Kaiser Health News 

Connect With Us 


		
		Kaiser Health News Original Stories	


					
												How A Drugmaker Turned The Abortion Pill Into A Rare-Disease Profit Machine
				


					An abortion drug invented decades ago is being used to treat Cushing’s syndrome — and it’s bringing in tens of millions of dollars a year.											(Sarah Jane Tribble,
						4/10)
									


					
												Can You Hear Me Now? Senate Bill Aims to Broaden Access To Hearing Services.
				


					The measure would allow Medicare beneficiaries to visit an audiologist to get a hearing test to diagnose a hearing problem without first being referred by a physician or nurse practitioner.											(Michelle Andrews,
						4/10)
									


					
												C-SPAN: FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb Talks To KHN
				


					Kaiser Health News reporter Sarah Jane Tribble sat down with Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb on C-SPAN’s "Newsmakers" program. The conversation ranged from how the nation should combat the opioid epidemic to reining in drug prices.											(4/9)
									


				
										Political Cartoon: 'Lean Patch?'
			


					Kaiser Health News provides a fresh take on health policy developments with "Political Cartoon: 'Lean Patch?'" by Dan Piraro.				

Here's today's health policy haiku:

Uninsured run up
the ER costs for others.
I know: a mandate!

 - Anonymous


				If you have a health policy haiku to share, please Contact Us and let us know if you want us to include your name. Keep in mind that we give extra points if you link back to a KHN original story.			


					
					Health Law				


							
																Administration Relaxes Essential Benefits Regulations, Creates New Mandate Exemptions
						

Overall, the Trump administration's rules addressing the standards for insurers planning to participate in health law marketplaces give more control and further flexibility over to states. 


					
						Reuters:
						Trump Administration Issues Rule Further Watering Down Obamacare					
					
					The Trump administration took additional steps to weaken Obamacare on Monday, allowing U.S. states to relax the rules on what insurers must cover and giving states more power to regulate their individual insurance markets. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services issued a final rule that allows states to select essential health benefits that must be covered by individual insurance plans sold under former President Barack Obama's healthcare law. The 2010 Affordable Care Act requires coverage of 10 benefits, including maternity and newborn care and prescription drugs. Under the new rule, states can select from a much larger list which benefits insurers must cover. (Abutaleb, 4/9)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Trump Administration Rewrites ACA Insurance Rules To Give More Power To States					
					
					The rules add two broad exemptions from the ACA’s requirement that most consumers be insured. The change offers escape hatches that will be retroactive two years, even before a recent tax law ends the penalties completely starting in 2019. People living in areas where only one insurer is selling plans in the marketplace now can qualify for a “hardship exemption.” So can people who oppose abortion and live in places where the only available plan covers abortion services. Federal health officials and private researchers have shown that about half of U.S. counties have only one ACA insurer this year. (Goldstein, 4/9)				


					
						The Hill:
						Trump Officials Create New Exemptions To ObamaCare Mandate 					
					
					The administration is also stepping up eligibility checks to make sure people are supposed to receive financial assistance under the law. Officials said they worried some low-income people in states that have not expanded Medicaid were overestimating their income, so that it becomes over the poverty level, thereby qualifying them for tax credits to help afford premiums on the law’s private marketplaces. (Sullivan, 4/9)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						Abortion Objectors May Get A Pass On Health Law Penalty					
					
					Object to abortion? You may be able to get an exemption from the Affordable Care Act tax penalty for people who don't get health insurance. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced final rules Monday for the ACA's health insurance marketplaces, and expanded exemptions were part of the package. Last year's GOP tax bill repealed the health law's unpopular requirement to carry health insurance or risk fines from the IRS — but that doesn't happen until next year. (Alonso-Zaldivar, 4/9)				


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						​Trump Administration Allows States To Narrow ACA Coverage					
					
					Democrats and some consumer groups denounced the rule as another effort by the administration to undermine the ACA. They have said that weakening the scope of the benefits offered in ACA plans will hurt consumers by reducing coverage. The new rule will “undermine protections for people with pre-existing conditions with a race-to-the-bottom approach that fundamentally undermines the Affordable Care Act’s essential health-benefit coverage guarantee,” said Brad Woodhouse, campaign director of Protect Our Care, a group that is an advocate for the ACA. (Armour, 4/9)				


					
						Modern Healthcare:
						CMS Issues Final Rule Allowing States To Pick Essential Health Benefits 					
					
					Health insurers have anxiously been waiting for the rule, which is usually released in mid-March. It follows on the heels of other actions taken by the Trump administration aimed at easing Affordable Care Act regulations in the name of promoting consumer choice, including a proposal to extend the duration of short-term medical plans and expanding access to association health plans that don't comply with ACA consumer protections. (Livingston and Luthi, 4/9)				


					
						CQ:
						Trump Administration Expands Exemptions From Individual Mandate					
					
					CMS Administrator Seema Verma touted the changes as a way of increasing access and reducing premiums for consumers under the health care law. But she also stressed that it was simply an option, not a requirement. “These are just options for states,” she told reporters Monday. “If they don’t want to do this, they can stick with what they have.” (Clason, 4/9)				


							
																California Leads Coalition Of States To Intervene In Texas Suit That Challenges Health Law
						

“It is a legally unsound action, and it is a dangerous action for millions of Americans who left the bad days of pre-existing conditions and the inability to get care for their children," California Attorney General Xavier Becerra said of the Texas lawsuit that is challenging the constitutionality of the health law saying the mandate no longer counts as a tax.


					
						The Associated Press:
						Democratic Attorneys General Fight Texas Health Care Lawsuit					
					
					Sixteen Democratic attorneys general pushed back Monday against a Texas lawsuit aimed at striking down former President Barack Obama's health care overhaul. California Attorney General Xavier Becerra led 14 other states and the District of Columbia in filing a motion to intervene in the Texas case and defend the law, suggesting the Trump administration wouldn't take such action. (Ronanye, 4/9)				


					
						Los Angeles Times:
						California Seeks To Intervene To Defend Obamacare In Court					
					
					“It is an irresponsible action,” Becerra said of the Texas lawsuit. “It is a legally unsound action, and it is a dangerous action for millions of Americans who left the bad days of pre-existing conditions and the inability to get care for their children. ”The lawsuit by Texas challenges Obamacare as unconstitutional, arguing that because Congress has set the penalty for going without insurance at zero, it does not count as a tax. A 2012 Supreme Court decision had upheld the law as a tax. The motion to intervene by California, New York and other states argues that Texas’ lawsuit is legally insufficient and would cause chaos in the healthcare market. (McGreevy, 4/10)				


					
					Women’s Health				


							
																Following Thousands Of Complaints From Women, FDA Puts Restrictions On Bayer's Birth Control Implant
						

The FDA said only women who read and have the opportunity to sign a brochure about the risks of the device will be able to receive the implant made by Bayer. The move comes two years after the agency ordered the company to place a “black box warning” on the product package. 


					
						The New York Times:
						F.D.A. Restricts Sales Of Bayer’s Essure Contraceptive Implant					
					
					The Food and Drug Administration on Monday said it would require Bayer to restrict sales of its Essure birth control implant to medical practices like doctors’ offices that agree to fully inform women about the device’s risks. Since the implant became available 16 years ago, thousands of women have sued Bayer, Essure’s manufacturer, with many claiming they suffered severe injuries, including perforation of the uterus and the fallopian tubes from the metal implant. (Kaplan, 4/9)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						FDA Puts Restrictions On Birth Control Implant But No Recall					
					
					The Food and Drug Administration said only women who read and have the opportunity to sign a brochure about the risks of the device will be able to receive the implant made by Bayer. The checklist of risks must also be signed by the woman's doctor. The new requirement comes almost two years after the FDA added its strongest warning to Essure, citing problems reported with the nickel-titanium implant. The agency also ordered Bayer to conduct a study of the device's safety. (Perrone, 4/9)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						FDA Restricts Sale Of Essure Contraceptive Device, Requires That Women Be Informed Of Risks					
					
					FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said in a statement that the agency was making the checklist mandatory because some women were not being adequately informed of Essure's risks “despite previous efforts to alert women to the potential complications ... That is simply unacceptable. Every single woman receiving this device should fully understand the associated risks.” (McGinley, 4/9)				


					
						The Hill:
						FDA Restricts Sale Of Essure Birth Control After Thousands Of Complaints 					
					
					“We take the concerns of all women affected by Essure very seriously," FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said in a statement Monday. "I’ve personally had the opportunity to meet with several women and hear their important concerns about this product. Despite previous efforts to alert women to the potential complications of Essure, we know that some patients still aren’t receiving this important information. That is simply unacceptable. Every single woman receiving this device should fully understand the associated risks.” Patient advocacy groups and lawmakers have called for the FDA to remove the device from the market. (Hellmann, 4/9)				


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						FDA Adds Restrictions On Sale Of Bayer’s Essure					
					
					Women who had testified before a panel of independent medical advisers described fatigue, hair loss and depression, as well as persistent pelvic or abdominal pain after taking Essure. There were also reports of rash, hives, nausea, swelling and increased symptoms of asthma and arthritis that women attributed to the implant. Since adding the warnings in 2016, the FDA said sales of Essure have declined roughly 70% in the U.S. Essure gained FDA approval for sale in 2002. (Moise, 4/9)				

Meanwhile, in other news from the agency —


					
						Stat:
						Here’s What’s In The FDA Plan To Include Pregnant Women In Clinical Trials					
					
					The FDA has taken a big step in encouraging drug companies to include pregnant women in clinical trials, issuing a draft guidance outlining how to do so safely and ethically. Nearly 4 million women in the U.S. give birth each year, but few drugs have been approved as safe and effective to use during pregnancy. The new guidance aims to help drug companies address those information gaps “through judicious inclusion of pregnant women in clinical trials and careful attention to potential fetal risk.” (Thielking, 4/10)				


					
						Kaiser Health News:
						C-SPAN: FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb Talks To KHN 					
					
					Kaiser Health News reporter Sarah Jane Tribble sat down with Dr. Scott Gottlieb, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, on C-SPAN’s “Newsmakers” program, which aired Sunday. Tribble was joined by Bloomberg correspondent Anna Edney. The conversation ranged from how the nation should combat the opioid epidemic to reining in drug prices. Gottlieb said competition in the drug market remains key to lowering prices. (4/9)				


					
						USA Today:
						FDA's Scott Gottlieb Pushes For More Food Safety To Improve Health					
					
					The Trump administration’s top food and drug regulator is pushing for less salt in food, more nutrition information on labels and innovative ways to communicate healthy ways of eating, all of which Scott Gottlieb says could make more of a difference than anything else his agency could do, short of curing cancer. Gottlieb, the Food and Drug Administration commissioner, has positively surprised critics of the administration’s regulatory agenda elsewhere. (O'Donnell and Parker, 4/6)				


					
					Pharmaceuticals				


							
																CVS Pocketed Difference After Improperly Reporting Generic Drug Prices To Government, Lawsuit Claims
						

CVS Caremark allegedly paid pharmacies lower prices for generic drugs than what Medicare Part D plans were charged, according to the whistle blower lawsuit filed by an actuary at Aetna.


					
						Stat:
						Aetna Auditor Says CVS Improperly Reported Generic Prices To Medicare					
					
					The CVS Caremark pharmacy benefit manager improperly reported generic drug prices to the federal government, causing Medicare and its beneficiaries to overpay for medicines, while pocketing a difference in pricing, according to a lawsuit filed by an actuary at the Aetna health insurer. The lawsuit revolves around complicated, behind-the-scenes contracts between pharmacy benefit managers and Medicare Part D plans, and the pricing that must be reported to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (Silverman, 4/9)				

In other news —


					
						The Hill:
						Dem Questions Hiring Of Former CVS Executive To Lead Drug Pricing Reform					
					
					Rep. Keith Ellison (D-Minn.) is questioning the hiring of a former CVS executive to oversee drug pricing efforts at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Ellison, who is often outspoken on the issue of rising drug costs, said Dan Best's hiring poses a "potential conflict of interest" because he has worked in both the pharmaceutical and pharmacy industry. (Hellmann, 4/9)				


					
					Marketplace				


							
																Experts Know What Doesn't Work When It Comes To Controlling Health Costs, But Are Less Certain About What Will
						

One of the common sense ideas that is rejected by health experts is letting patients become smarter shoppers and search out deals. But the idea just doesn't work. 


					
						Stat:
						How To Reduce Health Care Costs? Experts Say Lots Of Ideas, Few Successes					
					
					Most countries have systems in place to evaluate drugs and their value, unlike the U.S. [Steven] Pearson, whose nonprofit group conducts similar analyses, argues that studies of whether one drug is demonstrably better than another will push progress. “If we do a better job discriminating, it will make companies go for the home run. The business model will reward those that try to innovate.” His organization concluded that a $475,000 drug for pediatric leukemia was worth its price. But a $75,000 drug for tardive dyskinesia, piggybacking on another rare-disease drug, was not. (Cooney, 4/9)				

In other health industry news —


					
						Bloomberg:
						30,000 Strong And Counting, UnitedHealth Gathers A Doctor Army 					
					
					Disruptors are circling the health-care industry. UnitedHealth Group Inc., the biggest U.S. health insurer, has built an army of tens of thousands of physicians to fend off invaders. Health care in the U.S. has been plunged into a high-speed reconfiguration that could redraw longstanding relationships between patients, doctors, drugmakers and insurers. Outsiders such as Amazon.com Inc. and Walmart Inc. are looking for ways to shake up the business. (Tracer, 4/9)				


					
						Bloomberg:
						Hedge Fund Adage Reaps Big Initial Gain On Health-Care Takeover 					
					
					Adage Capital Management, a $30 billion hedge fund founded by two former money mangers from Harvard University’s endowment, reaped an initial gain of more than $100 million Monday after Swiss drugmaker Novartis AG agreed to acquire AveXis Inc. AveXis, which has a promising drug to treat a rare disease that afflicts infants, rose 80 percent to $208.05 a share at 9:32 am in New York trading. Novartis’ $8.7 billion offer represented an 88 percent premium to AveXis’ Friday closing price. (Stein, 4/9)				


							
																Under Proposed California Bill, State Would Set Prices For Certain Health Care Services
						

The measure, which is backed by influential unions and opposed by providers, faces an uphill battle in the state Legislature. 


					
						The Associated Press:
						California Bill Would Create Health Care Price Controls					
					
					California's government would set prices for hospital stays, doctor visits and other health care services under legislation introduced Monday, vastly remaking the industry in a bid to lower health care costs. The proposal, which drew swift opposition from the health care industry, comes amid a fierce debate in California as activists on the left push aggressively for a system that would provide government-funded insurance for everyone in the state. (4/9)				


					
						California Healthline:
						California Aims To Tackle Health Care Prices In Novel Rate-Setting Proposal					
					
					Supporters of the legislation, called the Health Care Price Relief Act, say California has made major strides in expanding health insurance coverage, but recent changes haven’t addressed the cost increases squeezing too many families. To remedy this, Assembly Bill 3087 calls for an independent, nine-member state commission to set health care reimbursements for hospitals, doctors and other providers in the private-insurance market serving employers and individuals. The bill faces formidable opposition from physician groups and hospitals. (Terhune, 4/10)				


					
					Medicaid				


							
																Health Scholars Criticize Medicaid Work Requirements, Saying Policy Contradicts Intent Of Program
						

The scholars voiced their opinion as part of an amicus brief filed as part of a lawsuit challenging Kentucky's changes to its Medicaid program. 


					
						Modern Healthcare:
						Medicaid Work Requirements Violate Program's Intent, Scholars Say 					
					
					More than 40 public health scholars on Friday stepped into a lawsuit challenging Kentucky's plan to enact work requirements on Medicaid beneficiaries. They argue the policy contradicts the intent of the Medicaid demonstration statute to improve the program, and that unintended consequences could lead to massive revenue drops for health centers. (Luthi, 4/9)				

In other Medicaid news —


					
						Modern Healthcare:
						CMS Scales Back Evaluation Plans For Indiana Medicaid Waiver 					
					
					The White House on Friday cleared the CMS to scale back efforts to evaluate Indiana's conservative approach to Medicaid expansion. The move could prevent the agency from gathering adequate data on to determine if the state's method of expansion harmed access to care. The White House's Office of Management and Budget granted the CMS permission to eliminate an Obama-era plan to survey beneficiaries of Indiana's Medicaid program, known as Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0. The survey would have gathered information from current and former HIP 2.0 beneficiaries on their experience in the program, including paying premium contributions, obtaining health savings accounts and being locked out of benefits if they failed to pay their premiums. (Dickson, 4/9)				


					
						Roll Call:
						Medicaid Work Debate Gets A Tennessee Twist					
					
					A growing number of mostly Republican-led states are itching to create work requirements for people on Medicaid, but finding a way to pay for it could prove challenging. In Tennessee, lawmakers want to add a Medicaid work mandate, but only if they can use federal — not state — dollars to make it happen. And they think there may be a way to do just that. Republicans have proposed taking money from a different government program that provides cash assistance to poor families and instead using it to cover the multimillion-dollar cost of creating and monitoring work requirements in its Medicaid program, known as TennCare. (Williams, 4/9)				


					
						New Orleans Times-Picayune:
						'No Timeline' For Medicaid Work Requirements, State Says					
					
					Gov. John Bel Edwards' administration said Sunday it does not have a timeline for implementing work requirements for Medicaid recipients, though the Louisiana Department of Health is continuing to study the concept. The governor, a Democrat, announced in January that he was interested in putting work requirements for Louisiana Medicaid recipients into effect. So far though, the state Department of Health hasn't provided many details on what the Medicaid work program, an approach often favored by Republicans, might look like. (O'Donoghue, 4/9)				


					
					Public Health And Education				


							
																Naloxone Is A Lifesaver For Many, But Its Flaws Have Scientists Calling For New Alternatives
						

Many experts believe “naloxone is being outgunned” in the opioid crisis that's fueled by potent drugs like fentanyl and carfentanil. In other news, Congress is set to hold more hearings on the epidemic as lawmakers work toward a bill they want to bring to the floor next month. 


					
						Stat:
						Companies, Academics Search For Better Overdose-Reversal Drugs					
					
					Naloxone is the only widely available drug to reverse opioid overdoses. But anecdotal reports of its limitations against synthetic opioids are on the rise. Spurred by that public health threat — as well as a booming commercial market for the antidote — drug companies, researchers, and health officials are eagerly eyeing the development of new treatments to augment the use of naloxone or, in some cases, potentially replace it. (Blau, 4/10)				


					
						CQ:
						Congress Prepares For Week Of Opioid Hearings					
					
					Four different hearings on combating aspects of the opioid crisis are set for Wednesday, as the House and Senate ramp up efforts to pass legislative packages this spring. Legislative action is scheduled in both chambers. The Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee plans to discuss a bipartisan legislative package revealed last week and the House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee will consider 34 bills. (Raman, 4/9)				

And in the states —


					
						The Associated Press:
						Court To Decide If Drug Use While Pregnant Is Child Abuse					
					
					Pennsylvania's highest court will decide whether a woman's use of illegal drugs while pregnant qualifies as child abuse under state law. The Supreme Court recently took up the case of a woman who tested positive for suboxone and marijuana at the time she gave birth early last year at Williamsport Hospital. (Scolforo, 4/9)				


					
						Concord (N.H.) Monitor:
						Officials Push For More Medication-Assisted Opioid Treatment In N.H.					
					
					It’s become a central component of the state’s opioid response. People in the throes of substance abuse disorder are given new medications, targeted to cut off any chemical enjoyment of the drugs doing them harm. Combined with peer support, therapy and sheer willpower, “medication-assisted treatment” can give those suffering addiction a better life – and let them hold onto it. But even with the growing popularity of Suboxone, the most commonly used “blocking” pharmaceutical, New Hampshire faces an elemental problem: physicians. The number of doctors and nurses actually trained to prescribe the medications is far from enough, advocates say. (DeWitt, 4/9)				


							
																Scientists Want To Focus On Actual Brain Changes And Not Memory Loss As Way Of Defining Alzheimer's
						

The change would be geared toward providing more objective research. It would also mean many more people will be considered to have Alzheimer's, because the biological signs can show up 15 to 20 years before symptoms do.


					
						The Associated Press:
						New Way Of Defining Alzheimer's Aims To Find Disease Sooner					
					
					Government and other scientists are proposing a new way to define Alzheimer's disease — basing it on biological signs, such as brain changes, rather than memory loss and other symptoms of dementia that are used today. The move is aimed at improving research, by using more objective criteria like brain scans to pick patients for studies and enroll them sooner in the course of their illness, when treatments may have more chance to help. (Marchione, 4/10)				


					
						NPR:
						Some Scientists Want Brain Changes, Not Symptoms, To Define Alzheimer's					
					
					Instead of defining the disease through symptoms like memory problems or fuzzy thinking, the scientists want to focus on biological changes in the brain associated with Alzheimer's. These include the plaques and tangles that build up in the brains of people with the disease. But they say the new approach is intended only for research studies, and isn't yet ready for use by most doctors who treat Alzheimer's patients.If the new approach is widely adopted, it would help researchers study patients whose brain function is still normal, but are likely to develop dementia caused by Alzheimer's. (Hamilton, 4/10)				


							
																Kaiser Permanente Launches $2 Million, Nationwide Initiative To Research Gun Violence
						

Kaiser Permanente decided to jump-start its effort because of the huge effect of gun violence on its patients. In other news, officials in Ohio urge lawmakers to pass a "red flag" law to confiscate guns. 


					
						The Washington Post:
						With $2 Million, Kaiser Permanente Wants To Help Revive Underfunded Gun-Violence Research					
					
					Kaiser Permanente announced Monday that it will begin studying gun violence — a long-ignored issue because of the political pressures surrounding firearms in this country — by investing $2 million in research that will involve doctors and other professionals across its hospitals and centers nationwide. Officials at the giant health system said they hope the move will encourage other systems to wade into this field of research, which has had lack of funding and data in the more than two decades since the federal government virtually abandoned such studies. (Wan, 4/9)				


					
						Cleveland Plain Dealer:
						Ohio Should Approve 'Red Flag' Laws For Gun Confiscation, Cleveland City Council Says					
					
					City Council on Monday urged the Ohio General Assembly to adopt "red flag" laws that allow police or family members to seek to have guns confiscated from individuals dangerous to themselves or others. (Higgs, 4/9)				


					
					State Watch				


							
																Flint Children To Undergo In-Depth Health Screenings As Part Of Legal Settlement
						

The agreement settles a part of a lawsuit that accused education officials of not properly screening and evaluating children in Flint to determine if they needed special education services following the city's water crisis.


					
						Reuters:
						Flint School Children To Be Screened For Effects Of Lead After Agreement					
					
					School children in Flint, Michigan, will receive screening and in-depth health assessments to measure the effects of lead-tainted drinking water on their ability to learn, under a more than $4 million legal agreement reached on Monday. The agreement partially settled a federal lawsuit related to a water crisis in Flint that drew international attention and prompted dozens of other civil lawsuits and criminal charges against former government officials. (Dobuzinskis, 4/9)				


					
						Detroit Free Press:
						Flint Water Crisis: Up To 30,000 Kids To Get Screened For Lead Effects					
					
					As part of the settlement, the State of Michigan will pay $4.1 million to cover the cost of the screenings, according to lawyers for the plaintiffs, which include more than a dozen children and parents. The screening could impact between 25,000 and 30,000 school-age children, as well as younger children who may have been exposed. "It's a win for our kids," said Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, director of the MSU-Hurley Pediatric Public Health Initiative, who is already leading an effort to identify children and adults exposed to lead and get them connected to any resources they may need. (Higgins, 4/9)				

And in other news —


					
						Milwaukee Journal Sentinel:
						Barrett: Paint Remains The Primary Source Of Lead Poisoning For Kids					
					
					Paint remains the primary source of lead poisoning for Milwaukee children, Mayor Tom Barrett said Monday.And he again accused the paint industry of trying to shift the blame to contaminated water in an effort to create a controversy over the city's lead pipes — and avoid tens of millions of dollars in settlements or court judgments. (Spicuzza and Bice, 4/9)				


							
																Hospital Industry In Texas Urban Areas Soars Under Obamacare, But Rural Patients See Decline In Care
						

"Rural hospital closures have hit Texas especially hard; it has almost twice as many as the second-most state,'' said Mark Holmes, an industry analyst. "Losing the emergency room, labor and delivery, and other critical health care services in addition to hundreds of jobs can be devastating to the community." Hospital news comes from Maryland, Illinois and Massachusetts, as well.


					
						Dallas Morning News:
						Taking The Pulse Of Texas Hospitals, Revenue Is Up, But Rural Care Is Down 					
					
					The past ﬁve years have been a strong period for the hospital industry in Texas, according to a recent report from market research ﬁrm IBISWorld. And while the demand for health care services has risen nationwide as people became insured through the Affordable Care Act, the demand statewide grew faster than the number of available facilities. (Rice and Joseph, 4/9)				


					
						The Baltimore Sun:
						Mixed Reviews For Maryland's Unique Hospital Payment System					
					
					An audit by independent consultants found Maryland’s experimental program to curb health care spending has saved money and improved the health of citizens, but another evaluation by professors from Harvard University and the University of Pittsburgh painted a less rosy picture. The state entered into an agreement with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services four years ago to implement a system that scrapped the fee-for-service payment model for hospitals. (McDaniels, 4/6)				


					
						Marketplace:
						What Happens When A Hospital Sells Its Debt?					
					
					[Richard] Boykin is one of a few Cook County politicians that recently have started wondering whether taxpayers can get a better return on the roughly $170 million of unpaid medical bills the health system has that's now with collection agencies. Boykin wants the hospital system to sell the right to collect that debt to a private company instead. (Bryan, 4/9)				


					
						Boston Globe:
						Nurses At Greenfield Hospital Plan Second Strike In Past Year					
					
					For the second time in less than a year, nurses at Baystate Health’s community hospital in Greenfield are preparing to go on strike amid a stalemate in contract negotiations. About 200 members of the Massachusetts Nurses Association are planning a 24-hour walkout on Wednesday. (Dayal McCluskey, 4/9)				


					
						Chicago Sun Times:
						U. Of C. Medicine Set To Open South Side Trauma Center May 1 					
					
					U. of C. Medicine is set to launch the first adult trauma center on the South Side in decades next month after gaining approval from the Illinois Department of Public Health. The Level 1 adult trauma center will fill the hole left in trauma care since Michael Reese Hospital closed its center in 1991. (Whitehair, 4/9)				


					
						Chicago Tribune:
						U. Of C. Trauma Center Gains Final State Approval, Set To Open May 1 					
					
					For the first time in 27 years, Chicago’s South Side will soon have a Level I adult trauma center, now that University of Chicago Medicine has gained the final stamp of approval from the state. The program, scheduled to open May 1, will treat people with traumatic injuries, such as from gunshots, vehicle crashes, burns and falls. (Schencker, 4/9)				


					
						Boston Globe:
						More Scrutiny Needed On Massive Beth Israel-Lahey Merger					
					
					The Massachusetts Department of Public Health recently recommended approval of a 13-hospital merger led by Beth Israel and Lahey Health, which will dramatically alter our health care landscape for generations to come. As the impact of this mega merger is largely unknown, the DPH’s recommendation is both unfortunate and premature. (Jennings, 4/9)				


							
																State Highlights: Work Requirements, Health Care Key Issues In Ky. House Race; Abortion Clinic Widens Lawsuit Against Mississippi
						

Media outlets report on news from Kentucky, Mississippi, Minnesota, Louisiana, Tennessee, Texas, Wisconsin, Arizona, Iowa, Illinois, Nebraska, South Dakota, Indiana and California.


					
						Reuters:
						In Key Kentucky House Race, Healthcare Anxieties Loom Large					
					
					Andy Barr, a Republican lawmaker representing central Kentucky, won his last three elections promising to repeal and replace Obamacare. This year, his Democratic challengers for Congress in Kentucky's sixth district are betting that message will ring hollow. Their hopes lie with voters like Joyell Anderson, who went for President Donald Trump in 2016 and said she generally votes Republican. This year, she is not sure who to support for Congress, but she knows what her top priority is: healthcare. (4/9)				


					
						Reuters:
						Mississippi's Last Abortion Clinic Expands Lawsuit On Restrictions					
					
					Mississippi's last remaining abortion provider expanded a federal challenge on Monday to laws that ban abortions in the state after 15 weeks of pregnancy and block access to the procedure in myriad ways, it said. The ban on abortions after 15 weeks, signed into law last month by Mississippi Governor Phil Bryant, put the strictest time limit on legal abortions in the United States. (Woodall, 4/9)				


					
						The Star Tribune:
						Families Of Abuse Victims Intensify Push For Elder Care Reforms In Minn. 					
					
					Frustrated by what they see as legislative foot-dragging, family members of abuse victims are intensifying their push for new laws to protect tens of thousands of vulnerable adults who live in senior care facilities across the state. A grass roots coalition of abuse victims and their relatives, Elder Voice Family Advocates, descended on the State Capitol early Monday and distributed 1,850 summaries of maltreatment reports — including descriptions of beatings, sexual assaults and thefts — to legislators ahead of key hearings this week. The reports represent just a small fraction of the more than 20,000 allegations of maltreatment received by the Minnesota Department of Health each year from individuals and facilities across the state. (Serres, 4/9)				


					
						New Orleans Times-Picayune:
						Measles Case Confirmed In New Orleans, Health Officials Say 					
					
					State health officials are investigating a confirmed case of measles in New Orleans. Measles is a highly contagious viral illness that can spread quickly among people who have not been vaccinated. In extreme cases, it can lead to hospitalization and even death. The person who tested positive for measles is currently hospitalized in New Orleans, according a Department of Health press release. Officials are trying to identify and notify people that the patient may have come in contact with to prevent the spread of the virus. (Clark, 4/9)				


					
						Minnesota Public Radio:
						Flu Season Hit Minnesota Hard, And It's Not Over Yet					
					
					The flu has hit Minnesotans hard this year, with more than 6,000 flu-related hospitalizations, more than any other year since the state government started tracking such cases 10 years ago. A health department official says the season is not yet over. (Gunderson, 4/9)				


					
						KCUR:
						Jackson County Jail's Health Care Provider Leaving Contract A Year Early 					
					
					The Nashville-based company that provides health and dental care for the 1,000 inmates at the Jackson County Detention Center has told the county it is pulling out of its three-year contract early. The county's $3.2 million yearly contract with Correct Care Solutions (CCS) was supposed to run through June 2019. But according to a joint statement, the company told Jackson County last month that it was using an option in the contract to end the relationship early. No details were given in the joint statement. (Zeff, 4/9)				


					
						Texas Tribune:
						Report: Texas' Maternal Deaths Were Dramatically Lower In 2012 Under New Methodology					
					
					The number of Texas women who died from pregnancy complications in 2012 is being cut by more than half through a new state method for counting and confirming maternal deaths — which made Texas the subject of national news coverage over its high death rate. Several of the state’s top health experts released a report in the medical journal Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology on Monday showing that by using the new method, the number of women who died dropped from 147 to 56. (Evans, 4/9)				


					
						Milwaukee Journal Sentinel:
						Milwaukee City Lead Manager Suspended For Mismanagement					
					
					The head of Milwaukee's troubled program to prevent lead poisoning among Milwaukee children "failed in her ability to manage" those efforts, a newly released suspension notice says. Lisa Lien, the home environmental health manager, was suspended for 10 days in December after city officials found she was "ineffective," "insubordinate" and "incompetent or inefficient" in her work for the Milwaukee Health Department. (Spicuzza and Bice, 4/9)				


					
						Minnesota Public Radio:
						How Culturally Centered Care Could Help Mothers And Babies					
					
					Many social scientists and medical researchers agree that the disparities in maternal mortality is due to racism, not race. And there's a growing consensus that racial discrimination experienced by black mothers during their lifetime makes them less likely to carry their babies to full term. (Combs and Yang, 4/9)				


					
						Arizona Republic:
						Arizona Center For Cancer Care Faces Suit For Medicare Fraud					
					
					An Arizona medical company that serves thousands of cancer patients is battling a federal lawsuit alleging that it ripped off Medicare and other government programs with millions of dollars in fraudulent charges. The whistleblower complaint moving through U.S. District Court says principals at Arizona Center for Cancer Care improperly collected nearly $8 million from U.S. health care agencies since 2011. (Wagner, 4/9)				


					
						Texas Tribune:
						Three Fired At Texas Health Commission After Another Contracting Error					
					
					A health commission spokeswoman said three employees had been fired after Republican Gov. Greg Abbott on Monday penned a sharply worded letter to Executive Commissioner Charles Smith bemoaning his “failure to ensure the integrity” of the state’s procurement process. At issue was an award granted to a health insurance company to administer the Children’s Health Insurance Program in rural parts of the state. (Walters, 4/9)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						Salmonella In Chicken Salad Kills 1, Sickens 265 In 8 States					
					
					Chicken salad made by an Iowa food processing company and distributed by Fareway Stores in the Midwest sickened 265 people in eight states and caused one death in Iowa from salmonella contamination, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. The outbreak which sickened people from Jan. 8 through March 20, appears to have ended, the CDC said in an update posted on Friday. Ill people ranged in age from less than 1 year to 89 years. Sixty-seven percent were female. (4/9)				


					
						Los Angeles Times:
						L.A. County Unveils New Budget, Emphasizing Homeless Services And Other Safety-Net Programs					
					
					Los Angeles County officials released a proposed $30.8-billion budget for the next fiscal year Monday, emphasizing the need to combat and prevent homelessness and to provide crucial safety-net services. "Of all of the issues confronting the county none is more urgent and complex than homelessness," Sachi Hamai, the county's chief executive, said at a news conference. (Agrawal, 4/9)				


					
					Editorials And Opinions				


							
																Perspectives: Finally, Virginia Inches Closer To Medicaid Expansion
						

Opinion writers focus on issues surrounding Medicaid.


					
						The Washington Post:
						At Last, Virginia Republicans Might Allow Their State Better Medicaid					
					
					For the past four years, Virginia has thumbed its nose at billions of dollars in federal funding while leaving hundreds of thousands of residents without health insurance, all in service to Republican lawmakers’ antipathy toward Obamacare. The irrationality of their stance, and the damage it has done to their constituents, has been manifest. Now GOP obstruction has begun to crack under the weight of its own illogic. (4/9)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Will Virginia Finally Do The Right Thing For 400,000 People Desperate For Health Care?					
					
					Watch this, America. A state may be about to do something sensible, bipartisan and even humanitarian to take care of its people.It could still fall apart, as it has before. But Virginia’s lawmakers appear to be on the verge of insuring about 400,000 low-income residents by expanding Medicaid after years of refusing to do so. Remember, Virginia is a place where thousands of people queue up before dawn on one weekend every summer to get free treatment from volunteers who turn livestock pens into medical crash units at the Wise County Fairgrounds because people are so desperate for care. (Petula Dvorak, 4/9)				


					
						USA Today:
						Trump And GOP Hypocrisy On Mental Health And Medicaid					
					
					A mental health problem at the highest level,” President Trump said after a shooting in Sutherland Springs, Texas left 26 parishioners dead. “Mental health is often a big problem underlying these tragedies,” House Speaker Paul Ryan said after a gunman killed 17 students and teachers at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. If Republican leaders are talking about mental health, it’s generally for one reason — to avoid talking about guns. By any measure, the claim that mental illness is to blame for gun violence is false. (Rep. Joe Kennedy, 4/9)				


							
																Viewpoints: Pros And Cons Of Mergers Between Retailers, Insurers; Sorry, GOP: No Obamacare Death Spiral
						

Editorial writers focus on these and other health topics.


					
						Los Angeles Times:
						Walmart And CVS Have 15,000 Combined Stores. Why Are Both Trying To Buy Health Insurance Companies?					
					
					The economics of healthcare in America is making for some strange bedfellows. CVS, the behemoth pharmacy chain, plans to buy Aetna, a 22-million member health insurer, for $69 billion. Less than two weeks ago, it became public that Walmart, where one in four Americans shop each week, is considering an acquisition of another insurer, Humana. Why would these two massive retailers want to buy health insurers? Think millions of customers under one roof buying insurance, visiting health clinics and — importantly — filling prescriptions. These merged insurer-retailers could have lots of price-setting leverage in dealing with pharmaceutical companies and hospitals. But consolidation like this also can threaten competition — and in healthcare markets, that is a demonstrated danger. (Dana P. Goldman and Erin E. Trish, 4/10)				


					
						Bloomberg:
						The Medical Marketplace Is Changing Fast					
					
					Marketplace disruption is reshaping health care in the U.S., with headline-grabbing mergers and the formation of new companies. These moves are breaking down traditional silos in health care. And further change can be expected, as calls grow louder for better health-care value for the dollar. Four trends are driving the shift: an ongoing movement toward value-based payments; improved health-care data analytics; innovations in medical science; and increasing demand from consumers for greater convenience and value. Although health-care costs have been growing more slowly than they once did, the U.S. still spends far too much, and there's great variation across the country in both prices (especially for employer-sponsored insurance) and utilization (especially for Medicare). Fee-for-service payment is a major reason spending is so high and varies so much from region to region. The shift toward value-based payments -- including bundled payments and accountable care organizations -- is a necessary though not complete solution. (Peter R. Orszag and David Gluckman, 4/9)				


					
						The New York Times:
						Obamacare’s Very Stable Genius 					
					
					Front pages continue, understandably, to be dominated by the roughly 130,000 scandals currently afflicting the Trump administration. But polls suggest that the reek of corruption, intense as it is, isn’t likely to dominate the midterm elections. The biggest issue on voters’ minds appears, instead, to be health care. (Paul Krugman, 4/9)				


					
						Portland Press Herald:
						Health Insurance Rate Increases Were Avoidable					
					
					This fall, millions of Americans who are already struggling to afford health insurance will once again experience double-digit premium increases because of election-year politics at its worst. What is most regrettable is not only that those increases could have been prevented but also that the cost of health insurance actually could have declined by as much as 40 percent in the individual market over the next two years. (Sen. Susan Collins, 4/8)				


					
						The Baltimore Sun:
						Maryland's Year Of Health Care					
					
					The General Assembly session that ends at midnight on Monday has seen its share of controversial issues, from gun control to medical marijuana, and of memorable moments, perhaps the most notable of which was when Republican Del. Meagan Simonaire gave a floor speech endorsing a ban on so-called “conversion therapy” for gay youth, which she said her father, Republican state Sen. Bryan Simonaire, suggested she try after she came out as bisexual. The session has had some election-year political jockeying, too, as Gov. Larry Hogan sparred with Democrats over changes to the state school construction program. But the most significant thing that’s likely to emerge from the 90 days of lawmaking came with little fanfare or controversy — one of the most aggressive efforts in the country to protect the state’s Affordable Care Act insurance exchange from collapsing under a series of blows from the Republican Congress and President Donald Trump. (4/6)				


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						Food Stamps Shouldn’t Pay For Junk					
					
					The Food Stamp Program started as a way to help people whose shelves were empty. It certainly helped my family. My mother was a single parent who struggled to make ends meet in wealthy Darien, Conn., during the 1970s. We relied on food stamps until I was 16. Since then, the program has grown considerably. Renamed the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, it supported more than 40 million Americans in 2017. Even though SNAP is generally well-intentioned, what it puts on shelves is not always helpful or healthy. SNAP rules allow stores to distribute candy, soda, cheese products, energy drinks, processed meats and lots of other items that end up seriously compromising the health of SNAP recipients. (Moby, 4/9)				


					
						The Philadelphia Inquirer:
						What I Did After Getting A Fetal Diagnosis Of Down Syndrome Should Be No One Else's Business					
					
					State legislators in Harrisburg believe they are empowered to make decisions about what women can and cannot do during pregnancy. Legislation before both the state House and Senate would prohibit a woman to have an abortion because of a fetal diagnosis of Down syndrome. This legislation – House Bill 2050 and Senate Bill 1050 – is unconstitutional, unenforceable, and wrong. (Jennifer Schrad, 4/9)				


					
						Columbus Dispatch:
						Childbirth Presents Great Risk To Black Women					
					
					The anticipation of bringing a new bundle of joy into the world — and all that comes with it — can be both exciting and stressful for moms-to-be. But if you are an expectant black mother, there is much more at stake, according to a recent study and last Sunday’s Dispatch.com article “Central Ohio hospitals ramp up efforts to reduce maternal mortality deaths amid growing national crisis.” Having a baby comes with several risk factors, and too many black moms die during and shortly after childbirth. (Linda Post, 4/9)				


					
						Portland Press Herald:
						Gov. LePage To Blame For Maine's Protracted Fight Over Overdose Antidote					
					
					Gov. LePage wrote this week of the state’s response to the opioid epidemic: “The Legislature’s focus on naloxone as the most important tool is sadly misplaced.” Sometimes, you’ve got to wonder where he’s been. (4/6)				


	We want to hear from you: Contact Us



									Listen: A Sudden Freeze On ACA Payouts And What It Means For You								


									Democrats Rally Against Threats To The ACA To Block Trump’s Supreme Court Nominee								


									Support Circle: Family Caregivers Share Stories And Tips To Ease Alzheimer's Toll								


									If High Court Reverses Roe V. Wade, 22 States Poised To Ban Abortion								


				© 2018 Kaiser Family Foundation. All rights reserved.			


				Powered by WordPress.com VIP			