Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A man convicted of rape in Marion County was arrested in Arizona by Border Patrol agents Sunday and detained as a felon entering the U.S. illegally.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    A look at crime statistics for Oregon.
    Statesman Journal

NAVA-GUITTIEREZ, PASCUAL / CHARGES:  DRIVE UNDER INFLUENCE INTOX , RAPE III, ASSAULT IV 
(Photo: Marion County Sheriff's office)

A man convicted of rape and assault in Marion County was arrested in Arizona by Border Patrol agents Sunday.


Agents patrolling the border near Lukeville, Arizona, arrested five men on suspicion of being in the United States illegally, according to U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials.


Among them was 31-year-old Pascual Nava-Gutierrez, a former resident of Donald, Oregon. 


While conducting a background check, agents discovered Nava-Gutierrez was convicted of third-degree rape and fourth-degree assault in 2012 before being deported to Mexico. 


According to court records, Nava-Gutierrez was convicted of DUI and reckless endangerment in 2008. While he was still on probation in 2010, a Marion County grand jury indicted him on charges of third-degree rape, fourth-degree assault and harassment and issued a warrant for his arrest. 


He was taken into custody two years later on new assault charges. After pleading guilty to rape and two counts of assault, Nava-Gutierrez was sentenced to 90 days in jail, five years probation, batterer intervention treatment and ordered to register as a sex offender.


A U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement hold was placed on him while he was incarcerated at Marion County jail. 


Border patrol officials said Nava-Gutierrez will remain in custody pending prosecution for criminal immigration violations involving re-entry as an aggravated felon. Information was not available on when Nava-Gutierrez had previously been deported, but agents said it was most likely after his release from Marion County Jail.


Officials said all people apprehended by border patrol agents undergo criminal history checks using biometrics like fingerprint analysis to identify those crossing the border illegally who have criminal histories. 


In the fiscal year 2017, U.S. Border Patrol arrested almost 8,000 convicted criminals crossing the border illegally. Of those, 2,675 had outstanding warrants for their arrests. 


For questions, comments and news tips, email reporter Whitney Woodworth at wmwoodwort@statesmanjournal.com, call 503-399-6884 or follow on Twitter @wmwoodworth


Read more:


Lost cell phone, beer, ham sandwich lead police to Dallas arson suspects


Three Salem Subway restaurants burglarized within weeks of each other


Paper, plastic piling up across Oregon as China refuses to take U.S. recycling


 


 
