
					In June 2018, FEMA deployed barges to Hawaii, to transport victims of the Kilauea volcano to an "internment camp."									

In June 2018, the latest installment appeared in a long-running, sprawling set of conspiracy theories about the FEMA, or Federal Emergency Management Agency, the United States government’s disaster management organization.

Conspiracy theorists have constructed complicated and incoherent claims of a “deep state” plot by globalist federal authorities to build concentration camps for political undesirables (usually presented as conservatives or anti-globalists) by way of FEMA. This has given rise to fevered and baseless reports about “FEMA camps,” disposable coffins, enforced vaccinations, and the related “Jade Helm” conspiracy theory.

In June 2018, adherents continued this tradition with groundless claims about “FEMA barges,” alleging that the federal government was taking advantage of a volcanic eruption in Hawaii to incarcerate civilians in an “internment camp.” On 7 June 2018, the web site SomeonesBones.com — which promotes the extraterrestrial Nibiru and Anunnaki conspiracy theories — wrote:

A flotilla of FEMA barges, each able to hold 2,000 people in cramped conditions, set sail from a secret staging area near San Diego and is currently en route to Hawaii, says a FEMA employee speaking under condition of anonymity. The vessels, he said, departed California on June 5 and, travelling at a speed of 20 knots, will arrive in Hawaii on the eleventh. Rather than berth at Port Allen or Hiwo Harbor, the ships will drop anchor ten miles offshore and use powerboats to ferry displaced persons to one of three FEMA housing ships.

But FEMA is on no mission of mercy; anyone escorted onto a FEMA barge will be incarcerated and transported to a mainland FEMA internment camp in Region IX. There, they will be held captive by a controversial agency with a long history of imprisoning people against their will.

To illustrate this false report, SomeonesBones.com used three images taken out of their proper context. The first does in fact show a FEMA barge, but the photograph was taken in 2017 and shows a vessel deployed by FEMA to provide temporary accommodation to victims of Hurricane Harvey in Texas. The original photograph can be seen in news reports at that time.  

The second image is actually a photograph of the Vernon C. Bain Correctional Center, a prison barge used by the New York City Department of Corrections, which is anchored near the Bronx. The original photograph can be found here. The third image used out of context was actually taken in 2013, not June 2018. It shows a barge docked at Treasure Island in San Francisco. You can see the original photograph here. 

Beyond the fact that SomeonesBones.com has a history of publishing wildly untrue conspiracy theories and misleadingly used unrelated photographs in the context of its story, we could find no corroboration whatsoever for the claim that FEMA plans to even send barges to temporarily house victims of the Kilauea volcanic eruption.

The claim that FEMA plans to use the barges as transport to an “internment camp” is no more than the latest in a long line of groundless conspiracy theories about the agency. 

Snopes.com has long been engaged in the battle against misinformation, an effort we could not sustain without the support of our readers.


 If you'd like to learn more about how you can support us, click here. 

Filed Under:
									conspiracy theories
									FEMA
									FEMA camps
													+2 more
											hawaii
											someonesbones.com
												


							Fact Checker:
						
																						Dan MacGuill
															
			
		

Featured Image:Theodore Trimmer / Shutterstock.com

Published:26 June 2018

LaCapria, Kim.  “Alpha Fail.”
  Snopes.com.  9 October 2015.

Mikkelson, David.  “Obama Quietly Orders Millions of Disposable Coffins?”
  Snopes.com.  13 October 2014.

MacGuill, Dan.  “Did FEMA Deny Aid to Harvey Victims Unless They Received Vaccinations?”
  Snopes.com.  5 September 2017. 

LaCapria, Kim.  “Jade Helm Concludes.”
  Snopes.com.  15 September 2015. 

Jones, Caleb; Garcia, Marco.  “Quakes, Lava and Gas: Hawaii Residents Flee Volcanic Threats.”
  Associated Press.  5 May 2018. 

Masse, Jacque.  “Port Arthur Mayor Clarified Temporary Housing Situation for City.”
  KBMT.  13 September 2017. 


							11 July 2018
						Some viewers mistook a spoof trailer for a sequel to the movie "Forrest Gump" as genuine in June 2018.		


							10 July 2018
						Conspiracy-peddling web sites seized on a fatal explosion as a means to push more dubious stories.		


							10 July 2018
						Images showing "melted" cars in Arizona are real, but the extreme heat came from a nearby construction fire, not the sun.		


							10 July 2018
						A meme created by a satirical Facebook page convinced some viewers that a fictional congresswoman was attempting to pass a non-existent law.		


							9 July 2018
						Reports of a viral epidemic that supposedly killed 16 people in Louisville originated on a prank news generator web site.		


							9 July 2018
						An image graphic purportedly comparing how Obama, Clinton, Bush and Trump celebrated the 4th of July consists of cherry-picked photographs, none taken on Independence Day.		


							9 July 2018
						Footage purporting to show 8 traffic accidents involving invisible ghost cars was the product of some creative digital editing.		


							9 July 2018
						An obscure satirical web site managed to trick many readers with a fabricated story in the summer of 2018.		


							18 June 2018
						There is no federal law mandating children and parents be separated at the border; a policy resulting in that outcome was enacted in May 2018.		


							21 June 2018
						The First Lady made a surprise visit to detained immigrant children while wearing a jacket bearing the message "I DON'T REALLY CARE DO U?" on the back.		


							2 August 2016
						A viral image suggests that the late Nirvana singer Kurt Cobain hinted at a future Donald Trump presidency over 20 years before it happened.		


							21 June 2000
						The long-standing claim that Jane Fonda turned smuggled messages from U.S. POWs over to their North Vietnamese captors is false.		


							6 February 2018
						Facebook hasn't limited your feed to only a certain number of people, and sharing a post saying otherwise won't make any difference.		


							18 June 2018
						There is no federal law mandating children and parents be separated at the border; a policy resulting in that outcome was enacted in May 2018.		


							12 June 2018
						A heart-rending photograph of a crying child in a cage has been widely shared, but it was part of a protest to call attention to immigration practices.		


							21 June 2018
						The First Lady made a surprise visit to detained immigrant children while wearing a jacket bearing the message "I DON'T REALLY CARE DO U?" on the back.		


							20 June 2018
						A congressional report and criminal indictment resulted from a 2014 incident in which multiple immigrant children were handed off to a human trafficking ring.		


							5 April 2018
						Tide Pods and condom snorting are far from the first fake parental panics — are kids today really that stupid, or is it just the news outlets reporting on them?		

Urban Legends Reference Pages© 1995- by Snopes.com | This material may not be reproduced without permission | Snopes and the Snopes.com logo are registered service marks of Snopes.com | Privacy Policy | Terms of Use |