Panicking because you haven't yet made plans for the weekend and you're short on cash? Don't worry—below, find all of your options for last-minute entertainment that won't cost more than $10. You already know about all the holiday pop-up markets and gift bazaars, but there are plenty of other great things happening, ranging from the Christmas Ships Parade of Boats Night to Someday We'll All Be Free: A Conversation about Abolition, and from free horse-drawn carriage rides in Occidental Park to the Royal Room's holiday sing-along. For even more options, check out our complete Things To Do calendar.




Get all this and more on the free Stranger Things To Do mobile app—available now on the App Store and Google Play. 

1. Creatura House Grand Opening This new shop by former Roq La Rue owner Kirsten Anderson will offer "high end, glamorous, earthy things for your home sanctuary," incorporating mystical, punk, and witchy themes, alongside art shows. The name of the gallery refers to their aesthetic, but also to their support for Creatura Wildlife Projects, a nonprofit. Their first exhibit will be by Peter Ferguson, appropriately titled I'll Line My Nest With Your Bones. (Capitol Hill, free)

2. Nostalgia Is For Losers: A 90's Photo/Memorabilia Show DJ Marco Collins will show off '90s memorabilia, including autographed vinyl, photos, and gold records, accompanied by rock photographer DJ Marco Collins, who'll share images of rock stars before they were famous— Nirvana, Soundgarden, Pearl Jam, and Alice in Chains. (Georgetown, free)

3. Joke Peddlers Bo Johnson and other funny friends will perform at Peddler's monthly show. (Ballard, $5)

4. Breakfast Club After Dark This special holiday happy hour includes a complimentary tasting from Glass Vodka, seasonal comfort food like hush puppies and beignets, and festive specials all night. (Belltown, $5)

5. Friday Tasting: Holiday Edition + Pike Brewing The folks from Downtown Spirits are hosting a tasting where they'll be serving tastes of Pike Brewing beers, Anchor Brewing's Christmas Ale, and drink specials while holiday movies play in the background. Guests are encouraged to wear ugly sweaters and bring cookies (there may or may not be contests). (Downtown, free)

6. Hopnificent 7 Holiday Special Seven powerhouse breweries (Fort George Brewery, Ecliptic Brewing, Breakside Brewery, Reuben's Brews, Pike Brewing Company, Friem Family Brewers, and Matchless Brewing) come together for a very special Charlie Brown-themed tap takeover. Peanuts character-inspired attire is encouraged, and Teku Tavern is dog-friendly, so you're welcome to bring your own Snoopy. (South Lake Union, free)

7. Night Lab: Wintry Drinks Workshop Let an Ada's mixologist teach you how to whip up holiday cocktails like a pro in the Lab, Ada's event space. (Capitol Hill, free)

8. Ballard Gingerbread Jubilee In addition to milk carton gingerbread house building, this annual community affair will also have a live performance by tots from Sweet Pea Cottage Preschool of the Arts. (Ballard, free)

9. Christmas Ship Parade of Boats Night During the Christmas Ship Festival, watch the third annual Parade of Boats night. Brightly decorated boats, including the lead Christmas Ship with performances from on-board Dickens Carolers, will convene in Lake Union and begin their promenade westward through the Fremont Cut. At the free on-shore viewing party, you can hear commentary from Allan and Ashley from Warm 106.9's morning show, cast your vote for the best boat, and enter to win prizes. (South Lake Union, free)

10. Porchlight Xmas Formal The recommended attire for this Christmas formal is "ties, Christmas ties, dresses, sweaters, snowmen, gingerbread, Wet Bandits, etc." Interpret that how you will and come for the drinks, snacks, pizza, and photo booth. (Capitol Hill, free)

11. South Lake Union Holiday Sleigh Photos Champagne for people and biscuits for pups will be served at this holiday photo party. Get a digital and physical copy of a precious memory with your furry family member. (South Lake Union, $10)

12. Temple De Hirsch Sinai Hannukah At the temple's Bellevue campus, enjoy performances by Shabbat Junior and Chanukah Pajamikah, and on their Seattle campus, see a Shabbat Unplugged performance. (South Lake Union, free)

13. Winter Warmth Celebration Join the Cascade Neighborhood Council for desserts and hot drinks, music, arts and crafts, and games (which yield Winter Warmth prizes). (South Lake Union, free)

14. Ball of Wax 50: The Foghorns, Screens, Visceral Candy, The Laughing Group, Jenni Potts This Ball of Wax compilation release party will celebrate their 50th release, featuring live performances by local musicians like the Foghorns, Screens, Visceral Candy, the Laughing Group, and Jenni Potts. (Eastlake, $8/$10)

15. Communist Eyes, Burien, Dead Man Join up with trash rockers Communist Eyes, local alt guys Büriën (guess where they got their name), and filthy blues band Dead Man for a wild night out that doubles as a holiday toy drive for local kids. (Georgetown, $8)

16. Correo Aereo Acoustic Latin/world music duo Correo Aereo (aka Abel Rocha and Madeleine Sosin) will perform songs from Venezuela, Argentina, and Mexico. (Columbia City, free)

17. David Haney + FHTAGN: String Fury "Spatial sound collective" FHTAGN will perform improvisational pieces in full battle stance while David Haney will present music from his last 25 albums. (Wallingford, $10)

18. Festivus! Costanza holiday extravaganza Festivus will be celebrated with a non-denominational live set of DJs like DARRIUS, Meistro, Yamanaka, HYDEF, and MTBTZ. In the spirit of the season, local Burning Man camp Soular Society will be hosting the final donation event for their 2017 Winter Coat Drive, so bring new or gently used warm, winter items to donate (and receive a $5 discounted cover). Every donation will go directly to Mary's Place. (Downtown, $10)

19. Happy Orchestra Trio Earshot Jazz Instrumentalist of the Year nominee Tarik Abouzied of Happy Orchestra will bring together a group of local funk and jazz musicians, including Joe Doria and Scott Goodwin. (Downtown, free)

20. Hurricane Harvey Benefit Show with Actionesse, Asterhouse, and Temple Canyon Raise money for the victims of recent disaster Hurricane Harvey with this triple set of local rock groups Actionesse, Asterhouse, and Temple Canyon. (Capitol Hill, $10)

21. Jordan Wiegert Jazz Quintet Debut Witness the beginning of a new jazz talent with this debut performance of local drummer Jordan Wiegert's jazz quintet, with featured involvement from Joey Boyd on saxophone, Ryan Donnelly on bass, Owen Thayer on guitar, and Drew Medak on piano. (Capitol Hill, $5)

22. Josephine Howell Join singer, dancer, and actor Josie Howell for a live performance. (Bellevue, free)

23. Lust Punch, Ghost Town Whistlers, Honor Hall, Petey Normal Ready yourself for the full throttle heavy metal-infused rock thrust of Lust Punch, Ghost Town Whistlers, Honor Hall, and Petey Normal at the Saloon. (Pioneer Square, $8)

24. Maya Soleil Maya Soleil's "electric Afro-World fusion" show features Zambian singer and dancer Moye Kashimbi and Ghana's Sheimawu and Awal Alhassan, backed by Rob "Mad Scientist" Pastorok on keyboards, TJ Morris on drums, Bob Antolin on sax, flute, and guitar, and E Michael Pruitt on bass. (Pioneer Square, free)

25. Michael Owcharuk Trio Musician/composer Mike Owcharuk will play tight/loose jazz piano. As Charles Mudede describes him: "Michael Owcharuk is a very talented and entertaining local pianist who has collaborated with almost all of the leading figures in our productive and accomplished jazz scene. His play has an experimental edge that’s coupled with a strong sense of swing." (First Hill, free)

26. Noah Gundersen's Cheap Date Sip a $2 Hamm's while you listen to the sounds of Seattle indie folk singer-songwriter Noah Gundersen. (Capitol Hill, $5)

27. Quiet, Kings of Cavalier, Maklak Moody psych-punks Quiet will headline, with support performances by Kings of Cavalier and Maklak. (University District, $8)

28. Semantron, DANGG, Fungal Abyss The time has come once again to implore you to witness the psychotropic splendor that is a Fungal Abyss show. Improvising after ingesting hallucinogens is not recommended to you amateurs at home, but the pros in Fungal Abyss turn this high-wire stunt into heavier-than-a-death-in-the-family psychedelia. Every FA performance I’ve been fortunate enough to attend is a brain-blasting adventure. Headliners Semantron have no music available right now, but their personnel—Brothers of the Sonic Cloth’s Dave French, Neurosis’s Scott Kelly, Green Jello’s Guy Nelson—portends gargantuan catharsis. DAVE SEGAL (Ballard, $8)

29. A Service of Readings and Carols Hear holiday carols from the Cathedral Choir, Women of St. James Schola, Jubilate Young Women's Ensemble, and Schola Cantorum accompanied by Cathedral brass, harp, and organ. (Downtown, free)

30. Smoking Bill, Fortress of the Bear High-energy rock band Smoking Bill bring their funky party vibes to West Seattle, with local indie rockers Fortress of the Bear. (West Seattle, $8)

31. Sticky Situation, C U Next Tuesday, Disorderlies, Mud On My Bra Join up with some witchy punks at this live show in the University District with sets by Sticky Situation, C U Next Tuesday, Disorderlies, and Mud On My Bra. (University District, $7)

32. Swing 3PO Hear holiday tunes from swing trio Swing 3PO. They'll play tunes from the Great American Songbook and the Jungle Book, plus original compositions. (First Hill, free)

33. Theories, Tacos!, the Family Curse Joe “Grindo” Axler is a true example of the eclectic nature of modern heavy metal. When he’s not serving you behind the bar, Axler plays drums for two of the heaviest yet sonically opposite metal bands in the Northwest. On one hand, there’s Samothrace, who play slow, crushing doom metal with an average song length somewhere around the 10-minute mark. On the opposite side of the spectrum, there’s Theories, which is the musical equivalent of a brick to the face—raging, unapologetic grinding death metal played at a breakneck speed. Release that tension with Theories and let them grind your mind.     KEVIN DIERS (Ballard, $10)

34. Trust KEXP DJ Kid Hops and Justice &amp; Treasure (formerly SunTzu Sound) join forces for TRUST, a dance night dedicated to "sophisticated sounds unbound by genre." (Downtown, $10)

35. Vera Toy Drive Join Slumberbox, Universal Peace, Seltzer, and Regional Justice Center for a night of local rock. Vera will be collecting toys (worth $8 or more) for El Centro de la Raza's holiday drive. (Seattle Center, $8)

36. Vinyl Spin Party With Kurt Bloch and Jim Sangster Kurt Bloch (Fastbacks, the Young Fresh Fellows) and Jim Sangster (the Young Fresh Fellows, TRIPWIRES) will be spinning everything from R&amp;B to "saucy surf" and "crunchy garage" on 45s. (Ballard, free)

37. Wiscon, Skates!, Freeway Park Thumping soul rockers Wiscon share their music like every live show is a party for the end of the world. They'll be joined by Skates! and Freeway Park. (Eastlake, $6/$8)

38. WONGS, Violence Creeps, Minority Whip Join Seattle's WONGS and Minority Whip and Oakland's Violence Creeps for a night of punk rock. (Eastlake, $8)

39. Xmas Maximus Holiday Variety Show Enjoy some not-so-wholesome holiday fun with Cathy Sorbo's comedy, Octavia Sexton, Crystal Tassels, and Amara Strutt's burlesque, and festive tunes by the Xmas Maximus Band. (Shoreline, $10)

40. Stride: A Cabaret Cornish performers will sing works by Tracy Chapman, Pharrell Williams, Cy Coleman, and Lin Manuel Miranda, all centered on the theme of self-determination. (Downtown, free)

41. E.J. Koh, Mita Mahato, Montreux Rotholtz, and Jane Wong "All the new thinking is about loss. / In this it resembles all the old thinking," says Robert Hass in his beloved poem "Meditation at Lagunitas." This group of local literary poets will present much of this new thinking, but in their own dramatically different styles. Jane Wong, who will descend on Seattle from her newly appointed ivory tower at Western Washington University, swims in the blood and the guts of loss in her recent collection, Overpour. Mita Mahato cuts it out of paper to create gorgeous, palpable poetry comics for In Between, which was published last month. Loss haunts Montreux Rotholtz's debut book, Unmark, and it's E.J. Koh's constant companion in her lauded new collection, A Lesser Love. Expect a lot of quiet intensity and powerful imagery. RICH SMITH (Capitol Hill, free)

42. Mxd kd Chapbook Release Hear new work by Malcolm Friend in celebration of his debut chapbook, mxd kd mixtape. Joining him will be Jesse Bernstein, Julz Bolinayen, Derek Obiso Dizon, Raychelle Duazo Le’Chante’ Raiwalui, and Jasmine Schwartz. (Capitol Hill, free)

43. Someday We'll All Be Free: A Conversation about Abolition Though the conversation has certainly been troubled, Seattle is one of the few American municipalities actively considering ways to live without prisons. To help deepen and expand that consideration, Black Lives Matter cofounder Patrisse Cullors, Los Angeles poet laureate Luis Rodriguez, ACLU of Washington's Michele Storms, Rainier Beach educator Jerrell Davis, and Native American photographer and director Wesley Roach will help explain ways that libraries can help nudge us into that future. According to press materials, "the evening will include live performances, a panel, a live tweet up, and Q&amp;A," as well as a criminal-justice reading list curated by our wonderful librarians. RICH SMITH (Downtown, free)

44. The Whatsits Featuring Wendy Wahman, Elizabeth Rose Stanton, Kevan Atteberry, Jennifer K. Mann and Ben Clanton Five children's book author/illustrators (Ben Clanton, Elizabeth Rose Stanton, Jennifer K Mann, Kevan Atteberry, and Wendy Wahman) will gather for a reading and signing. They'll be taking your questions about the process of making children's books. (University District, free)

45. Building the Wall With this production of Pulitzer Prize-winning and Tony Award-winning playwright Robert Schenkkan’s Building the Wall, the theater world has officially moved on from indirect criticisms of the worst president in the history of the US to direct criticism of the worst president in the history of the US. In the play, which Schenkkan reportedly wrote in a “white heat” after the 2016 election, ICE rounds up immigrants following a terrorist attack in Times Square. As everyone waits to hear what will be done with the incarcerated, a history professor grills the supervisor of the private prison, who is in charge of administering the horrifying punishment they expect to come down the pike. Desdemona Chiang, who’s fresh off a pretty solid production of The World of Extreme Happiness at Seattle Public Theater, will direct. RICH SMITH (Capitol Hill, free)

46. Hobby Rockers (Robin Edwards &amp; Bree McKenna) Local musicians Robin Edwards and Bree McKenna of Lisa Prank, Tacocat, Childbirth, and Who Is She? fame are teaming up again but this time for an art show, with years of their paintings and drawings displayed in new community art space Nii Modo. Though not technically holiday-themed, this show will be primed for Christmas, with cookies, a decorated tree, and a night of GGNZLA Karaoke at the ready. (Wallingford, free)Opening Friday

47. Candy Cane Lane A local holiday tradition since 1949, a row of 1920s-era Tudor homes in Ravenna are lit up like life-sized gingerbread houses. Sleighs, reindeer, blow-up candy canes, and more await your wondrous stares. (University District, free)

48. Daily Menorah Lighting Every afternoon of Hanukkah, join the Stroum in the lighting of their lobby's menorah and singing. (Mercer Island, free)

49. Garden d’Lights Garden d’Lights features over half a million sparkling lights formed into the whimsical shapes of plants, flowers, birds, animals, and cascading waterfalls set amid the natural beauty of the Bellevue Botanical Garden. (Bellevue, $5)

50. Gingerbread Village This gingerbread village is no joke: Every year, Seattle architecture firms, master builders, and Sheraton Seattle culinary teams come together to build a meticulously planned candy wonderland. The theme of this year's village is "25 Years of Cheer: A Celebration of Seattle." See elements of the city's past and its imagined future in candy form, from skyscrapers to underground tunnels. (Downtown, free)

51. Holiday Express Train Stop by the Volunteer Park Conservatory's Seasonal House to see a model train swooshing around Santa's chair in a wintery village display. (Capitol Hill, free)

52. Ivar's Clam Lights Every night, Ivar's powers up the park with thousands of Christmas lights depicting various clammy characters. Is this where clams go to heaven after you eat them at Ivar's? (Renton, free)

53. Redmond Winter Wonderland Myriad holiday activities await you on the Eastside at Redmond Town Center's holiday extravaganza. Support Hopelink by hopping on the Hyatt House carousel, ride the holiday train, twirl around in a synthetic skating rink, visit Santa in his workshop, and more. (Redmond, free)

54. Reindeer Festival The nursery will be disguised as a winter wonderland this season for families to enjoy. Do some holiday shopping, pick up a Christmas tree, visit the model train village, hang out with Santa's reindeer, and more. (Crown Hill, free)

55. Snowflake Lane Get photos with Santa, then experience beautiful lights, "toy soldier drummers," animatronic characters, and pretty music in artificial snow every night. (Bellevue, free)

56. Teddy Bear Suite Visit a room full of holiday teddy bears at the Fairmont's annual winter display. All donations benefit the Seattle Children's Hospital. (Downtown, by donation)

57. Westlake Holiday Carousel Westlake Park's holiday carousel features 18 horses, a double chariot, and hundreds of twinkling (energy-efficient) lights. As always, proceeds from the carousel will benefit Treehouse. (Downtown, $3 suggested donation)

58. WildLights See the zoo in a new light—500,000 energy-efficient LEDs, in fact! See luminous animal-themed designs, have an indoor snowball fight, meet Santa and his very real reindeer and some nocturnal animals, listen to carolers, and enjoy the holiday beer garden. (Phinney, $9.95)

59. Winterfest Take a break from the stressful elements of the holiday season and head to Seattle Center for five weeks of festive fun. Go ice skating, visit the winter train village, see professional ice sculptures, watch performances, and more. (Seattle Center, free)

60. Diagon Alley With the help of his wife and two daughters, Seattle's Jon Chambers has been hard at work constructing a walk-through replica of Diagon Alley, the cobblestoned wizarding hub that snakes behind the Leaky Cauldron pub in Harry Potter, and finished it just in time for Halloween. In an interview with GeekWire, Chambers said: "I was born the day before Halloween, and October is like my power month. So I decided to quit my job and focus on this crazy thing." Stop by the Ballard home to see the magic for yourself. (Ballard, by donation)

61. Dickens Carolers at Sorrento The Dickens Carolers of Seattle make the hotel's Fireside Room even cozier with a holiday serenade. (First Hill, free)

62. Robert Calafiore and Joseph Minek: Color Darkroom Innovators These two photographers, Hartford's Robert Calafiore and Cleveland's Joseph Minek, still work in the darkroom, and this exhibition reveals their mastery of abstracts, nontraditional chromogenic processing, and sculpture with prints. (Ballard, free)Closing Saturday

63. Storefronts UN[contained] Artist Reception Storefronts UN[contained] is a residency for recognized artists of color hooked into important social issues. At this edition, you'll encounter inter-/multidisciplinary artists Barry Johnson, Storme Webber, and Naima Lowe. (Queen Anne, free)

64. Other Theatre Soft Open CsZ will mark the opening of its "Other Theatre" programming with three shows featuring three improv troupes each.(Fremont, $5)

65. Li'l Woody's Pancake Feed Fundraiser For the beginning of Las Posadas (the Mexican holiday season), L'il Woody's throws a Mexican pancake breakfast in partial tribute to the many charity pancake breakfast fundraisers served in their White Center space when it was the community hub the Epicure in the 1950s. 100% of proceeds will go to the White Center Community Association. (White Center, $8)

66. Meet the Kringles Snap a selfie with the Kringles, decorate ornaments, and pen a letter to Santa. Cone and Steiner will provide food, drinks, snacks, and holiday candy, and "maybe some reindeer food." (Capitol Hill, free)

67. Black Santa Join 100 Black Parents and Vulcan for this free family visit with Black Santa, featuring photos, kids' activities, and holiday treats. (Central District, free)

68. Hanukkah Pajama Jam Put on your PJs and enjoy live music from folk duo Josh &amp; Chava, a Hanukkah story from PJ Library, food truck goodies from Napkin Friends and Delfino’s Pizza, Krispy Kreme doughnuts, crafting, an olive oil press with Chabad, a menorah lighting and Havdalah, and much more. Admission is free with a pajama donation—they're looking for new and gently used sets for the foster program Amara. (Mercer Island, free)

69. Horse-Drawn Carriage Rides Clickety-clack your way through Occidental Park in style with free horse-drawn carriage rides all afternoon. There will also be free crafting activities, carolers, hot cocoa, and letters to Santa. (Pioneer Square, free)

70. Santa at Ounces Round up kids, pets, family, and/or friends and snap free pics with the official Santa of the Seattle Seahawks! Plus, food trucks and "holiday goodies." (West Seattle, free)

71. Seattle Secular Solstice So many holiday stories and traditions focus on light: it's no wonder that Hanukkah, Kwanzaa, and Advent call for lighting dozens of candles in the most depressing time of year. For those without such a tradition, Seattle Secular Solstice invites you, for the fourth year, to gather on the darkest day of the calendar to sing, eat food, and celebrate "empathy and evidence" (this year's theme). Meet these friendly secular folks for your December dose of cheery humanism. (University District, by donation)

72. 5 Cent Wifi Jazz Hop Hear original compositions of the new age genre "jazz hop" from local Capitol Hill group 5 Cent Wifi while eating some Southern Italian food. (Capitol Hill, free)

73. Around The World With KEXP: KEXP Mash-Up Party Esteemed KEXP members will gather for a music mash-up party led by DJ Kid Hops, DJ Chilly, and Darek Mazzone,  with electronica, world music, and Latin vibes all night long. (Fremont, $6/$8)

74. Ceremony Presents: Timewarp Dance to the best of the '80s and beyond with DJ Evan Blackstone in your Saturday night best. (Downtown, $5)

75. Delilah Pearl and The Mantarays Dress fancy and "swango" with Vashon Island's Delilah Pearl and the Mantarays. The band's sound combines "a bit of 1940’s hepcat jazz, a heap of modern soul and R&amp;B, and smoky torch ballads." (First Hill, free)

76. Devils Hunt Me Down, Woodshed, Thunderhound, Sun Mother Devils Hunt Me Down, "raised on a diet of psychedelic mushrooms and bear fat," will strive to be the loudest dirt-rockers in Cascadia, but they'll have competition from howling Woodshed, Thunderhound, and Sun Mother. (Fremont, $8/$10)

77. Dude York, Naked Giants, Dogbreth Halftime for the Holidays tackles the highs and lows of the holidays with Dude York's typical mix of bluntness, cheekiness, and cheesiness. "Hollywood Holiday" is a tongue-in-cheek ode to winters in Southern California. "Jingle Bells Rock" is an audible eye roll at the Christmas classic. "Takin' Care of Christmas" is a play on the Bachman-Turner Overdrive track. And other songs delve into the lower points of Christmas, for instance "Break Up Holiday," which sums up the feeling of having to see a hometown ex when you go back to see your parents. The whole song is a fierce, guitar-powered jab. And the title Halftime for the Holidays? All but two songs end in a half-time guitar solo.      ANNA KAPLAN (Belltown, $3/$5)

78. Grant Schroff Trio The drummer for Seattle afro funk band Polyrhythmics will perform with his own trio. (Downtown, free)

79. Holiday Rock Party Hear holiday music from "poppy party rockers" Doseywallips and Christmas surf rockers Dancer &amp; Prancer. (Georgetown, $5)

80. Holiday Sing-Along with Sing Noel Gather your loved ones for a holiday sing-along with eight-part harmony group Sing Noel (also known as the 32nd Street Singers) as they lead the room in singing interactive and traditional holiday favorites, plus some classic drinking songs, with a full audience participation 12-part version of the "Twelve Days of Christmas." (Columbia City, free)

81. Inferno: Ugly Sweater Party Recurring queer ladies' night Inferno jumps on the holiday-sweater-themed-wagon with a seasonal dance night soundtracked by DJ Lady Jane. Good luck finding sweaters that are both ugly and sexy. (Capitol Hill, $10)

82. Jovino Santos Neto Expect Brazilian-inspired lyricism and invention from Golden Ear-winning local star Jovino Santos Neto as he plays a solo set on the piano. (First Hill, free)

83. Jupe Jupe, Trick Candles, Razor Clam Minor-key New Wave rockers Jupe Jupe will be backed up by Trick Candles and Razor Clam for a night out in Ballard. (Ballard, $10)

84. Kurly Somthing, Corespondents, Cantrip, Guests Experimental electronica visualists Kurly Somthing lash their sense of neon across the stage with Corespondents, Cantrip, and additional guests. (University District, $8)

85. Monsterwatch, Choke The Pope, Porn Bloopers, Baywitch Melodic garage punks Monsterwatch will take over the Funhouse stage with support from Choke The Pope, Porn Bloopers, and Baywitch. (Eastlake, $6/$8)

86. Niagara Moon, Craig Marker, Bess Hepner Join orchestral alt-pop artist Niagara Moon, singer-songwriter Craig Marker, and Bess Hepner for a free show. (Columbia City, free)

87. Phono Paradiso, Cold Comfort, Colorworks, New Felts Local psychedelic dream-pop group Phono Paradiso will be joined by Cold Comfort, Colorworks, and New Felts for a brightly colored evening set. (Ballard, $8)

88. Ritual Veil, Medusa Stare, Line of Flight Portland trio Ritual Veil "take the familiarity of new wave, post punk, and synth pop and throw a sex beat and goth subculture cloak over it." Experience the hodgepodge for yourself. (Georgetown, $8)

89. Scarlet Parke, Fell From a Star Smooth and smoky songstress Scarlet Parke plays on your heartstrings with her particular blend of blues and pop that gains momentum from her brand of dark yet party-ready seduction. She'll be joined by Fell From a Star. (Capitol Hill, $8/$10)

90. Shagnasty, Chimp, the Riffbrokers, the Dignitaries Hear local rock from Shagnasty, Chimp, the Riffbrokers, and the Dignitaries. (Shoreline, $8)

91. Silent Opposition, Raw Dogs, The Brass, Head Honcho Seattle hardcore punks Silent Opposition headline this benefit for the family of community member John Hernandez with bill support from Raw Dogs, the Brass, and Head Honcho. (University District, $5)

92. The Tarantellas The Tarantellas are a traditional duo of mandolino (played by Richard Sclafani) and guitar (in the hands of the delightfully named Pete Cicero), with vocals and harmonica thrown in. Come for some Old Country serenades and southern Italo-nostalgia.(First Hill, free)

93. Thee Deception, Pukesnake, 29A Freedom rockers Thee Deception will join up with heavy venom thrashers Pukesnake and gritty alt-rock group 29A for a night out. (Georgetown, $8)

94. A Very Jerry Christmas Christmas is the time to celebrate the things you hold dearest to your heart—so Deadheads, get in the holiday spirit with this concert featuring Colin Higgins on guitar, Bob Lovelace on bass, Nate Spicer on keys, and Doug Port on drums, in a set that will celebrate the music of the Grateful Dead. (West Seattle, free)

95. Zelda Starfire, Opal-Thistle Pistol Sisters, Wildcat Rose One-woman blues/country/punk act Zelda Starfire will be joined by Opal-Thistle Pistol Sisters and Wildcat Rose. (West Seattle, $8)

96. Chinese Traditional Music and Dance Performance Enjoy traditional Chinese music from Beijing Opera, dances, martial arts performance, and a fashion show from the North American Chinese Performing Artists Group. (Downtown, free)

97. Open Studio Witness works in progress by performers Gigi Rosenberg, Eli Steffen, Shontina Vernon, and the pair of Tatiana Pavela and Taigé Lauren. Meet the artists and give them your most constructive feedback. (Queen Anne, $5)

98. Story So Far This folk rock musical follows a working class family in the wake of a father's death. Tonight's workshop version will include a staged reading of the show, with minimal blocking and music. Afterward, the audience will be invited to join the cast in a discussion. (Greenwood, pay what you will)

99. Mystic Hug Thug Some artists aim for shock, estrangement, perturbation, alienation. Some just want you to feel loved. One of the latter is Ryan Henry Ward. You know him as Henry, and he's the muralist who has covered the walls of your city in walruses and ostriches and fish and wizards and Sasquatches. You've seen his doofily-expressioned, elastic-limbed creatures on the sides of schools, taverns, pot shops, coffee shops, bars, and private residences. No matter how familiar they become, their whimsicality is funnier and sweeter than it is cloying, and the rich yet muted colors blend in with the city's natural hues. Henry's solo show and launch of the book Mystic Thug Hug promises more of this affectionate Northwest fancy. Who doesn't want to see a beatific sloth cradling a baby or an owl hugging a human or, in fact, a human hugging a human? (Capitol Hill, free)

100. Reading from Counting Time and Documentary Screening Publishers, poets, and filmmakers will come together for a documentary screening of Voices Beyond the Wall: Twelve Love Poems from the Murder Capital of the World and the launch of Counting Time Like People Count Stars, a collection of poetry that celebrates the young girls of Our Little Roses Orphanage in San Pedro Sula, Honduras. Both book and film document the girls’ work with poet and Episcopal priest Spencer Reece. (Chinatown-International District, free)

101. Art Build: Block the Gates Join 350 Seattle to help make art for a December 18 protest with Water Warriors and against Puget Sound Energy's planned liquified gas construction site, which is going forward despite the concerns of environmentalists and the strong objections of the Puyallup tribe. They say, "Dress for mess. Bring smiles and food to share, and a sewing machine if you have one." (Fremont, free)

102. Holiday Salsa Party Shake your booty to Mambo Cadillac's fusion/Afro Cuban salsa at the local band's holiday party. Instruction is available if you need it. (Chinatown-International District, $5/$10)

103. Gold E. Lofts Art Gallery Pop Up Art Show Art by Grace Dager, Karl Krogstad, and Jon Strongbow will be on view and available for sale, along with some pieces by Margaret Elliot, Steve Mortz, Zeno Sieler, and June Olsen. (Everett, free)Opening Saturday

104. PCNW Presents: Ernie Flowers and Marcia Glover Two up-and-coming artists, Ernie Flowers and Marcia Glover, exhibit a photographic series called Reflections of Home in PCNW's sponsorship program. (Capitol Hill, free)Closing Sunday

105. A Bonsai Solstice A couple of days before the darkest night of the year, experience sundown in the candlelit bonsai garden while Gary Stroutsos plays Native American flute. (Federal Way, free, donations accepted)

106. Center Ice Spectacle See a team of carvers create fanciful ice sculptures throughout the day. To warm things up, see "fire performances" by the Emerald City Dragons. (Seattle Center, free)

107. The Ballard Comedy Show Presents: Scott Losse Local comedian Scott Losse has performed at Portland’s Bridgetown Comedy Festival, San Francisco Sketchfest, Sketchfest Seattle, Bumbershoot, and other notable giggle fests. See what he has to say at this live set. (Ballard, $7)

108. Holiday Xtravaganza Enjoy an evening of holiday-inspired improv and sketches at this annual show. (Belltown, $5)

109. The Okstupid Show Watch host Patrick Higgins and friends take control of strangers' OkCupid profiles (and maybe create some of their own) at this comedic exploration of contemporary dating. They also promise instructional dating videos, audience games, and giveaways. (Greenwood, $10)

110. Mammoth and Mollusk Holiday Double Feature Sip a mulled wine cocktail while you watch A Muppet's Christmas Carol, followed by Bad Santa. Don't forget to dress as a muppet or a naughty elf for the chance to win prizes. Proceeds benefit the University District Food Bank. (Eastlake, free)

111. Cubes Christmas Posada Traditionally celebrated on the nine nights leading up to Christmas Eve, Las Posadas is a holiday tradition celebrated in Latin America. Join Cubes for an all-day affair filled with hot drinks, food from Tricky's Tacos, and marranito ornament-making. (Wallingford, free)

112. Cosplay 101 with Alchemic Rose Do you eye the costumed comic lovers roaming the streets during ComicCon with envy? In this free class for beginners, cosplay expert Alchemic Rose will be your guide in pattern making, material foraging, and other useful tips to help you stand out as your favorite character. (Fremont, by donation)

113. Ballard Menorah Lighting This annual Hanukkah celebration includes a giant Star of David menorah lighting, hot latkes, jelly doughnuts, music, and more. (Ballard, free)

114. Cal Anderson Park Menorah Lighting Capitol Hill dwellers can head to Cal Anderson for a public menorah lighting on the sixth night of Hanukkah. There will also be jelly doughnuts, coffee, latkes, kids' activities, gift bags filled with dreidels and gelt, and a raffle. (Capitol Hill, free)

115. Everett Menorah Lighting and Olive Press See a live olive press demonstration and a grand menorah lighting, enjoy Hanukkah treats and crafts, and more. (Everett, free)

116. Holiday Dog Party with Santa Don't let your dogs' holiday wishes go unheard; bring them to visit with Santa. While you're there, pick up some treats from Mud Bay, the Seattle Barkery, and Up &amp; Undies (who will be selling hand-sewn dog sweaters). (Ballard, free)

117. Dancer &amp; Prancer Dancer &amp; Prancer, "the world's greatest Christmas surf band," will play an all-ages show in the company of Santa himself, or so we hear. (West Seattle, $5)

118. Familiars, Cool American, Emma Lee Toyoda, Sleepover Club Tender-hearted fantasy rockers Familiars will spread a Northwest mist of indie experimental tracks from their latest album Digest Self, with support sets by Cool American, Emma Lee Toyoda, and Sleepover Club. (Eastlake, $5-$10)

119. Festivus with DJ Duckie For a special holiday version of Resurrection Sunday, dance to '70s, '80s, and '90s club music from DJ Duckie, plus special guests the Usual Suspects. (Capitol Hill, $5)

120. Harp Music at the Conservatory Harpist Bill McJohn returns to the Volunteer Park Conservatory's Bromeliad House. Hear his soothing melodies among the plants. (Capitol Hill, free)

121. In Aisle Eight, Black Giraffe, Etchings Five-piece Seattle rockers In Aisle Eight recently released their self-titled album, whose songs range from rock to hiphop, alternative to blues. They'll be joined at High Dive by Black Giraffe and Etchings. (Fremont, $6/$8)

122. Jazz in the City: Garfield High School Jazz Ensemble Witness the prolific students of the Garfield High School Jazz Ensemble as they jam together at this special holiday concert with all 30 members. (First Hill, free)

123. Lil Woadie, Thee Prophecy Local rappers Lil Woadie and Thee Prophecy will head west for a night. (West Seattle, $10)

124. Opera on Tap Christmas Special In their annual holiday show, the professional singers of Opera On Tap will bring Christmas to the masses, hosted by Managing Divo Robert McPherson. (University District, $5)

125. Seattle Opera Preview Lecture: Così Fan Tutte Norm Hollingshead will give you a sneak peek into Mozart's Così Fan Tutte, about two guys who have the bad idea of testing their women's loyalty. (West Seattle, free)

126. Six Killer, Shake Some Action, The Pop Cycle Six Killer experiments with American roots music, '70s rock, and indie rock, adding their own unique vocal harmonies. They'll be joined by Shake Some Action and the Pop Cycle. (Ballard, $8)

127. Story Time for Grown-Ups Librarian David Wright shares John Cheever’s holiday classic about a Manhattan doorman convinced that "Christmas is a sad season for the poor," as well as Donald Westlake’s story of a sinister anti-Santa named Nackles. (Rainier Valley, free)

128. The Ultimate Sodo Tailgate The "largest indoor tailgate in Sodo" promises prizes, music, food, and drink specials. (Sodo, free)

Sign up for the latest news and to win free tickets to events

Buy tickets to events around Seattle

Comprehensive calendar of Seattle events

The easiest way to find Seattle's best events

Print Archives


            
              All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
1535 11th Ave (Third Floor), Seattle, WA 98122
            
          


            Contact
            |
            Privacy Policy
            |
            Terms of Use
            |
            Takedown Policy
          


          
            All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
1535 11th Ave (Third Floor), Seattle, WA 98122
          
        


          
            Contact |
            Privacy Policy |
            Terms of Use |
            Takedown Policy
          
        