
Wednesday 11 July 2018



Alex Dobuzinskis and Dan Whitcomb



February 2 2018 7:09 AM



Five people were wounded, including a student shot in the head, when a gun went off in a Los Angeles middle school classroom on Thursday, and a 12-year-old girl was taken into custody, police said.


The girl, whose name was not released, was booked at a juvenile detention facility on a charge of negligent discharge of a firearm, said Officer Tony Im of the Los Angeles Police Department.

Im declined to say if investigators believed the girl deliberately opened fire at Sal Castro Middle School near the city's downtown district. Mayor Eric Garcetti told local KABC-TV at the scene that it was unclear if the shooting was accidental.

"We're unclear whether a gun went off or if it was an intentional shooting," Garcetti said. "Luckily there are no fatalities or serious injuries."

Two students were hit directly by gunfire and three other victims were hit by shrapnel, police said.

A 15-year-old boy was hit by gunfire in the left temple and was rushed to hospital, where he was alert and talking when he arrived, said Dr. Carl Chudnofsky, head of emergency medicine at Los Angeles County-USC Medical Center.

He had no damage to "vital structures," doctors said at a news conference, adding they were cautiously optimistic he would survive.

A 15-year-old girl was hit in the wrist and was in stable condition, Los Angeles Police Department spokeswoman Wendy Reyes said.

The three people with slight injuries from shrapnel ranged in age from 11 to 30 years old, Los Angeles Fire Department spokesman Erik Scott said.

Authorities said they were trying to determine how the gun was brought on campus. The incident triggered a lockdown of the campus and a neighboring high school. Parents swarmed the area seeking to be re-united with their children.

"As a parent, this is everyone's worst-case nightmare," Los Angeles Police Department deputy chief Robert Arcos said at a news conference.

The shooting, which took place in an elective class with children of different ages, was the latest outbreak of gun violence at a U.S. school.

Between 2000 and 2013, nearly 17 percent of so-called 160 active shooter incidents in the United States were in elementary, middle or high schools, according to a Federal Bureau of Investigation report. An active shooters is defined as a person trying shoot to death people in a confined area. Department spokesman Tony Im said in a telephone call.


Online Editors


Jeff Mason U.S. President Donald Trump accused Germany of being a "captive" of Russia on Wednesday as Western leaders gathered in Brussels for a NATO summit where Trump wants Europeans to pay up more for...

Independent.ie Newsdesk A man told investigators he left a five-month-old baby boy in the woods after a weekend car crash in Montana because the baby was very heavy, court records said.

Nick Allen The future of America's abortion law is on the line as a ferocious battle looms over Donald Trump's latest nominee to sit on the US Supreme Court.





Today's news headlines, directly to your inbox every morning.



Sign Up



What a difference a few weeks makes. 


Transport Minister... 


The Thai boys saved from a flooded cave... 


China’s government has vowed to take “firm and... 


When Sonni Vargas’s boyfriend proposed to her at... 


A father and son convicted of intentionally... 


Thousands of Bosnian Muslims have gathered in... 


Six activists wearing strategically coloured football... 


A baby porcupine is the first of its species to be born at Brookfield Zoo in Chicago. 


The Thai boys saved from a flooded cave endured dives in zero visibility lasting up... 


Fugitive businessman Low Taek Jho, a suspect in... 


Do you think you know Shrek well enough to recite it... 


Prince Harry has said football is 'most definitely'... 


A group of protesters have created a 'Trump... 


Britain's data watchdog intends to fine Facebook £500,000 for breaches of... 


A third rescue operation to bring out the remaining four boys and their football... 


A look back at some of Boris Johnson's... 


Prime Minister Theresa May has thanked David Davis and Boris Johnson in a... 


Over a hundred people are feared dead after heavy rainfall... 


Footage of Number 10 Chief of Staff Gavin... 


Dominic Raab has been appointed Brexit secretary by Theresa May after David... 

© Independent.ie 