Isaias Mosqueda Cisneros, father of 3, detained during raid on April 3

Isaias Mosqueda Cisneros, father of 3, detained during raid on April 3

Isaias Mosqueda Cisneros, father of 3, detained during raid on April 3

An Auburn father of three is in danger of being deported back to Mexico, and his family is pleading with Immigration and Customs Enforcement to let him out.


Isaias Mosqueda Cisneros, 38, was detained on April 3 on his way to work from his Auburn home by ICE agents during a sweep. Cisneros’ family is worried and left wondering when and if he will be coming home.


“I miss my dad,” 10-year-old Ninel Cisneros said Monday.


The family has deep roots in Auburn, where six of the children’s uncles and aunts live.


“We want him to come back, to be with our family and to be with us because we love him,” 13-year-old Yoni Cisneros said.


Coming up at 6: Family of Auburn man pleads for his release from detention after being picked up by ICE. pic.twitter.com/99vbhXTY2b

ICE spokesperson Richard Rocha said in a statement, “Isaias Mosqueda entered the U.S. illegally and was targeted by ICE officers due to his prior criminal history, which includes a 2006 conviction for the offense of assault with a deadly weapon.”


KCRA 3 did not find any records documenting a court case against Cisneros, but his brother Miguel Mosqueda Cisneros said the incident from 12 years ago was a case of self-defense.


“In 2006, something like that happened,” Miguel Cisneros said. “But someone tried to attack him in the back, so he defended himself.”


“The bigger problem was he run from the place,” he explained. “And that's why the police chase him and they caught him.”


Miguel Cisneros said his brother went to jail and paid the price for his crime.


Isaias Mosqueda Cisneros applied for citizenship back in 2000, but he was informed the process would take 12 years or more, his brother said It’s been 18 years – and Isaias Masqueda Cisneros is now in imminent danger of deportation.


Cisneros is being held at Yuba County Jail in Marysville, about 40 miles from his Placer County home.


The Placer County Sheriff’s Department told KCRA 3 it does not have a contract with ICE for holding undocumented immigrants.


Cisneros is on a detainer hold at the Yuba County Jail. Rocha said the agency had no further information about a timetable for advancing the Cisneros case.


One of Isaias Mosqueda Cisneros' clients came forward Monday to defend the landscaper as a fellow immigrant.


“I was born in Canada, and now I'm a naturalized citizen as well,” Ron Paitich said.


Patich said he employed Cisneros for three years to do yard work.


“I'm in my 70s now,” Paitich said. “I have less interest in doing yard work. So, it's really nice to have dedicated hardworking people like this.”


Isaias Masqueda Cisneros’ family and friends held a rally for him on Sunday outside the Yuba County Jail. On Monday, his children had this message to ICE:


“To let him go because he's a nice guy,” 12-year-old Julian Cisneros said. “He's a hard worker. He needs his family because we love him."


							AlertMe
						

Hearst Television participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on purchases made through our links to retailer sites.