


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A recent $7 million payout by Maricopa County for a death at one of its jail isn't the only seven-figure payout they've made for an inmate death.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Maricopa County Board of Supervisors is expected to pay $7 million to the family of Ernest "Marty" Atencio, who died while being booked into Maricopa County jail.
(Photo: Atencio family/Special for The Republic)

On Wednesday morning, the Maricopa County Board of Supervisors agreed to pay $7 million to the family of a man who died after a use-of-force incident in a county jail while former Sheriff Joe Arpaio was in office. 


The decision follows a long line of high-dollar settlements shelled out to those who alleged excessive force and wrongful deaths at the jails during the 24 years Arpaio served as sheriff.


The $7 million payout to the family of Ernest Atencio will be split between the risk-management funds of the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office and Correctional Health Services, which provides medical care for the county's inmates. 


RELATED: $7 million settlement approved in Arpaio-era jail death


Michael Manning, a local attorney who has represented plaintiffs in some of these cases, said it appears the lawsuit settled Wednesday was the final "Arpaio death case."


That suit centered on a 2011 incident involving Ernest Atencio, a man who died after officers allegedly punched him and shot him with a stun gun when he refused to take off a shoe. 


Civil-rights activists have long criticized what they said were inhumane conditions at Arpaio's jails. Arpaio used the facilities to burnish his "tough-on-crime" image, often boasting about the unappetizing food given to inmates, or the heat they endured at the outdoor Tent City jail.


But critics said Arpaio's policies came at a high price tag, pointing to the loss of lives and often multi-million dollar settlements funded by taxpayers. Arpaio lost his bid for a seventh term in office in 2016, and has been replaced by Sheriff Paul Penzone. 


Atencio's case garnered the county's largest payout since 2003, when the policy liability for each department rose from $1 million to $5 million. After that taxpayer-funded cap, the remainder of any award is paid by the county's excess liability insurance.


RELATED: Tent City, infamous home of inmates who wear pink underwear, is closingSome Maricopa County inmates go on hunger strike to protest poor food, activist saysSheriff Joe Arpaio has always done it his way


But a few earlier cases drew even higher figures. The families of Scott Norberg and Charles Agster received $8.25 and $9 million, respectively, when the men died after being placed in a restraining chair. 


While critics would often attribute the deaths to a "culture of cruelty" in the jails, Arpaio's officials typically pointed to other factors, like the inmate's previous medical condition. 


Here's a look back at some of the largest Arpaio-era jail settlements, based on The Arizona Republic archives.


Scott Norberg died during a confrontation with Maricopa County Sheriff's deputies in 1996. (Photo: The Republic)

Scott Norberg, 35, died June 1, 1996, during a struggle with detention officers in the Madison Street Jail. He had been arrested for aggravated assault and drug tests after his death came back positive for methamphetamine. The Medical Examiner's Office said his death was caused by "positional asphyxia" after he was forced into a metal restraint chair, his mouth gagged and his head forced into his chest during a struggle with detention officers.


Federal investigators affirmed findings that Norberg died of positional asphyxia and concluded that he had a history of drug and alcohol abuse that contributed to his death. But the investigation found insufficient evidence to prosecute Maricopa County jailers


In January 1999, the county's insurers agreed to pay $8.25 million to settle a wrongful-death lawsuit brought by the Norberg family. The settlement did not include an admission of wrongdoing from the Sheriff's Office.


Charles Agster, III died while in police custody in 2001. (Photo: The Republic)

Charles Agster was 33 in August 2001, when he was arrested after a store employee called police to report that he was acting strangely.


Agster's death drew several parallels with that of Norberg. Agster, who reportedly had the mental capacity of a 12-year-old, also died after he was buckled into a restraint chair while being booked into a Maricopa County jail. An initial autopsy report said that Agster died of positional asphyxia, effectively that he had suffocated while being held down by detention officers. A later autopsy report said the cause of death was excited delirium consistent with methamphetamine abuse. 


A jury initially awarded Agster's family $9 million, but legal battles first decreased, then increased that figure again, according to Manning. Manning believes the final payout was $7.6 million. 


Brian Crenshaw:
Maricopa County has agreed to pay $2 million to settle a wrongful death lawsuit on behalf of Brian Crenshaw, an inmate who died after suffering jail injuries in 2003. (Photo: Special to The Republic)

Brian Crenshaw was mentally disabled and legally blind when he was arrested on a shoplifting charge in October 2002, according to court papers. 


In March 2003, while in county jail, 40-year-old Crenshaw got into a verbal dispute with a detention officer and was shoved into a table and knocked to the floor, according to court papers. After treatment, he was placed in solitary confinement and denied medical care, the complaint stated.


Six days later, Crenshaw was found on the floor of his cell with a broken neck, fractured toes and other injuries. He was hospitalized, but physicians were unaware of a perforated duodenum, a portion of the small intestine, the complaint says. Crenshaw fell into a coma and died four weeks later of a sepsis condition or an infection stemming from blunt-force trauma to the abdomen due to a fall, according to a Medical Examiner's report.


Sheriff's officials at the time said Crenshaw's death resulted from a medical condition that developed in the hospital and had nothing to do with events in jail. They said the county settled on $2 million to avoid paying millions of dollars in attorney fees in the event a jury ruled for the plaintiffs.


According to a lawsuit, 33-year-old Yarbrough walked into a Phoenix convenience store in December 2005 and asked the clerk to call 911 because he felt ill. But when police tried to pull him to the ground, he resisted. When he got to the Fourth Avenue Jail, he was strapped into the restraint chair. 


At the time it was the third case that Manning had won involving Maricopa County Jail inmates who died after being strapped into a restraint chair. 


In 2007, Maricopa County agreed to pay $2 million to Yarbrough's family and estate. 


The use of the chairs was discontinued in August 2006. 


Deborah Braillard in an undated photo. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

The lawsuit was filed in 2006 by Deborah Braillard's family after Braillard, 46, died of complications of diabetes after being booked into the Fourth Avenue Jail on Jan. 1, 2005. The lawsuit targeted Maricopa County, the Sheriff's Office and Correctional Health Services, a taxpayer-funded agency that treats county-jail inmates.


Jail workers had noted Braillard's health condition in previous bookings, but they failed to do so when she was booked on suspicion of drug possession.


When she became incoherent while in custody, employees attributed her symptoms to drug withdrawal. The symptoms were, in fact, caused by her diabetes, which went untreated.


Maricopa County agreed to pay $3.25 million to settle a lawsuit in 2012.


READ MORE:Attorneys file new sexual harassment allegations against Jodi Arias prosecutorA step-by-step look at Rebecca Zahau's bizarre death at Spreckles MansionSerial-killing suspect Cleophus Cooksey Jr. pleads not guilty to 8 murders


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
