Search and rescue teams getting ready to deploy to areas affected by #santarosafires pic.twitter.com/HKWyPSPWqi

Recovery crews in Sonoma County have begun the grim task of searching for bodies in the ashes of neighborhoods that were devastated by wildfires.

Sheriff Rob Giordano on Thursday announced the county's 14th death (bringing the Northern California fires death toll up to 24) and said at a morning briefing that law enforcement is "moving into a recovery phase" in the aftermath of the Tubbs fire in the Santa Rosa area, which he called "an active disaster."

The searches can take hours and identification will be difficult, Giordano said.

In Northern California, 17 fires have burned more than 180,000 acres and destroyed at least 3,500 homes.

Winds were not as strong as officials feared Wednesday night, but there's still a risk that they could kick up and fan new fires, officials said Thursday.

Although the Tubbs fire spared an evacuated Calistoga on Wednesday night, the town is still an area of concern for officials, Williams said.

Maybe next time I visit pic.twitter.com/k7IHAUwfZT

The town of Calistoga is empty.

Motorcycle cops wearing masks are circling the deserted streets. Everything is closed in the downtown area -- the art galleries, wine tasting rooms, cafes. The thick smoke hangs like fog. Roads leading into town are closed.

Plumes of smoke over Napa Valley pic.twitter.com/gsS4IokJPB

Downtown Calistoga is deserted pic.twitter.com/e6FYOU43y6

Ten miles away at Napa Valley College, a Red Cross shelter had only 35 people through Tuesday night.

Douglas Thron, an Oakland-based drone cinematographer, has photographed California wildfires and their aftermath for decades.

But even he was surprised when he captured a U.S. Postal Service truck driving through Santa Rosa’s Coffey Park neighborhood. The driver could be seen Tuesday dutifully opening mailboxes in front of destroyed homes.

At first, Thron thought the driver was just pulling over to take a cellphone photo.

After burning 9,200 acres, Cal Fire reported that the Anaheim Hills fire was 60% contained as of Thursday morning.

All evacuation orders have been lifted. The fire destroyed 23 structures and damaged 36 others.

#Canyon2Fire [update] E Santa Ana Canyon Rd, W of Gypsum Canyon (Orange Co) remains 9,217 acres and 60% contained. https://t.co/QHeyNoFpME pic.twitter.com/RjcLQFkuCU

There still were some road closures Thursday morning: Santa Ana Canyon Road between Woodcrest and Gypsum Canyon roads, as well as parts of the 241 toll road.

Info. directly from @TheTollRoads re: 241. #CanyonFire2 https://t.co/Gd5ydB4Mcp

Firefighters gathered in a fairgrounds barn for morning briefings. Overall, the weather is on their side Thursday. pic.twitter.com/elUSfPPT74

Despite continuing red flag conditions, forecasts called for cooler daytime temperatures and relatively light winds Thursday. Fire authorities were predicting a generally productive day on the fire lines in and around the devastated resort communities of Sonoma and Napa counties’ wine country.

As of Thursday morning, the Tubbs fire had charred 34,200 acres and was 10% contained, Cal Fire spokesman Richard Cordova said.

“We need to hit this thing hard and get it done,” Santa Rosa Fire Chief Tom Gossner told hundreds of firefighters gathered at dawn in a barn at the Santa Rosa fairgrounds. “It’s time to finish this thing.”

The 43,000-acre Atlas fire had only moderate growth overnight thanks in part to winds that were milder than expected Wednesday night. They pushed the fire mostly to the north and east, good news for Napa residents who were warned Wednesday afternoon to be prepared to leave the eastern sections of town closest to the fire. 

The weaker winds also aided firefighters on the Partrick fire, but the danger of it pushing into Sonoma and Vineburg remained Thursday.

Firefighters were warned that critical “red flag” conditions remain, with strong winds, low humidity and “extremely receptive fuels,” according to Thursday morning's Cal Fire incident management plan for the Atlas and neighboring fires.

A 69-year-old woman was among the 23 people known dead in the firestorm that continues to rage across Northern California, her daughter confirmed on Facebook late Wednesday. 

Linda Tunis' remains were found at her home in Journey's End Mobile Home Park in Santa Rosa, according to her daughter Jessica Tunis. 

"I have been a mess, absolutely devastated," Jessica Tunis wrote on Facebook. "Hug and kiss your loved ones extra hard tonight." 

Shelters opened for fire evacuees in Sonoma County will not ask anyone's immigration status, Sheriff Rob Giordano said Wednesday night. 

"There’s a rumor out there that people are checking immigration status in shelters and that is not true,” he told reporters at a news briefing. 

“Immigration status will never be asked of you." 

A red-flag warning took effect Wednesday evening in the Bay Area as more than a dozen wildfires continued to spread throughout the region.

Weather officials expect strong winds, with gusts as high as 50 mph. With dry fuels and low humidity, the fires have the potential to spread quickly, according to the National Weather Service.

The warning took effect at 5 p.m. in the North Bay hills and will take effect at 11 p.m. in the East Bay hills, Santa Cruz Mountains and the mountains in Monterey and San Benito counties.

 Copyright © 2018, Los Angeles Times 