Welcome! 

News Feed Item

AI-Driven CAPD Solution Guides Surgeons in Efficiently Capturing Complete Patient Story

BIRMINGHAM, Ala. and BURLINGTON, Mass., Oct. 5, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Today, Vincari announced a clinical documentation reseller agreement with Nuance Communications, Inc. (NASDAQ: NUAN) to streamline surgical documentation and coding processes, driving improved clinician satisfaction, efficiency, and health system reimbursement. 




Through this new agreement, Nuance will offer the Vincari Surgical Computer-Assisted Physician Documentation (CAPD) solution, expanding Nuance's CAPD offerings to the surgical suite. The Vincari offering complements Nuance's artificial intelligence (AI)-powered offerings and provides a guided workflow experience designed to address the unique administrative challenges surgeons and proceduralists face, while ensuring more timely reporting and appropriate reimbursement. 


The shift to value-based care is increasing the pressure to deliver timely, accurate and compliant clinical documentation. For hospitals and healthcare systems, documentation inaccuracies and delays in surgical procedure notes and operative reports can put significant reimbursement at risk. Simultaneously, evolving clinical documentation guidelines make it more challenging to capture and code appropriately, while complex physician schedules across multiple locations make it difficult for clinical documentation specialists to follow up with clarifying questions. 


With limited time to document completely and accurately, the Vincari Surgical CAPD solution helps surgeons capture ICD-10-specific and Joint Commission-compliant details at the point of care. It provides an intelligent workflow design tailored to surgeons' specific needs, automatically prompting them when clarifications are needed to satisfy regulatory guidelines and helping eliminate retrospective queries and delays. In less than 90 seconds, a highly detailed and compliant report is created and made immediately available in the electronic health record (EHR) for the entire care team. To save time and improve efficiency, a copy is distributed to referring physician practices, and an automated charge capture report is sent to the surgeon's practice for coding and billing purposes. By capturing the required level of specificity and accuracy in documentation and streamlining coding processes from the start, the Vincari Surgical CAPD solution enables health systems to accelerate the revenue cycle and realize more appropriate reimbursement. 


"Tailored to their individual style and needs, Vincari surgeons can capture compliant documentation quickly after a procedure, said Dr. Lucian Newman, Chief Medical Officer, Vincari and practicing general surgeon. "Through this more efficient documentation and coding process, health systems will be able to receive appropriate quality ratings and reimbursement with documentation that accurately captures the level of care provided." 


Surgeons are often dissatisfied with existing EHR workflows that do not meet their unique needs. Powered by artificial intelligence, Vincari Surgical CAPD predicts a surgeon's documentation habits based upon learned patterns and uses available patient information to streamline the clinical documentation and coding process, all while continuously adapting to evolving documentation requirements. It improves the surgical team's efficiency with quick access to daily surgery schedules and patient lists on their mobile devices. Vincari Surgical CAPD also allows surgeons to analyze program performance through case tracking that enables research and improvement opportunities for the health system.


"From the moment a surgeon begins planning their day to the distribution of a complaint report, the Vincari Surgical CAPD solution enables a holistic approach to quality documentation backed by the power of speech and artificial intelligence," said Michael Clark, SVP Clinical Documentation Solutions, Nuance. "Adding the Vincari offering to our Nuance CAPD portfolio delivers a better clinical documentation experience which means more time for patient care, more satisfied physicians and improved financial outcomes for health systems."

"Our facility understands the needs of physicians and the critical balance of time spent between patients and documentation. We've chosen Vincari to provide our physicians an exceptional product to make documentation and coding of ICD-10 easy and effortless. Vincari gives physicians the time to be physicians," said William Mahone, President Halifax Regional Medical Center, Novant Health.


For more information about how Nuance and Vincari  are enhancing surgical clinical documentation and helping health systems realize appropriate reimbursement,, visit booth #715 (Nuance) at AHIMA's 89th Annual Convention &amp; Exhibit in Los Angeles, CA from October 7-11 or booth #1419 at MGMA in Anaheim, CA from October 8. To learn more about the features of the Vincari CAPD solutions, click here.


Nuance provides intelligent systems that support a more natural and insightful approach to clinical documentation, freeing clinicians to spend more time caring for patients. Nuance healthcare solutions capture, improve and communicate more than 300 million patient stories each year, helping more than 500,000 clinicians in 10,000 global healthcare organizations to drive meaningful clinical and financial outcomes. Nuance's award-winning clinical speech recognition, medical transcription, CDI, coding, quality and medical imaging solutions provide a more complete and accurate view of patient care. 


About Vincari Headquartered in Birmingham, AL, Vincari is the Electronic Physician Assistant designed to improve the way patient information is captured, leveraged, and delivered. Vincari's rules-based, point of care physician workflows help capture the complete picture of patient encounters from the bedside, hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers. By leveraging learned physician behavior and existing clinical information, Vincari improves workflow efficiency and streamlines the documentation and coding process. As a result, clinical documentation and charge capture data is delivered immediately to office and hospital EMRs, all while logging case data for research, recertification, and analytical purposes.  For more information, please visit www.vincari.com. 


About Nuance Communications, Inc. Nuance Communications, Inc. is a leading provider of voice and language solutions for businesses and consumers around the world. Its technologies, applications and services make the user experience more compelling by transforming the way people interact with devices and systems. Every day, millions of users and thousands of businesses experience Nuance's proven applications. For more information, please visit www.nuance.com. 


Trademark reference: Nuance and the Nuance logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of Nuance Communications, Inc. or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks referenced herein are the property of their respective owners. 


View original content with multimedia:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/vincari-and-nuance-team-to-improve-surgical-documentation-quality-and-drive-appropriate-reimbursement-300531875.html


SOURCE Vincari


Published October 5, 2017 
Copyright © 2017 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2007 PR Newswire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of PRNewswire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of PRNewswire. PRNewswire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





