ALBANY — Claiming New York's parole system is broken, the state Senate on Tuesday approved measures to make it harder for cop killers and other violent felons to get out of jail.

Senate Majority Leader John Flanagan (R-Suffolk County) also vowed to get tough with Gov. Cuomo's future Parole Board appointees.

"The state Senate under my leadership will reject any Parole Board nominees put forward by Gov. Cuomo who share his vision of putting the rights of violent convicted criminals ahead of the rights of law-abiding citizens," Flanagan said in a statement.

Flanagan said the GOP-controlled Senate's moves were in response to, among other events, the Parole Board's recent decision to grant freedom to convicted cop-killer Herman Bell and Democrat Cuomo's plan to restore voting rights to thousands of felons out on parole.

"The only conclusion one can reach from these irresponsible and dangerous actions is that New York's parole system under Gov. Cuomo is broken," Flanagan said.

A spokesman for the governor rejected Flanagan's accusation.

"We know Sen. Flanagan is having a tough time right now, but — by law — the parole board is an independent body and all of its members have been approved by the Senate," Cuomo spokesman Rich Azzopardi said.

Among the measures the Senate approved were bills that impose life sentences without parole for the murder of a cop or any first responder, or for anyone convicted of three or more violent felonies.

Other bills would authorize the Parole Board to require violent felony offenders to serve their maximum terms if their release poses "an imminent threat to society" and ban conditional releases for anyone convicted of first-degree manslaughter.

The Senate bills, however, face opposition in the Democrat-controlled Assembly.

Assembly Codes Committee Chairman Joe Lentol (D-Brooklyn) said parole is already "very limited" and accused Senate Republicans of playing politics.

"It's an election year and they are trying to capitalize by looking tough on crime instead of smart on crime," Lentol said.