
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

06/27/2018 07:36 AM EDT

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

Last night, an earthquake rocked the New York State Democratic establishment, as powerful incumbent Joe Crowley, considered by many as next in line to become speaker of the House, lost a primary in the Queens/Bronx district he’s represented for 20 years to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a 28-year-old first time candidate running to his left. Crowley is the first incumbent Democrat in the U.S. to lose his seat in a primary this year. 


Story Continued Below

Other incumbents were near casualties too, to a wave of young insurgents, all under 35, challenging their progressive bona fides in a soul-searching year for the Democratic Party. Rep. Yvette Clarke barely held the seat where she rarely faces a primary in New York’s 9th District, winning by a slim 1,000-vote margin against a 30-year-old challenger who called her out for her relative inactivity in Congress. And Rep. Carolyn Maloney, a stalwart of New York politics, held her seat against a virtual unknown hotel executive named Suraj Patel, winning her primary by a slim 10-point margin in a district where she’s regularly dispatched challengers, even high-profile ones, by a landslide. 

A source close to Crowley’s campaign who spoke with us last night called the primary results a “bloodletting of Washington Democrats” in New York. 

As we reported this morning in our first look at how Crowley lost his race, the Queens Democratic machine that Crowley had headed for years “does not know this district and I think that was a big part of it,” New York Council Member Danny Dromm said. “I told them that there is this radical wave of progressivism going on in this district and I explained that to them, and I tried to explain this could be bad for them.”

“He did everything you could do. I don’t know that he missed it. I got bombarded with mail, and phone calls and door-knocks. Every tool in the toolbox was used by him,” said a person familiar with Crowley’s campaign who spoke on condition of anonymity. "It’s just that he personifies the institution, he is the institution, and this is an anti-establishment movement right now.”

It seems like everything about last night bucked the conventional wisdom. We were out on Staten Island, waiting for what everyone thought would be a close race between incumbent GOP Rep. Dan Donovan and former Rep. Michael Grimm in New York’s 11th. Not so. It was over quickly, and it was a blowout, in Donovan’s favor. Donovan had the president’s endorsement. Grimm had a criminal record, which even Republicans who liked him thought might make him unelectable against a Democrat this fall. As Grimm put it during his concession speech last night: “I guess the president’s endorsement meant more than I thought.”

IT’S WEDNESDAY. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? In New York City with no announced public schedule.

WHERE’S BlLL? Holding a town hall on the Upper West Side with Council Member Helen Rosenthal

The Tabloids — New York Post: “Red Alert”— Daily News: “Lady Killers”—See Them

More Tabloids — Newsday: “TRAVEL BAN UPHELD”— El Diario New York: “Red de ayuda”— Translation: “Help Network”— See Them

The Free Papers — Metro New York: “WE WILL NOT BE BANNED”— AM New York: “NOT OUR NEW YORK”— See Them

The Broadsheets — New York Times: —Banner Headline: “JUSTICES BACK TRAVEL BAN, YIELDING TO TRUMP”— 4 col., above the fold: “How a Revered Global Adviser Blundered Into a Corrupt Bargain”— 2 col., below the fold: “Anti-Abortion Health Clinics Win First Amendment Ruling”— 4 col., below the fold: “Democratic Power Broker, Once a Possible House Leader, Loses New York Primary”— Wall Street Journal: — 5 col., above the fold: “Court Upholds Trump Travel Ban”— 4 col., above the fold: “A Shrunken GE Plans More Unit Sales”— 1 col., above the fold: “President Eases His Approach On China”— See Them

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “We met a machine with a movement.” — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez

ABOUT LAST NIGHT’S MIDTERMS: 

GREG GIROUX -- Bloomberg’s Hill election expert (@greggiroux): “Congress has never had a woman under 30 in its membership. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is 28. #ny14 … The youngest woman ever elected? Elise Stefanik (R-NY) at 30 in 2014. She's seeking 3rd term in #ny21”.

—“Who Is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez? A Democratic Giant Slayer,” by NYT’s Vivian Wang: “She has never held elected office. She is still paying off her student loans. She is 28 years old. ‘Women like me aren’t supposed to run for office,’ Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said in a viral campaign video released last month. They certainly weren’t supposed to win.” https://nyti.ms/2lDYoxi … CBSN interview with Ocasio-Cortez  https://cbsn.ws/2MuMYHF … Intercept profile  http://bit.ly/2ItZDYU 

—WAPO’S DAVE WEIGEL: “Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: The Democrat who challenged her party’s establishment — and won” https://wapo.st/2N0OzGd … Her famous campaign video http://bit.ly/2IwLjib 

TWEETS DU JOUR — @CynthiaNixon: “What a truly special night! Excited to have spent it with @Ocasio2018 celebrating her historic win.” Pic http://bit.ly/2tOvNcn 

—@GloriaPazmino: “.⁦@JoeCrowleyNY⁩’s mom is here. He says it’s ‘not about me, not about my feelings. It’s about America, I wish nothing but the best for Ms. Ocasio Cortez, I want her to have all the success.’ Crowley vows to endorse her and back her campaign.” Pic http://bit.ly/2N2ylfF 

—@ShaneGoldmacher: “CROWLEY at HQ: I know you are all trying your best to make me cry. It’s not going to happen.”

—@jeffzeleny: “The stunning defeat of @JoeCrowleyNY is a fresh reminder that one of the biggest political stories (getting far less attention than it deserves, with Trump consuming so much oxygen) is the major identity crisis underway inside the Democratic Party.”

VIDEO DU JOUR -- @jdavidgoodman: "Now @JoeCrowleyNY is playing guitar. He dedicated the first song to @Ocasio2018 — 'Born to Run'" http://bit.ly/2KpEYKj

PRESIDENT TRUMP ON CROWLEY — @realDonaldTrump at 10:18 p.m.: “Wow! Big Trump Hater Congressman Joe Crowley, who many expected was going to take Nancy Pelosi’s place, just LOST his primary election. In other words, he’s out! That is a big one that nobody saw happening. Perhaps he should have been nicer, and more respectful, to his President!”

—Here’s a map, prepared by CUNY’s Center for Urban Research, showing where Ocasio-Cortez won at the micro-level, plus Hispanic citizens of voting age estimates by census block group. 

—CROWLEY WIN ENERGIZES LIBERALS IN STATE, LOCAL RACES — POLITICO's Bill Mahoney: "In every election cycle, it seems, liberal activists in New York proclaim that Democratic voters are fed up with the status quo and ready to turn on moderate incumbents. It almost never happens. Before Tuesday, no incumbent Democratic member of Congress from New York City had lost a primary in a non-redistricting year since Floyd Flake ousted Alton Waldon in 1986. But that streak ended dramatically on Tuesday with Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's stunning defeat of Rep. Joe Crowley in Queens. And the performance of progressives in other congressional districts could set the stage for another upheaval in state-level primaries on Sept. 13. 'Andrew Cuomo and the IDC members just got a glimpse into their political burial,' liberal activist Pete Sikora said late Tuesday night, referring to the governor's challenge from actor Cynthia Nixon and the insurgencies being waged against members of the one-time breakaway group of Democrats in the state Senate. 'It's a political earthquake,' he said. 'The Democratic base is clearly really angry.'" Read more here.

—@TweetBenMax: “Cuomo's gonna do so many progressive things tomorrow.” 

NY-11— from Laura Nahmias: Maybe Donald Trump’s endorsement counts for something in New York after all — at least on Staten Island. Incumbent Rep. Dan Donovan successfully fought off a challenge on Tuesday from the Republican who held his seat before him — former Rep. Michael Grimm, a charismatic, mercurial ex-Marine who resigned in disgrace in 2015 after pleading guilty to felony tax fraud in federal court. How did he do it? In recent months, Donovan sharpened his language on immigration, proposed a bill to require a portrait of Donald Trump in U.S. post offices, and took pains to highlight areas where he agrees with the president, as he and Grimm both sought the coveted presidential endorsement in a district where Trump has high approval ratings from Republican voters. Michael Vinci voted a little before 7 p.m. in Grant City on Staten Island and said that while he likes Grimm personally, he didn't think he could win against a Democrat in a general election. “I voted for Dan Donovan just because of what happened with Michael Grimm and the conviction, even though I don’t agree with what happened to him. He’s just not as electable as Donovan would be," Vinci told POLITICO. Vinci said the president's endorsement of Donovan made the difference. "Yeah, that definitely pushed me over the edge. I was very on the fence.” Read it here. 

“Michael Grimm Falls Back to Earth. In a Ballroom on Staten Island” — New York Times’s Matt Flegenheimer: “The dream died near the cash bar, beside the stiff focaccia and the medley of Italian meats. ‘Noooooo!’ came the first cry from that corner of the Staten Island ballroom, which was supposed to be hosting a party on Tuesday night. ‘Recount!’ went another. Then came the expletives. Then came more. But nothing could reverse it. Former Representative Michael Grimm — undeterred by a felony tax plea, which he recently chalked up to a witch hunt, and a presidential endorsement for his opponent, which he had dismissed as insignificant — was acknowledging something he did not expect to reckon with this time: political gravity. ‘We make plans,’ he said, conceding a lopsided defeat to Representative Dan Donovan, the Republican who replaced him in Congress when Mr. Grimm went to jail. ‘God laughs at us.’” Read it here 

—FROM OUR FRIENDS AT POLITICO PLAYBOOK: “THE DCCC is already going up with a digital ad buy against New York GOP Rep. Dan Donovan — who beat ex-con Michael Grimm last night — as a tool of Republicans, namely President Donald Trump. ‘I’ve supported the president 90 percent of the time in my votes … I voted seven times to repeal Obamacare.’ The spot ends with Donovan holding up photos of President Trump and VP Mike Pence, with Donovan saying they should be in every post office, with the text ‘desperate’ on the screen. Donovan faces Democrat Max Rose, an Army veteran.” The 30-second spot  http://bit.ly/2Mr57Wv

—Around the state: Perry Gershon and Liuba Gretchen Shirley defeated more established candidates in Democratic primaries on Long Island. Antonio Delgado rose to the top of a seven-person field in NY-19 and will challenge Rep. John J. Faso. Tedra Cobb will challenge Stefanik in NY-21, Dana Balter bested Juanita Perez-Williams to challenge Rep. John Katko in NY-24, Assembly Majority Leader Joe Morelle fended off three challengers in NY-25, and the Democratic primary in NY-23 is too close to call.

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

—NIXON WORTH ABOUT $6 MILLION — POLITICO’s Bill Mahoney: Cynthia Nixon and her spouse have assets somewhere in the neighborhood of $6 million, according to a financial disclosure form the Democratic gubernatorial candidate submitted to the Joint Commission on Public Ethics. Nixon’s largest holdings were a defined benefit plan, valued at between $1.75 million and $2 million, and an East Village property worth between $1.5 million and $1.75 million. She also owns equities in eight funds worth between $100,000 and $150,000 apiece, according to the filing, obtained by POLITICO through a Freedom of Information Law request. All told, the value of the 34 assets listed on Nixon’s form come out to be somewhere between $5.27 million and $6.86 million. Read more here 

—ANOTHER GOLDEN TRAFFIC MISHAP — New York Post’s Rich Calder: “It’s the Golden handshake. Brooklyn state Sen. Marty Golden brazenly parked his Cadillac in a bus stop — but drove away scot-free after giving a traffic agent his card and a fist bump, according to a witness. ‘It’s absurd,’ said the man, who spoke on the condition of anonymity but provided photos of the illicit parking job and glad-handing in Bay Ridge. ‘This guy parked in a busy bus stop on 86th Street near Fourth Avenue while there was a lot of traffic. He clogged up the street with no regard and got caught, and then felt he could get away with it.’” Read more here

—“Caught on Speed Camera, a Senator Who’d Like to Shut Them Down,” by NYT’s Jim Dwyer: “The city has saved life and limb since 2015 by using cameras to enforce speed limits in special zones around some city schools: fatalities and serious injuries in those areas are down by 21 percent. ... The law permitting the cameras is due to expire next month, thanks to legislative flimflammery by State Senate Republicans. Next year, another law permitting red-light cameras will also expire, and the year after that, bus-lane cameras. Senator Martin J. Golden, the leading Republican from New York City and, realistically, the person with most clout on the subject, has had a great deal to say about the matter of speed cameras. 

“In fact, Senator Golden, who represents part of Brooklyn, appears to have held almost every possible position. ... It can be hard to keep up with Mr. Golden sometimes. Really. He moves fast — or at least, whoever is driving his car does. Mr. Golden has gotten 10 tickets since 2015 because someone behind the wheel of his personal Cadillac was caught speeding in school zones. (The cameras only identify the plates on the vehicles, not the driver; the owner gets the ticket.) He was ticketed in March, April and May of this year.” Read more here. 

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

—TORTURE ISLAND — “Rape at Rosie’s: When the bad guys at Rikers are the guards,” by New York magazine’s John Tucker: “According to the most recent Justice Department study, an anonymous survey of 53,000 inmates in 358 jails nationwide, about 50 of the 800 women housed at Rosie’s at any one time are being sexually victimized by staff — which puts Rosie’s among the top-12 worst jails in the country. Rikers’ reputation as a brutally Darwinian, scandal-ridden ‘torture island,’ where people who can’t afford bail spend months — and occasionally years — awaiting trial, has been well documented. And Mayor de Blasio has pledged to shut the place down by 2027. Although it’s part of the same story of corruption and violence, sexual assault and harassment at Rikers’ women’s facility has received relatively little attention. The DOJ survey also found that women there were more likely to say they’d been pressured for failing to acquiesce than those at any other jail in the United States. Call it the House of the Ultimate Unreckoned.” Read more here

—LABOR RELATIONS — De Blasio, DC 37 reach tentative contract agreement, by POLITICO’s Madina Toure: Mayor Bill de Blasio has reached a tentative 44-month contract agreement with District Council 37, New York City's largest municipal public employee union, the city and the union announced on Tuesday afternoon. Read more here

—FINING THE TAXI KING — New York Post’s Emily Saul: “A Brooklyn judge wants embattled ‘taxi king’ Gene Freidman to cough up $1.3 million to his former assistant, who sued the businessman following months of alleged sexual harassment. Elaine Gutierrez filed her suit against the beleaguered Freidman last year, saying he subjected her to a steady stream of unwanted attention during the seven months she worked for his now-shuttered company, Taxi Club Management. Freidman frequently commented on the woman’s breasts, exclaiming ‘Oh, your big boobs,’ and ‘Get your big boobs out of my face,’ Gutierrez testified.” Read more here

TRUMP’S NEW YORK 

—BLOOMBERG 2020? — New York Post’s Carl Campanile: “Mike Bloomberg is mulling another run for president — but as a Democrat, sources close to the former three-term mayor said. If he takes the plunge, Bloomberg would be 78 when he’s competing in Democratic primaries across the nation. Last week, he said he would pump $80 million of his vast personal fortune to aid Democrats in the congressional midterm elections this year. ‘That’s an indication of where his head is at,’ a Bloomberg insider said Tuesday.” Read more here

SOCIAL DATA: 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Gordon Gerstein ... Ditto PR, focusing on crypto and blockchain PR, is 6 (h/t Blain Rethmeier) ... Monica Showalter ... The New Yorker’s Anna Russell is 28 ... Vera Wang is 69 (h/t AP) … Jessica Ramos, a former City Hall aide who is challenging Sen. Jose Peralta in a primary … heating company executive Ted Danz, a former GOP congressional candidate from Schenectady County

ON THE MOVE: Sean Hecker has left Debevoise to link up with Roberta Kaplan and Julie Fink at Kaplan, Hecker &amp; Fink.

WEEKEND WEDDING -- Ben Macmillan Bell, an investment banking associate at Deutsche Bank and a recent Georgetown MBA grad, this weekend married Allie Federle, who has a jewelry line called 76 and Maine and also works for MM La Fleur. They got married at the Chebeague Island Inn in Maine and met on Hinge. Pics http://bit.ly/2tHzdNE … http://bit.ly/2IzHBoc 

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

— ‘THE DEATH OF SHOCK,’ NBC’s Lester Holt said Tuesday, alongside ABC’s David Muir and CBS’s Jeff Glor, is something all the anchors are grappling with. “We’re not shocked anymore as a country,” Holt said. “There are stories that we’ll all run to because they’re enormous and within two days no one’s talking about them anymore, because we are just at a point now that shock happens on a daily basis that we are no longer shocked.”

— “We’re not talking about what happened in Santa Fe, Texas, just a few weeks ago,” Holt added, referring to the school shooting that left 10 dead. “We’re not even talking about what happened down the street here less than a year ago.” By “here,” Holt meant Las Vegas, the site of the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history, as well as Tuesday’s PromaxBDA Station Summit. 

— Beyond the frenetic news cycle, the three broadcast anchors discussed political comedy, sexual harassment (including in the TV news business) and dealing with the president’s press attacks, according to the Hollywood Reporter’s Jeremy Barr. “This is not the first time the press has been criticized and it won’t be the last,” Glor said. As for covering this fractious moment each night, Muir acknowledged that “we are reporting to a divided America.”

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

— HOUSEKEEPING — Rent Guidelines Board votes for lower end of rent increases, by POLITICO’s Sam Raskin: The city’s Rent Guidelines Board voted to approve rent increases for rent-stabilized apartments by 1.5 percent for one-year leases and by 2.5 percent for two-year leases, to the dismay of the hundreds of tenant activists that gathered Tuesday night to call for a rent freeze. The 5-4 vote comes after a preliminary vote in April set the range of rent increases of between 0.75 to 2.75 percent for one-year leases, and 1.75 to 3.75 percent for two-year leases, placing the approved rent adjustments on the lower end of the spectrum. The rent increases for roughly 1 million rent stabilized apartments in New York City will go into effect on Oct. 1. Read more here 

— WHAT’S IN STORE — “Too little too late: Internet sales tax ruling can’t stop brick-and-mortar retail apocalypse,” by The Real Deal’s Keith Larsen: “Retail trade groups claimed a big victory for their brick-and-mortar store constituency when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled Thursday that states can collect sales tax from internet retailers. Even President Trump notched it as a win. But retail experts question how much the change will really help or even affect traditional brick and mortar retailers, which have been losing out to e-commerce businesses for a host of reasons. For smaller shops, the ruling could even mean additional expense for costly software. E-commerce accounted for about $450 billion, or 13 percent of overall retail sales in 2017, up from $390 billion or 11.6 percent in 2016, according to the U.S. Commerce Department. At the same time, sales continue to slow at many traditional retail outlets, and large retailers such as Macy’s, JC Penney have announced store closures. In the notable case of Toys R’ Us, among many others, it has meant bankruptcy.” Read more here 

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— Wayne Spence was elected to a second term as president of the Public Employees Federation.

— Former Erie County Sheriff Thomas Higgins, 88. 

— The Department of Public Service is accusing Spectrum of false advertising. 

— Police stormed a plane at JFK thinking it had been hijacked.

— The New York City Landmarks Preservation Corporation approved an expansion for the Frick Collection.

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

Sandy Alderson stepped down as general manager of the Mets on Tuesday afternoon, citing a recurrence of cancer as a reason. If this is it for his Mets tenure, his spot in Mets history is secure: he built rosters that reached the playoffs in consecutive seasons, including an NL pennant winner in 2015. And let us not forget, he did this into the teeth of ownership both financially compromised and always willing to overstep its own intellectual limits to make his work harder.

Mercury 83, Liberty 69: Diana Taurasi scored 27 points, the Liberty still haven't found that second scorer to help Tina Charles, and New York dropped to 4-9.

Mets 4, Pirates 3: Wilmer Flores, king of clutch, hit another walkoff single to end the Mets' seven-game losing streak.

Yankees 6, Phillies 0: Luis Severino won his 12th game of the season, while Did Gregorius and Aaron Hicks both homered.

The day ahead: the Mets host the Pirates. The Yankees are in Philadelphia.

#UpstateAmerica: The number of bear sightings in Western New York has doubled over the past year. 

#ZooYork: Do you know the six snake species native to Staten Island?

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC