Sir Kenny Dalglish and Dame Emma Thompson lead more than 1,000 stars of sports, arts, science and public life - plus hundreds of unsung heroes


Football legend “King” Kenny Dalglish has become Sir Kenny as he leads more than 1,000 people receiving gongs in the Queen’s Birthday Honours.

The former Liverpool striker and manager, 67, is knighted for services to football, charity and the City of Liverpool.

Also honoured are screen stars Emma Thompson and Keira Knightley, ex-University Challenge host Bamber Gascoigne and rapper Ms Dynamite.

The list is full of hundreds of unsung heroes, from counsellors and a Holocaust survivor to Britain's longest-serving poppy seller.

But there are also fatcat bosses of Royal Mail and Network Rail whose gongs are likely to prompt accusations of rewards for failure.

Here is the 2018 Queen's Birthday Honours List in full.

In total, 1,057 people have received an award.

Of the total number recognised in the Queen’s Birthday Honours list this year, 210 have been made an OBE, 392 an MBE, and 318 awarded a BEM.

There are always rows over gongs for cronies and the establishment, but 71% of honours went to everyday community heroes.

Meanwhile 11% work in education, 12% in health, 13% in industry, 3% in science and technology and 5% in sport.

Just under half the recipients (49%) are women, while 10% of all those on the list are from ethnic minorities.

Liverpool football legend Kenny Dalglish heads a host of the great and the good receiving gongs in the Queen’s birthday honours.

The former striker and manager, 67, who was at Hillsborough when 96 fans were killed in 1989, becomes a knight.

The 67-year-old Glaswegian and his wife Marina have helped raise millions of pounds for charity after she successfully battled breast cancer.

Sir Kenny joked he thought the letter was from the taxman - and told the Mirror he will still be very much the same person after the honour.

“It doesn’t feel right. It doesn’t feel comfortable. No-one will be calling me that anyway,” he smiled.

Jermain Defoe celebrated an OBE by paying tribute to best friend Bradley Lowery, his six-year-old “best friend” who died last year.

The former England striker struck up a moving relationship with little Bradley during his time at Sunderland as the lad battled a rare type of cancer.

The Premier league star, whose award recognises the work of the Jermain Defoe Foundation in St Lucia, told the Mirror: “It was a special relationship. Over the years playing football, being lucky enough, being blessed and realising you are role models, there are a lot of kids who look up to you.”

Keira Knightley will receive an OBE for her services to drama and charity.

The royal honour comes more than 15 years after the twice Oscar-nominated film star scored her breakthrough role as a football-loving teenager in Bend It Like Beckham.

Since then, Knightley, 33, has gone on to star in Pirates of the Caribbean, Love Actually and Pride &amp; Prejudice.

One of Britain's most acclaimed actresses, Emma Thompson, is made a Dame for services to drama after winning Oscars, Baftas, Golden Globes and Emmys.

The 59-year-old has been a star since the 1980s in The Remains Of The Day, Howards End, Harry Potter films and the Nanny McPhee films.

Born in 1959 to an acting parents, she studied English at Cambridge and joined comedy troupe Footlights alongside Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie.

A human rights activist, Greenpeace and Labour supporter, she lives with husband Greg Wise, daughter Gaia, 18, and a son, Tindyebwa Agaba, a Rwandan orphan they informally adopted in 2003 when he was 14.

World heavyweight champion boxer Anthony Joshua is made an OBE for services to sport.

It is the second honour for the star, who is just 28, after he led a team of Olympic gold medallists receiving MBEs in 2013.

Tom Hardy, who receives a CBE for services to drama, made his name on the big screen with a series of hard man roles.

The 40-year-old actor is known for Inception, Mad Max: Fury Road, Bronson and The Revenant.

But the privately-educated star has a hard-bitted back story in real life too. He has spoken about how he went off the rails with alcohol addiction, checking himself into rehab in 2003. He's been clean ever since.

"I went in thinking I'd do it for a little bit until I can go out and drink and people forgive me. But I did my 28 days, and after listening to people who had been through similar circumstances I realised I did have a problem," he previously told the Mirror.

Network Rail boss Mark Carne – blamed for bungling new timetables which have left passengers stranded and delayed – collects a CBE for services to the rail industry.

Meanwhile the number of trains either cancelled or more than 30 minutes late on Northern and Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR) routes averaged 11% and 13% respectively in the first two weeks of the new timetables.

Mr Carne said in a statement last week that timetables were finalised “significantly later than normal for reasons that were both within and without our control”.

He continued: “It has not been good enough and we know it.”

Another corporate boss accused of being rewarded for failure is Royal Mail chief Moya Greene, who becomes a Dame.

The Canadian dubbed “Moneybags Moya” oversaw the 2013 privatisation of the service.

In the same year, she was forced to hand back a shocking £120,000 housing perk.

She was given the money to help her buy a home as part of a lavish £1.5million pay and perks package last year.

She steps down later this year with almost £1million - a cash payment equivalent to 12 months’ base salary, which was £547,800 last year, as well as a payment equivalent to her expected annual bonus of £367,000.

Author Kazuo Ishiguro said he is "proud of Britain, its open, democratic traditions and literary culture" after being awarded a knighthood for services to literature - less than a year after winning the Nobel Prize.

His acclaimed works include The Remains Of The Day for which he won the Man Booker Prize.

The 63-year-old said: "I'm deeply touched to receive this honour from the nation that welcomed me as a small foreign boy, that educated me and nurtured me.

"At this uncertain moment around our globe, I remain proud of Britain, its open, democratic traditions - and its wonderful literary culture in which I've been allowed to participate."

Rapper and singer Ms Dynamite is honoured with an MBE - under her real name Niomi McLean-Daley.

The 37-year-old who burst onto the scene with earworm hit Dy-na-mi-tee in 2002 is recognised for services to music.

She retreated from the spotlight in 2006 after being arrested outside a London nightclub and sentenced to community service.

Since then she has featured on TV, guest-hosted on BBC radio and appeared on Katy B's Lights On track.

Following a wave of terror attacks which struck the UK in 2017, former assistant commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Mark Rowley, who led the national response, is honoured with a knighthood.

On his retirement in March after 31 years in policing Mr Rowley was praised by Prime Minister Theresa May for his "dedication to protecting public safety and tackling the evils of terrorism".

Among the politicians honoured are Conservative deputy Commons speaker Eleanor Laing and Tory Brexiteer Bernard Jenkin, awarded a damehood and a knighthood respectively for their political and public service.

Labour's Louise Ellman has also been made a dame for parliamentary and political services.

Britain's richest billionaire Jim Ratcliffe, the boss of chemical company Ineos who is worth £21.05 billion, receives a knighthood for services to business and investment.

The firm’s Grangemouth refinery was at the centre of the most bitter industrial disputes in recent years when it was threatened with closure in 2013, triggering a major rift with the unions.

Alpine skier Menna Fitzpatrick is the youngest on this year's list, picking up an MBE for services to Paralympic winter Olympic sport.

The Welsh star is just 20 but she's already Britain's most successful winter paralympian after learning to ski aged five.

She gained slalom gold, super combined silver, giant slalom silver and super-G bronze at this year's Winter Paralympics.

Former Second World War nurse Rosemary Powell, who at 103 is the oldest on the list, is made an MBE for voluntary service.

She has spent an astonishing 97 years collecting for the Royal British Legion Poppy Appeal, and announced she will hang up her collecting tin just days ago because she feels she is “getting old”.

Rosemary was just six when she began selling the Royal British Legion poppies on Remembrance Day in 1921 – the year the appeal was first held.

She said: "We did it in memory of those men who were killed – for their sacrifice. Sadly war has had a significant impact on my life.”

Renowned war correspondent Kate Adie is made a CBE for services to media, while Stacey Dooley, known for her BBC Three investigative series covering topics ranging from the fight against Isis to the abortion debate, receives an MBE for services to broadcasting.

Thriller writer Ken Follett gets a CBE and TV presenter and Britain’s best-known classicist Professor Mary Beard collects a Damehood. Waterstones founder Tim Waterstone is now a Sir.

Holocaust survivor Ber Helfgott, also known as Ben, is knighted for services to Holocaust remembrance and education.

Chief Scientific Officer for NHS England Professor Susan Hill is made a dame for services to the 100,000 Genome Project and to NHS Genomic Medicine, while surgeon Nadine Hachach-Haram is awarded a BEM for services to surgery and innovation, having co-founded a company pioneering virtual access to surgery for people in remote areas.

Judy Naake, who made millions selling St Tropez self-tanning products, initially from the back of her car, receives an MBE for services to entrepreneurship, the community and philanthropy.

Jo Malone, creator of the self-titled luxury perfumery brand who has since started the fragrance-centred Jo Loves business, is awarded a CBE for services to the British economy and the GREAT Britain campaign.

While there are no honours for local heroes involved in the response to the Grenfell Tower fire, the Cabinet has said it expects "acts of bravery and extraordinary community spirit" which emerged from the tragedy to feature on future lists, adding that its approach will be "time-appropriate".

Professor Steven Charles Cowley, FRS. FREng, president, Corpus Christi College, University of Oxford. For services to Science and to the Development of Nuclear Fusion. (Oxford)

Kenneth Dalglish, MBE. For services to Football to Charity and to the City of Liverpool. (Southport, Merseyside)

Professor Christopher Martin Dobson. Professor Chemical and Structural Biology and Master, St John's College, University of Cambridge. For services to Science and Higher Education. (Cambridge, Cambridgeshire)

Lloyd Dorfman, CBE. Philanthropist. For services to Philanthropy and the Arts. (London)

James Raymond Eadie, QC. First Treasury Counsel. For services to the Law and to Government. (London)

Professor Leslie Colin Ebdon, CBE. Formerly director, Fair Access to Higher Education. For services to Higher Education and to Social Mobility. (Hitchin, Hertfordshire)

Douglas Jardine Flint, CBE. For services to the Finance Industry. (Robertsbridge, East Sussex)

David John Mark Green, CB, QC. Formerly director, Serious Fraud Office. For services to the Criminal Justice System. (London)

Professor Christopher John Ham, CBE. Formerly chief executive, The King's Fund. For services to Health Policy and to Management. (Solihull, West Midlands)

Professor David Antony Haslam, CBE. Chair, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. For services to NHS Leadership. (Martinstown, Dorset)

Ber Helfgott, MBE. For services to Holocaust Remembrance and Education. (London)

Professor James Hough, OBE. Associate director, Institute for Gravitational Research, University of Glasgow. For services to the Detection of Gravitational Waves. (Bearsden, Dunbartonshire)

Professor Christopher Roy Husbands. Vice Chancellor Sheffield Hallam University. For services to Higher Education. (Sheffield)

Kazuo Ishiguro, OBE. Author. For services to Literature. (London)

The Honourable Bernard Christison Jenkin, MP. Member of Parliament for Harwich and North Essex. For political and public service. (Harwich, Essex)

Simon John Keenlyside, CBE. Baritone. For services to Music. (London)

James Arthur Ratcliffe. Chairman and chief executive Officer Ineos Chemical Group. For services to Business and to Investment. (London)

Mark Peter Rowley, QPM. Formerly assistant commissioner, Metropolitan Police Service. For services to Policing. (Surrey)

Professor Simon Michael Schama, CBE, FBA. Historian and Broadcaster. For services to History. (London)

Dr Charles Saumarez Smith, CBE, FBA. Secretary and chief executive, Royal Academy of Arts. For services to Art, to Architecture and to Culture in the UK. (London)

Tim Waterstone. Founder Waterstones. For services to Bookselling and to charity. (London)

Ms Emma Thompson. Actress. For services to Drama. (London)

Ms Janet Mary Vitmayer, CBE. Formerly chief executive and director, Horniman Museum. For services to Museums and to Diversity. (London)

Mrs Lucy Victoria Annabel Chadwick. Formerly director general of International Security and Environment, Department for Transport. For public service. (London)

Matthew Coffey. Chief Operating Officer, Ofsted. For services to Education. (Kent)

Michael Brian Driver. Chief Financial Officer, Ministry of Justice and head of Government Finance, HM Treasury. For public service. (London)

Mrs Karen Elizabeth Gosden, OBE. Universal Credit Area director, Department for Work and Pensions. For services to Welfare Reform. (Derbyshire)

George Thomas Alexander Gray. Formerly head Office of the Legislative Counsel, Northern Ireland. For services to Legislation and Constitutional Law. (Belfast)

Ms Lowri Alice Khan, CBE. Director, Financial Stability, HM Treasury. For public service. (London)

Professor John Neil Loughhead, OBE. Chief Scientific Adviser, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. For services to Research and Development in the Energy Sector. (Ossett, West Yorkshire)

Mrs Hayley Rogers. Parliamentary Counsel, Office of the Parliamentary Counsel. For services to the Preparation of Legislation. (Chelmsford)

Sir Craig Collins Reedie, CBE. President, World Anti-Doping Agency. For services to Sport. (Renfrewshire)

David William Kinloch Anderson, QC. Formerly Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation. For services to National Security and to Civil Liberties. (Ipswich)

Dr The Reverend Ralph Waller. Formerly Principal Harris Manchester College, University of Oxford, and Pro vice-Chancellor, University of Oxford. For services to Education. (Oxfordshire)

Dr Thomas Ades. Composer, pianist and conductor. For services to Music. (London)

Ms Kathryn Adie, OBE. Journalist and radio presenter. For services to Media. (Dorset)

Ms Barbara Pettigrew Allison. Director Communications, Ministerial Support and Facilities, Scottish Government. For public service. (Biggar, Lanarkshire)

Robert John Ayling. Formerly chairman of the Board HM Courts and Tribunals Service. For public service. (London)

Professor Jaswinder Singh Bamrah. Consultant Psychiatrist, Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Trust and Honorary Reader University of Manchester. For services to Mental Health, to Diversity and to the NHS. (Sale, Cheshire)

Alexander Hugh McCormack Begbie. Chief People Officer Standard Life. For services to Business and Social Inclusion. (Edinburgh)

Mrs Caroline Brazier. Chief Librarian, British Library. For services to Librarianship and to Higher Education. (York)

Professor Christoffel Hendrik Brink. Emeritus vice-Chancellor Newcastle University. For services to Higher Education. (Tynemouth)

Stanley Robert Brown. Chief executive Forensic Science Northern Ireland. For services to Science and to Justice. (Lisburn)

Professor Julia Clare Buckingham. Vice-Chancellor and president Brunel University, London. For services to Biology and to Education. (Middlesex)

Mrs Elizabeth Nicole Calder. Co-founder, Bloomsbury Publishing. For services to Literature. (Suffolk)

Ryan Jerome Campbell. Chair Mind. For services to Improving Mental Health Provision in England and Wales. (Surrey)

Mark Milford Power Carne. Chief executive Network Rail. For services to the Rail Industry. (Basingstoke)

Ms Dinah Victoria Casson. Co-founder Casson Mann. For services to Design. (London)

Brent Cheshire. Formerly chairman DONG Energy UK Ltd. For services to the Renewable Energy Sector. (Billingshurst)

Ms Naomi Wendy Climer. For services to the Engineering Profession. (London)

Ms Yvonne Veronica Coghill, OBE. Director, Workforce Race Equality Standard Implementation, NHS England. For services to Race Equality in the NHS. (Middlesex)

Ms Dionne Collins, QPM. Chief Constable, West Yorkshire Police. For services to Policing and the British Association of Women in Policing. (Huddersfield)

Timothy Douglas Davie. Chief executive Officer BBC Studios. For services to International Trade. (Henley)

Professor Rosemary Genevieve Davis. Professor Emeritus University College London, Institute of Education. For services to Education. (Moreton in Marsh, Gloucestershire)

Professor Lorna Anne Dawson. Principal Soil Scientist The James Hutton Institute. For services to Soil and Forensic Science. (Aberdeen)

William Dodds. Head Building Standards, Scottish Government. For public service. (Carluke, Lanarkshire)

Peter Dwyer. Formerly director Children and Young People's Services, North Yorkshire County Council. For services to Children's Social Work. (York)

Dr Alison Janet Elliot, OBE. Formerly Associate director, Centre for Theology and Public Issues, University of Edinburgh. For public service. (Edinburgh)

Richard Peter Elsy. Chief executive High Value Manufacturing Catapult. For services to Manufacturing and Technology. (Solihull)

Dr Hilary Frances Emery. Honorary Norham Fellow University of Oxford and lately chief executive, National Children's Bureau. For services to Children and Young People. (Witney)

Alun Trevor Bernard Evans. Chief executive and secretary The British Academy. For services to Scholarship. (London)

David Eyton. Group head of Technology BP plc. For services to Engineering and to Energy. (Beaconsfield)

Kenneth Martin Follett. Author. For services to Literature and to charity. (Knebworth)

Ms Marie Sylvia Gabriel. Chair East London NHS Foundation Trust. For services to the NHS. (London)

Arthur Bamber Gascoigne. Broadcaster and writer. For services to the Arts. (Surrey)

Dr Robert Nicolas Gent. Consultant Health Protection and Deputy head, Emergency Response Department, Public Health England. For services to Health Protection. (Grange-over-Sands)

Professor George Edward Griffin. Emeritus Professor Infectious Diseases and Medicine, St George's, University of London. For services to Public Health and to Health Research. (Surrey)

Ms Rosamund Clare Hamilton. Director North West, National Probation Service. For services to Probation and to Criminal Justice. (Didsbury)

Edward Thomas Hardy. Actor. For services to Drama. (Surrey)

Professor Sarah Harper. Director Oxford Institute of Population Ageing, University of Oxford. For services to the Science of Demography. (Oxfordshire)

Professor Bashir Mohammed Ali Al-Hashimi. Professor of Computer Engineering University of Southampton. For services to Computer Engineering and to Industry. (Southampton)

Professor Jonathan Edward Haskel. Professor of Economics Imperial College London. For services to Economics. (London)

David Wilson Havelock. Formerly director Credit Risk Group, UK Export Finance, Department for International Trade. For services to the Economy. (Farnham, Surrey)

Dr Margaret Henrietta Augusta Casely-Hayford. For charitable services in the UK and abroad. (London)

Professor Ann Louise Heathwaite. Professor Land and Water Science, Lancaster Environment Centre. For services to Scientific Research and Advice to the Government. (Lancashire)

Dr Colin Herron. Managing director Zero Carbon Futures. For services to Business and to the Renewable Energy Sector. (Whitley Bay)

Professor Carole Hillenbrand, OBE. Emerita Professor in Islamic History, University of Edinburgh and Professor, University of St Andrews. For services to the Understanding of Islamic History. (Edinburgh)

Ms Lubaina Himid, MBE. Artist. For services to Art. (Preston, Lancashire)

Professor Matthew Hugo Hotopf. Vice Dean of Research Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London. For services to Psychiatric Research. (London)

Nicholas Houghton. Deputy director International Tax Policy and Structure, HM Revenue and Customs. For services to International Tax Development and to Promoting Overseas Investment in the UK. (Bedfordshire)

Mrs Janice Hughes. Co-founder and director, Redshift Strategy. For services to UK Technology Exports, to charitable services to Healthcare Abroad and to the Global Telecoms Women's Network. (London)

Professor Jill Hunter. Professor of Midwifery Cardiff University. For services to Midwifery and to Midwifery Education in the UK and Europe. (Swansea)

Professor Graham John Hutchings, FRS. Regius Professor of Chemistry, Cardiff University and director, Cardiff Catalysis Institute. For services to Chemistry and to Innovation. (Northallerton)

Thomas Segun Ilube. Entrepreneur. For services to Technology and to Philanthropy. (Surrey)

Paul Gavin Johnson. Director Institute for Fiscal Studies. For services to the Social Sciences and Economics. (London)

David Kinder. Alternate Executive director for the UK. World Bank Group. For public service and services to Mental Wellbeing.

Ms Kanya King, MBE. Entrepreneur. For services to Music and Culture. (London)

Dr John Kirkby. Founder Christians Against Poverty. For services to Poverty Relief. (Bradford, West Yorkshire)

Professor Jane Alison Langdale, FRS. Professorial Research Fellow, Department of Plant Sciences, The Queen's College, University of Oxford. For services to Plant Science. (Oxfordshire)

Dr Paul Litchfield, OBE. Chief Medical Officer, BT Group plc. For services to Wellbeing in the Workplace. (Kenilworth, Warwickshire)

Professor Paul Stephen Little. Professor Primary Care, University of Southampton. For services to General Practice Research. (Romsey)

Joanne Lesley Malone, MBE. Proprietor Jo Loves Ltd. For services to the British Economy and the GREAT Britain campaign. (London)

Alexander John Marshall, QPM. Formerly chief executive, College of Policing. For services to Policing. (Overton)

Mrs Janet Susanne Burgoyne McCollum. Chief executive, Moy Park Ltd. For services to Economic Development in Northern Ireland. (Craigavon)

Brendan Joseph McGuigan. For services to Justice in Northern Ireland. (Down)

Professor Robert Edward Moon. For services to Education in Developing Countries. (Oxfordshire)

Ms Gillian Moore, MBE. Director of Music, Southbank Centre. For services to Music. (London)

Mrs Heidi Mottram, OBE. Chief executive Officer, Northumbrian Water Group. For services to the Water Industry and to Business Community. (Raskell)

Professor James Murdoch. Professor of Public Law University of Glasgow. For services to Education and to Human Rights. (Strathaven, Lanarkshire)

Kevin Patrick O'Hare. Director The Royal Ballet. For services to Dance. (London)

David Campbell Orr. Chief executive National Housing Federation. For services to Housing. (London)

Ian David Prosser. Director of Railway Safety Office of Rail and Road. For services to Railway Safety. (Cambridgeshire)

Dr Ethel Quayle. Reader in Clinical Psychology COPINE Research Project, University of Edinburgh. For services to the Online Welfare of Children and Young People. (Anstruther, Fife)

Timothy William Read. Universal Credit Delivery manager Business Transformation Group, Department for Work and Pensions. For services to Welfare Reform. (York)

Professor Stuart William John Reid. Principal Royal Veterinary College. For services to the Veterinary Profession and to Higher Education. (Hatfield)

Richard George Riley. Director Home Office. For services to National Security. (London)

Mrs Jayne Ripley. Senior Management, Ministry of Defence. For services to Defence. (London)

The Honourable Hannah Mary Rothschild. Writer and Filmmaker. For services to the Arts and to charity. (London)

Jonathan Mark Rouse. Chief Officer Greater Manchester Health and Social Care Partnership. For services to Health and Social Care. (Altrincham, Cheshire)

Mark Francis Russell. Chief executive UK Government Investments. For services to Business and to the Economy. (London)

Ms Jennifer Margaret Saunders, OBE. Formerly chief executive, National Energy Action. For services to Tackling Fuel Poverty. (Newcastle upon Tyne)

Robert Lee Shaw. Deputy chief executive NHS Digital. For services to Health and Social Care. (Leeds, West Yorkshire)

Professor Janice Debra Sigsworth. Executive director of Nursing Imperial College Healthcare Trust. For services to Nursing. (London)

Ms Patricia Mary Smart. Chief executive Officer Create Partnership Trust. For services to Education. (Birmingham)

Professor Robert Steele. Senior Research Professor Prevention, Early Detection and Treatment of Colorectal Cancer, University of Dundee. For services to Public Health. (Perth and Kinross)

Professor Jennifer Temkin. Professor of Law City Law School, University of London. For services to Criminal Justice. (London)

Mrs Jan Thirlaway. Transformation and Planning Lead, Department for Work and Pensions. For services to Pensions Operations. (Peterlee)

Huw Vaughan Thomas. Auditor General Wales. For services to Public Audit and Accountability in Wales. (Colwyn Bay)

Mrs Brenda Dianne Hebb Trenowden. Head of Financial Institutions Group, ANZ Bank and Global Chair, 30 Percent Club. For services to Exports in the Financial Sector and to Gender Equality. (Sevenoaks)

Alun Howard Tucker. Formerly Member UN International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. For services to International Justice. (Cardiff)

Dr Ian David Twinn. For political and voluntary service. (London)

Professor Katherine Jane Willis. Director of Science Royal Botanic Garden, Kew and Professor of Biodiversity, University of Oxford. For services to Biodiversity and to Conservation. (Oxfordshire)

Ms Jeanette Winterson, OBE. Writer. For services to Literature. (Gloucestershire)

David Leslie Wood. Councillor Newcastle City Council. For political and public service. (Newcastle upon Tyne)

James Allan. Grade 7 Ministry of Defence. For services to Defence. (London)

Ms Gillian Margaret Alton. Chief executive Officer, Grimsby Institute Group. For services to Education. (Belton, Lincolnshire)

John Alvis, MBE. Director, Alvis Brothers Ltd. For services to Cheese Exports, Farming and Rural Communities. (Winford, Somerset)

Mrs Linda Arkley. For political service in the North East of England. (North Shields)

Mrs Paula Dawn Assheton. Head, Operational Assurance, Border Force, Home Office. For services to Border Security. (Surrey)

Manoj Kumar Badale. Chair British Asian Trust. For services to the Economy and to charity. (London)

Marshall Charles Bailey. For services to the Financial Sector and to charity. (London)

Dr Michael John Baker. Grade 6. For services to Defence. (Kent)

Dr Anne Bamford. Formerly director of Education, Archdiocese of Southwark. For services to Education. (East Molesey)

Mrs Deborah Marie Barnes. Executive director, Children's Social Care, Lincolnshire County Council. For services to Children's Social Care. (Lincolnshire)

Dr Ian Nicholas Basnett. Director of Public Health and Associate Medical director Barts Health NHS Trust. For services to Public Health. (London)

Matthew Alexander Charlton Bell. Formerly chief executive Officer Committee on Climate Change. For services to Combatting Climate Change. (London)

Ms Judith Sarah Bernstein. Joint head Coroners, Burials, Cremation and Inquiries Policy Team, Ministry of Justice. For public service. (London)

Professor Julian Fleetwood Bion. Professor of Intensive Care Medicine University of Birmingham. For services to Intensive Care Medicine. (Birmingham)

Jeremy David Blyth. Senior UK Accreditor Galileo Programme and Chair, European Galilieo Security Board. For services to UK and EU Security. (Herefordshire)

Roger Philip Bourne. Deputy head Aerospace Hub, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. For services to the British Aerospace Industry. (Rochester)

Professor Denise Ann Bower. Professor Engineering Project Management, University of Leeds. For services to the Engineering and Construction Industries. (Holmfirth)

John Oswald Boyle. Governor and Lately Chair of Directors The Blackpool Sixth Form College. For services to Education. (Poulton-le-Fylde)

Mrs Patricia Anne Bradwell. Deputy Leader, Lincolnshire County Council. For services to Local Government. (Woodhall Spa)

Richard William Bridgman. Founder and Owner Warren Services Ltd. For services to apprenticeships for young people. (Bury St Edmunds)

Capt Andrew John Brigden. Maritime manager Cornwall Council. For services to the UK Ports and Maritime Industry. (Truro)

Mrs Sonia Kumari Brooks. Deputy Governor, HM Young Offenders Institution, Feltham. For services to HM Prison Service and to the Criminal Justice System. (Berkshire)

Mrs Gillian Anne Brown. Leader and District Councillor, Arun District Council. For services to Local Government and to the community in West Sussex. (Bognor Regis)

Paul Royston Caseley. Senior Fellow Cyber and Information Systems, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory. For services to Defence. (Malvern)

Ms Larissa Anna Chase. Deputy head Information Communication and Technology, 10 Downing Street. For public service. (London)

Pargan Singh Cheema. Chief executive The Scottish Grocers' Federation. For services to Business, to Community Cohesion and to charity. (Bridge of Allan, Stirling and Falkirk)

Professor Peter Leslie Chiodini. Consultant Parasitologist The Hospital for Tropical Diseases. For services to Parasitology and to Malaria. (Biddenham, Bedfordshire)

Dr Neil Gareth Churchill. Director Patient Experience, NHS England. For services to the Voluntary Sector and to Carers. (Forest Row)

Professor Lionel John Clarke. Co-chair SynBio Leadership Council and director, BionerG. For services to the Synthetic Biology Sector. (Chester)

Ms Sarah Clarke. Formerly Championships director All England Lawn Tennis Club. For services to Sports Administration. (London)

Trevor David Clarke. Director for International Services Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Healthcare. (London)

Dr William Ian Clements. Chair Health Care and Social Care Board. For services to Healthcare and to the community in Newtownards, Northern Ireland. (Newtownards)

David John Climie. Formerly Project director The Forth Replacement Crossing Project, Transport Scotland. For services to Engineering. (South Queensferry)

Ms Alice Mary Coote. Mezzo Soprano. For services to Music. (Whitegate, Cheshire)

Brian Joseph Cosgrove. For services to the UK Animation Industry. (Nantwich)

Professor Robert John McArthur Craik. Provost Emeritus Heriot-Watt University Malaysia. For services to Higher Education. (Edinburgh)

Mrs Margaret Elizabeth Crawford. For services to Education. (London)

Mark John Criddle. Volunteer Torbay Lifeboat Station. For services to Maritime Safety. (Brixham)

Steven James Crocker. Director of Children's Services Hampshire County Council. For services to Children's Social Care in Hampshire and the Isle of Wight. (Oxfordshire)

Mrs Elizabeth Ruth Cuddy. Board Member, Radius Housing. For services to the Social and Affordable Housing Sector in Northern Ireland. (Dungannon)

Professor Alison Jean Davenport. Professor in Corrosion Science University of Birmingham. For services to Electrochemistry and Corrosion Science. (Birmingham)

Dr Janet Beryl Davis. For services to the Natural Environment and Walkers in Great Britain. (Dorchester)

Robert John Davis. Governor HM Prison Belmarsh. For services to HM Prison and Probation Service. (Oakley, Bedfordshire)

Andrew John Davison. For services to the Environment to Culture and to the community in North East England. (Northumberland)

Jermain Colin Defoe. Footballer. For services to the Jermain Defoe Foundation. (Hertfordshire)

Simon Denegri. National director for Patients Carers and the Public, National Institute for Health Research. For services to Public Health and Social Care Research. (Tunbridge Wells)

Patrick Sibley Jan Derham. Headmaster Westminster School, London. For services to Education. (London)

Pradip Khodidas Dhamecha. Chief executive Dhamecha Group. For services to Exports, to Economic Growth and to Philanthropy. (Middlesex)

David Dickinson. Chief executive Officer Waterton Academy Trust. For services to Education. (Barnsley)

Dr Darrin Matthew Disley. Formerly chief executive Officer Horizon Discovery Group. For services to Business, to Enterprise and to Health. (Cambridgeshire)

Byron Leon Dixon. Director Micro-Fresh International. For services to Industry and Innovation. (Leicestershire)

Montagu Denis Wyatt Don. Horticulturalist Writer and Broadcaster. For services to Horticulture, to Broadcasting and to charity. (Leominster)

David Harry Done. Chief executive Officer Richmond Housing Partnership. For services to Housing Provision. (Grayshott, Hampshire)

Mrs Veronica Donovan. Consultant Midwife for Foetal Medicine, Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Midwifery. (Birmingham)

Mrs Annette Dryburgh. Senior Operational Advisor, Women's Strategy Team, Scottish Prison Service. For services to Women Offenders. (Stirling)

Mrs Catherine Duffy. Founder, RVH Liver Support Group. For services to People with Liver Disease and to their Carers in Northern Ireland. (Tyrone)

Ms Jane Elsa Duncan. President Royal Institute of British Architects. For services to Diversity in the Architecture Profession. (Little Chalfont)

Ms Ruth Anne Duston. Owner Primera Corporation and chief executive, Victoria Business Improvement District. For services to the Business Community in Central London. (London)

Stewart James Edgar, QFSM. Chief Fire Officer and director of Operations, Gloucestershire County Council. For services to Local Government. (Tewkesbury)

Professor Sian Ellard. Consultant Clinical Scientist Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust and Professor Genomic Medicine, University of Exeter. For services to Patient Care. (Teignmouth)

Ms Marianne Elliott. Theatre director. For services to Theatre. (London)

Professor Paul Emery. Director Leeds Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust. For services to Rheumatology. (Harrogate)

Professor Pamela Enderby, MBE. Emeritus Professor of Community Rehabilitation, University of Sheffield. For services to Speech and Language Therapy. (Hope Valley, Derbyshire)

Jeffrey Ennis. Councillor Metropolitan Borough of Barnsley. For parliamentary and political services. (Barnsley)

Martin Frederick Emmanuel Ephson. Co-founder and director Fermoie. For services to Design and Manufacturing. (Malborough)

Mrs Julia Evans. Chief executive Officer, Building Services Research and Information Association. For services to the Construction Industry. (London)

Norman Frazer Evans. For services to the Economy and to charity. (Lisburn)

Hugh David Facey, MBE. Managing director and chairman, Gripple Ltd and Loadhog Ltd. For services to Manufacturing, to Innovation, to Exports and to Employee Ownership. (Sheffield)

Vincent Paul Ferguson. Founder Inciner8 Ltd. For services to Exporting and Manufacturing in North West England and to charity. (Ormskirk)

Miss Patricia Eileen Fernon. Deputy head Commercial Land Equipment, Ministry of Defence. For services to Defence Procurement. (Chepstow)

Miss Fenella Marion Fielding. Actress. For services to Drama and to charity. (London)

Dr Andrew Kerr Fraser. Director of Public Health Science NHS Health Scotland. For services to Healthcare. (Edinburgh)

Thomas Brough Gardiner. Assistant director, Competent Authority, HM Revenue and Customs. For services to Revenue Protection and to Youth Sport. (Bishop's Stortford)

Professor Peter John Giblin. Emeritus Professor of Mathematics University of Liverpool. For services to Mathematics. (Liverpool)

Ms Michele Giddens. Co-founder Bridges Fund Management and Chair, National Advisory Board for Impact Investment. For services to International Development and to Social Finance. (London)

Nitesh Gor, DL. Founder and chief executive, Avanti Schools Trust. For services to Education. (London)

David Peter Gosnell. Executive chairman Old Bushmills Distillery. For services to the Economy in Northern Ireland. (Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire)

Professor Kenneth Thomas Victor Grattan. FREng Royal Academy of Engineering, George Daniels Professor of Scientific Instrumentation and Dean, Graduate School, City University of London. For services to Science. (Middlesex)

Professor Deborah Greaves. Head School of Engineering, University of Plymouth. For services to Marine Renewable Energy, to Equalities and to Higher Education. (Plymouth)

Ms Suzanne Jean Greaves. Assistant director Trade Bill manager, Department for International Trade. For services to Government Legislation. (Hitchin, Hertfordshire)

Andrew Gregory. Deputy director head of Transport Security Operations Centre. For services to Transport Resilience. (Hertfordshire)

Michael Haines. Presenter Global Acts of Unity. For voluntary service to Tolerance and Education in the UK and Abroad. (Dundee)

Mrs Brenda Ann Norma Hale. For political service. (Hillsborough, Down)

Mrs Kathryn Ann Halford. Chief Nurse, Barking, Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust. For services to Nursing. (Gloucestershire)

Stephen Geoffrey Hall. Head of Rural Statistics Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. For voluntary and charitable service. (London)

Matthew Hare. Chief executive Gigaclear. For services to Broadband Provision in the UK. (Abingdon)

Robin Charles Moreton Harper. Formerly chairman Scottish Wildlife Trust. For services to Nature Conservation and to Public Life in Scotland. (Edinburgh)

Stephen Thomas Hatherall. Team Leader New Employment Model Implementation Programme. For services to Armed Forces Personnel. (Andover)

Michael Hay, MBE. Chef de Mission, Great Britain and Northern Ireland 2018 Winter Olympic Games. For services to Sport. (Sunbury, Middlesex)

Dr Augustus Casely-Hayford. Curator Cultural Historian and Broadcaster. For services to Arts and Culture.

Patrick Ian Helme. Co-founder and director Fermoie. For services to Interior Design and to Manufacturing. (London)

Patrick Joseph Heneghan. For parliamentary and political services. (London)

Miss Karen Hoe. Parent Participation Coordinator and Volunteer National Network of Parent Carer Forums. For services to Children with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities. (Grimsby)

Mrs Clare Yvonne Horrocks. Formerly Principal Judge, War Pensions and Armed Forces Compensation Chamber. For services to the Armed Forces and to the Administration of Justice. (Maidstone)

Norman James Houston. Director Northern Ireland Executive Bureau, Washington DC. For services to the Promotion of Northern Ireland Overseas.

Robert Noel Hudson. Formerly director All-Wales Collaborative. For services to the NHS in Wales. (Bassaleg, Newport, Gwent)

John James. Chief executive Sickle Cell Society. For services to People Affected by Sickle Cell Disease. (London)

Robert John James. Managing director AerFin Ltd. For services to Exports in the Aerospace Industry. (Caerphilly)

Dr Ian William Jardine. Formerly chief executive Scottish Natural Heritage. For services to the Environment. (Bridge of Earn, Perth and Kinross)

Keith Samuel Jarrett. Devolution Spending Control Analyst HM Treasury. For services to Devolution and to Public Finances. (Surrey)

Professor Phillip John. Executive Chair SCHOLAR Forum. For services to Education in Scotland. (Edinburgh)

Ms Eleanor Sally Johnson. Director of Organ Donation and Transplantation NHS Blood and Transplant. For services to Organ Donors and Recipients. (London)

Professor David Emrys Jeffreys Jones. Dean Faculty Trainees, National Institute for Health Research and Professor of Liver Immunology, Newcastle University. For services to Liver Disease and Training. (Ingoe)

Julian Raphael Nathaniel Joseph. Musician. For services to Music. (London)

Mrs Julie Ann Joseph. Chief executive, Common Thread Ltd. For services to Childcare Provision in Scotland and to charity. (Dumfries and Galloway)

Anthony Oluwafemi Olaseni Joshua, MBE. Boxer. For services to Sport. (London)

James Kane. Estates Area manager Scottish Prison Service. For services to the Scottish Prison Service and to charity. (West Lothian)

Professor Anne-Maree Keenan. Assistant director NIHR Leeds Biomedical Research Centre, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust. For services to Podiatry. (Saxton)

Mrs Shahana Khan. For voluntary service to Healthcare and Social Housing in the West Midlands. (West Midland)

Dr Robert Edward Klaber. Consultant, General Paediatrics, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust. For services to Paediatric Care. (London)

Roger Kline. Formerly head of Strategy and Delivery NHS Workforce Race Equality Standard, NHS England. For services to Equality in the NHS. (Hertfordshire)

Mrs Keira Knightley. For services to Drama and to charity. (London)

William Stuart Laing. Formerly Chair, Houlden Jewellers. For services to the Jewellery Industry. (Troon)

Ms Sophie Henrietta Turner Laing. Chief executive Officer Endemol Shine Group. For services to the Media. (London)

Pritpal Singh Landa. Managing director, DSL Group (Nottingham) Ltd. For services to Business, to charity and to the community in Nottingham. (Woodthorpe)

Brian James Landers. Formerly chairman, Companies House. For services to the Economy. (London)

Dr Norman Alexander Lannigan. Formerly head, Pharmacy and Prescribing Support Unit, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. For services to Pharmaceutical Care and Medicines Management. (West Calder, West Lothian)

Professor Richard John Last. Vice-Chancellor Norwich University of the Arts. For services to Higher Education. (Norwich)

Professor James Law. Professor of Speech and Language Science Newcastle University. For services to Speech and Language Therapy. (Bridge of Allan, Stirling and Falkirk)

Adam Troy Lawrence. Formerly chief executive Royal Mint. For public service and services to the community in South Wales. (Chipping Sodbury)

Peter John Lawrence. Founder Guardianship (Missing Persons) Bill 2017. For services to the Families of Missing Persons. (York)

Jeremy Richard Paflin Lee. Formerly Deputy director Border Force, Home Office. For services to Border Security. (Southport)

Richard Leman. For services to Hockey. (East Grinstead)

Steven Edward Leone. Headteacher Stone Hill School, Doncaster. For services to Education and Children with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities. (Lea, Lincolnshire)

Miss Ruth Louise Lester. Honorary consultant Birmingham Children's Hospital. For services to Children and Young People with Limb Deformities. (Birmingham)

Professor Foo Yew Liew. Gardiner Professor of Immunology University of Glasgow. For services to Science and Medicine, particularly in Scotland and Hong Kong. (Glasgow)

Mrs Rowena Jane Elizabeth Limb. Area director, East and South East Midlands, Cities and Local Growth Unit, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. For services to the Economy. (Loughborough)

Amandeep Singh Madra. For services to Punjabi and Sikh Heritage and Culture. (Gerrards Cross)

Professor Jane Marshall. Professor School of Health Sciences, City University of London. For services to Education in Health Sciences. (London)

Joseph Michael Martin. Formerly Project director Queensferry Crossing. For services to the UK Construction Industry. (Inverness-shire)

Stephen James Martin, QPM. Assistant chief Constable. For services to Policing and the community in Northern Ireland. (Belfast)

Ms Laurie Anne Matthew. Founder Eighteen and under. For services to Young People and Survivors of Sexual Abuse. (Perth and Kinross)

Ms Christina McComb. Senior Independent director British Business Bank. For services to the Economy. (Middlesex)

Ian McCubbin. Formerly Senior vice president GlaxoSmithKline and Chair, Medicines Manufacturing Industry Partnership. For services to the Pharmaceutical Industry. (Buckinghamshire)

William Hay McCurrach. Curriculum head Food, City of Glasgow College. For services to Education in the Hospitality Industry. (Glasgow)

Lt Col Kimberly Anne McCutcheon. Formerly Commanding Officer First Aid Nursing Yeomanry. For services to the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry and Emergency Response in London. (Gattonside, Roxburgh, Ettrick and Lauderdale)

Mrs Diana Barbara McKenna. Head, Specialist Disabled Children's Services, Derbyshire County Council. For services to Children and Young People with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities. (Derbyshire)

Dr Katharine McLean. Executive Medical director and chief Operating Officer NHS Improvement. For services to Leadership in the NHS. (Darley Abbey, Derbyshire)

Mrs Katherine Sally McMath. County president, Girlguiding West Lothian. For services to Girlguiding and to the community in West Lothian. (Currie, Midlothian)

John McRobert. Principal Engineer Department of Infrastructure. For services to Engineering in Northern Ireland. (Magherafelt)

Charles McSherry. Director Lanarkshire Enterprise Services Ltd. For services to Business, to Education and to Small Businesses in Scotland. (Stirling)

John McVay. Chief executive Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television. For services to the Media and Creative Industries. (London)

Ms Deirdre Elizabeth Michie. Chief executive Oil and Gas UK. For services to the Oil and Gas Industry. (London)

Dr Marnie Millard. Group chief executive Officer Nichols plc. For services to International Trade and Businesses in North West England. (Huddersfield)

Ms Anne Josephine Moore. Formerly Senior vice president Royal College of Surgeons. For services to Neurosurgery and Surgical Standards. (Plymouth)

Mrs Abi Morgan. Screenwriter. For services to Theatre and Screenwriting. (London)

Ms Angela Morgan. Formerly chief executive Includem. For services to Children and Families. (Alloa)

Dr Mary Teresa Morley. Formerly director of Therapies South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust. For services to Occupational Therapy. (Surrey)

Ms Farshid Moussavi. Architect. For services to Architecture. (London)

Tobias Hamilton Mulder. Senior manager People Programme, National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement and to Diversity. (London)

His Honour Riaz Hassan Naqvi. Resident Judge Sovereign Base Area Cyprus. For services to Defence. (Seaford, East Sussex)

Mrs Caroline Newling. Theatre Producer. For services to Theatre. (London)

Alexander Mark Nileshwar. Senior Professional Special Projects Delivery Team. For services to Military Capability. (London)

Professor Donal Joseph O'Donoghue. Medical director Health Innovation Manchester. For services to Kidney Patients. (Poynton, Cheshire)

Edward Charles O'Hare. For services to the Construction Industry and Entrepreneurship. (Newry, Co Down)

Richard John Oldfield. For services to the Canterbury Cathedral Appeal and to charity. (Sittingbourne)

Dr Diana Jane Owen. Formerly director The Shakespeare Birthplace Trust. For services to Culture and to Tourism. (Stratford-upon-Avon)

Professor Keith Palmer. Chair Industrial Injuries Advisory Council. For services to Occupational Health and Medicine. (Southampton)

Mrs Marlize Palmer. Departmental Records Officer, Welsh Government. For services to Information Management. (Pontcanna, Cardiff)

Michael Park. Chief executive Scottish White Fish Producers Association. For services to Marine Conservation. (Kincardineshire)

Dhruv Prashant Patel. For voluntary service to the British Hindu community and to Social Cohesion. (London)

Mark Andrew Polin, QPM. Chief Constable, North Wales Police. For services to Policing. (Denbighshire)

Ms Allison Cook Ramsay. Formerly Lead Nurse Learning Disabilities, NHS Forth Valley. For services to Learning Disability Nursing. (Falkirk)

Kumar Sureshchandra Raval. Founder of Faith in Leadership. For services to Leadership Education and to Inter-faith Cohesion. (London)

Dr Syed Tanzeem Haider Raza. Consultant Physician The Royal Bournemouth and Christchurch Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Health and Medical Education. (Bournemouth)

Mrs Cathleen Pauline Reeves. Deputy director, Road User Licensing Insurance and Safety, Department for Transport. For services to Local Sustainable Transport. (Gillingham, Kent)

Malcolm Richardson. National chairman Magistrates' Association. For services to the Administration of Justice. (Oldbury on Severn)

Ian Russell Ritchie. Formerly chief executive Rugby Football Union. For services to Sports Administration. (Virginia Water)

Ms Claire Elizabeth Robins. Headteacher Scholars' Education Trust and Member of the North West London South Central Headteacher's Board. For services to Education. (St Albans, Hertfordshire)

Mrs Diane Mary Rochford. Executive Headteacher, John F Kennedy Special School and Chair, Rochford Review. For services to Education. (London)

Paul Roseby. Chief executive Officer and Artistic director National Youth Theatre. For services to Drama and Young People. (London)

Dr Ashok Roy. Clinical Lead Learning Disabilities, Health Education England. For services to People with Learning Disabilities. (Sutton Coldfield)

Ms Lucinda Valerie Russell. Racehorse Trainer Arlary House Stables. For services to Horse Racing. (Milnathort, Perth and Kinross)

Dr Amarjit Kaur Samra. Director of Research Medical Directorate. For services to Defence Medical Research. (Birmingham)

Jeffery Howard Savory. For services to Disability Sport. (Barry, Vale of Glamorgan)

Peter Edgar Scott. Chief executive UK Independent Living Fund Scotland. For services to People with Disabilities. (Rutherglen, Glasgow)

Professor Laura Maria Serrant. Professor of Nursing Sheffield Hallam University. For services to Health Policy. (Sheffield)

Andrew Michael Gordon Sharpe. For voluntary political service. (Epsom, Surrey)

Richard Charles Edwin Smith. Director The Tank Museum. For services to Military Heritage. (Poole)

Stuart Graham Smith. Non Executive director CAFCASS and director of Adult and Children's Services, Calderdale Council. For services to Children's Social Care. (West Yorkshire)

Norman Springford. Formerly Executive chairman Apex Hotels. For services to the Scottish Tourism Industry. (Edinburgh)

Darren Styles. Publisher and Ambassador GREAT Campaign. For services to the Economy, to Diversity and to charity. (Cowden, Kent)

Professor Tong Sun. Professor of Sensor Engineering City University of London. For services to Engineering. (Middlesex)

Robert Symonds. Chair WISE Academies Trust. For services to Education. (Sunderland)

Ms Sally Elizabeth Tallant. Director Liverpool Biennial. For services to the Arts. (London)

Professor Carol Elizabeth Tannahill. Director Glasgow Centre for Population Health and chief Social Policy Adviser, Scottish Government. For services to Public Health. (Bearsden, Dunbartonshire)

Mrs Sally Jennifer Joan Tennant. Patron, Tommy's. For services to Research into Miscarriages and Stillbirths. (London)

Dr Stephen Thomas. Principal of Medetec Independent Medical Device consultant (Wound Dressings) and Medical Writer. For services to the NHS. (Cardiff)

Ms Anne Kathleen Tiivas. Director Child Protection in Sport Unit. For services to Safeguarding Children and Young People. (Lutterworth)

Jack Crossley Tordoff, MBE. Chair, JCT600 Ltd. For services to Business and to the community in West Yorkshire. (West Yorkshire)

Professor Samantha Carole Twiselton. Director Sheffield Institute of Education. For services to Higher Education. (Sheffield)

Barry James Allen Charles Valentine. Barrister-at-Law. For services to the Legal Profession and to the Courts. (Co Down)

Mrs Vanessa Vallely. Managing director, http://www.wearethecity.com. For services to Women and the Economy. (Rayleigh)

Michael John Wade. For services to Government and to the Economy. (London)

Arjun Chainrai Waney. Entrepreneur. For services to the Restaurant Industry. (London)

Neil Kenneth Warwick. Business Development Partner Square One Law. For services to the Economy and to Young People in the North East. (Newcastle upon Tyne)

Ms Lindsey Margaret Watt. Formerly Headteacher Castleview Primary School. For services to Education in Edinburgh. (Edinburgh)

Dr Joan Freeman Webber. Principal Pathologist Forest Research (Centre for Ecosystems, Society and Biosecurity). For services to Tree Health. (Alton)

Ms Catherine Louise Webster. Deputy head Devolution Settlements Division, Cabinet Office. For services to the Constitution. (London)

Mrs Angela Williams. Principal, Huddersfield New College. For services to Education. (Holmfirth)

Professor Laurence Glynn Williams. Formerly Chair Committee on Radioactive Waste Management. For services to Nuclear Safety and to Radioactive Waste Management. (Merseyside)

The Rt Hon Jennifer Nancy Willott. For political and public service. (London)

Professor Debbie Wiseman, MBE. Composer and conductor. For services to Music. (London)

Professor Charles David Alexander Wolfe. Professor of Public Health King's College London. For services to Stroke and Public Health Medicine. (New Buckenham, Norfolk)

Mrs Roisin Wood. Chief executive, Kick It Out. For services to Tackling Discrimination and Exclusion in Football. (London)

Dr Wendy Jane Woodhouse. Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Mental Healthcare for Children and Young People. (Swindon)

Dr Lucy Worsley. Historian and chief Curator Historic Royal Palaces. For services to History and to Heritage. (London)

Mrs Agnes Rose Forrest Wylie. Artist. For services to Art. (Kent)

Ms Elizabeth Anne Yarnold, MBE. Athlete. For services to Winter Olympic Sport. (Hampshire)

Mrs Katherine Patricia Yates. Administrative Officer, Personal Tax Operations, HM Revenue and Customs. For services to Vulnerable Customers. (Whetstone, Leicestershire)

Peter Stewart Agnew. Senior Executive Officer Ministry of Defence. For public service. (Antrim)

Ms Roma Agrawal. Associate director AECOM. For services to Engineering. (London)

Ajaz Khowaj Quoram Ahmed. Founder AKQA. For services to Media. (London)

Mrs Akeela Ahmed. Founder, She Speaks, We Hear. For services to Muslim Women. (London)

Mrs Beverley Aitken. Chair of Governors, East Kent College. For services to Further Education and to the community in Kent. (Margate)

Sarfraz Ali. President Pakistan Association Liverpool. For services to Community Cohesion and Integration in Liverpool. (Liverpool)

Mahomed Farouk Alimahomed. Chairman Lesta Packaging plc. For services to Business, the community and to Philanthropy. (Leicestershire)

Mrs Kathleen Mary Appleby. (Calverley) managing director, The Concrete Society. For services to the Construction Industry. (Melksham)

Iain William Armitage. Fundraiser Shooting Star Chase. For services to the community and to Supporting Families with Life-Limiting Illnesses. (Godalming)

Richard Stephen Ash. For services to the community in Bearsted Kent. (Maidstone)

William Ashe. Councillor and Lately Mayor Mid and East Antrim Borough Council. For services to Local Government in Northern Ireland. (Antrim)

Faisal Atcha. Firefighter and Community Volunteer Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue Service. For public service. (Stonehouse)

Gary Christopher Avis. For services to Dance and to charity in Suffolk. (Suffolk)

Robert Anthony Avis. For services to the community in Guildford Surrey. (Surrey)

Mrs Susan Lesley Bailey. For services to Vulnerable Children and Families in the West Midlands. (West Midlands)

Mrs Marcella Caterina Olive-Ballestra. Founder and Lately Chair, Board of Asperger East Anglia. For services to Children, to Young People and to Adults with Asperger Syndrome and Disabilities. (Great Yarmouth)

David Anthony Banner. For services to the Video Games Industry. (Bridgend, South Glamorgan)

Ms Gillian Barclay. Head Dementia Innovation Team, Scottish Government. For services to Dementia Care and to Public Safety. (Inverkeithing, Fife)

Dr Christopher Andrew Barnett. Formerly Headmaster Whitgift School, Croydon. For services to Education. (Great Malvern)

Christopher Leslie Batten. Formerly HR Casework Legacy manager Department for Transport. For services to Public Administration. (Tonbridge)

Miss Mary Angela Beatty. Law and Politics Teacher Whitefield School, Cricklewood. For services to Education. (London)

Ms Sonya Bedford. Head of Renewable Energy Stephens Scown LLP. For services to Community Energy. (Axbridge, Somerset)

Ahmed Bedri. Founder Sudan Supplementary School and Sudan Volunteer Programme. For services to Education. (London)

Timothy Charles Robert Noel Bentinck. (The Earl of Portland) Actor. For services to Drama. (London)

Ms June Isobel Best. For services to People with Disabilities in Northern Ireland. (Moira, Co Down)

Ms Hannah Bingham. Administrative Officer Ministry of Defence. For services to Defence. (London)

Mrs Katharine Bird. Advanced Nurse Practitioner, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Vulnerable Teenagers. (Stourbridge)

Stephen Edmund Bird. Head of Heritage Bath and North East Somerset Council. For services to Museums, to Heritage and to Tourism. (Bath)

Michael John Bissell. For services to Fundraising to charity in Sri Lanka and to the community in Reading and Newbury, Berkshire. (Reading)

Derek James Blake. Formerly vice-Chair of Governors Stour Valley Community School, Clare. For services to Education and to the community in Suffolk. (Sudbury)

Ms Anne Elizabeth Boden. Chief executive Officer Starling Bank. For services to Financial Technology. (London)

Ms Sara Jane Booth. For services to Women's Football.

Alastair Stirling Boyle. For services to charity particularly the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service and to the Anthony Nolan Partnership. (Hamilton, Lanarkshire)

Mrs Janice Marie Ruston Bradley. Head of Conservation, Nottinghamshire Wildlife Trust. For services to Wildlife in Nottinghamshire. (Nottinghamshire)

Kenneth William Bremner. Chief executive South Tyneside and City Hospitals Sunderland NHS Foundation Trusts. For services to NHS Leadership. (Ponteland, Northumberland)

Christopher Charles Brindley. Chair GreaterSport. For services to Sport in Greater Manchester. (Stretford)

Michael Herbert Brown. For services to the community in Handsworth Birmingham. (Sutton Coldfield)

Mrs Alison Mary Browning. Teacher, Varndean School, Brighton. For services to Education and to the Personal Development of Young People. (Redhill, Surrey)

Satvir Paul Bungar. Managing director of Mergers and Acquisitions and head of Facilities Management Sector BDO LLP. For services to Corporate Finance. (Birmingham)

Clive Dennis Burgess. For services to Young People in Dorset. (Portland)

Mrs Denise Elizabeth Burton. For services to Girlguiding and to the community in Peterborough. (Peterborough)

Jonathan Burton. Community Pharmacist Right Medicine Pharmacy, University of Stirling. For services to Healthcare. (Alloa)

Mrs Mary-Jane Butler. For charitable service in Kenya. (Kingsbridge)

Professor Andrew Alexander Calder. Chair Tenovus Scotland and Scotland's Churches Trust. For services to Obstetrics and to Gynaecology. (Strathtay, Perth and Kinross)

Dr Ruth Rachel Caleb. Chair Mental Wellbeing in Higher Education Working Group and Lately head of Counselling, Brunel University London. For services to Higher Education. (London)

William Calvert. For services to Business, to charity and to the community in Thirsk, North Yorkshire. (Thirsk)

Miss Margaret Cameron. For services to Policing and to the community in Belfast. (Belfast)

Mrs Susan Alayne Campbell. Principal, Magherafelt Nursery School. For services to Education. (Castledawson, Londonderry)

Ms Anne-Marie Canning. Director of Social Mobility and Student Success King's College London. For services to Higher Education. (London)

Ian Reginald Carr. Mayor and lately Leader Test Valley Borough Council. For services to Local Government and to the community in Test Valley, Hampshire. (Andover)

John Richard Carter. Formerly Honorary chief executive Bath Cancer Unit Support Group. For charitable services to Healthcare and to the community in Bath. (Somerset)

Mrs Susan Catterall. Trustee, Orpington Unit Management Committee, Sea Cadet Corps. For voluntary service to Young People. (Kent)

Mrs Virginia Anne Von Celsing. For public and political service. (Reading)

Professor Roland Andrew Chadwick. Individual Merit Research Scientist British Geological Survey. For services to the Science of Carbon Capture and Sequestration. (Ruddington, Nottinghamshire)

Mrs Linda Chambers. Early Years Co-ordinator, Ballybeen Women's Centre Pre-School. For services to Education. (Dundonald, Co Down)

Mrs Sarah Charters. Consultant Nurse, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Vulnerable Adults. (Hampshire)

Mrs Margaret Alice Chilton. Formerly National Documentation Training Executive, British Chambers of Commerce. For services to the Economy. (Rugby, Warwickshire)

Mrs Carol Joy Chorley. For voluntary service to the community in Sarratt, Hertfordshire. (Rickmansworth)

Fakrul Alam Choudhury. For services to the community in Oldham. (Oldham)

Mrs Mairi Anna Chrystal. Head, Stroke Nurse and Therapist Service, Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland. For services to Stroke Patients in Scotland. (Aberdeen)

Ms Kate Clanchy. Poet. For services to Literature. (Oxfordshire)

Mrs Sheila Claridge. Formerly Specialist Maths Teacher, The Mead Community Primary School, Wiltshire. For services to Education. (Corsham)

Mrs Andrea Kathryn Clarke. Founder and director, Playskill. For services to Children and to Young People with Physical Disabilities. (Watford)

Mrs Janice Clarke. For services to Health and Social Care and to the community in Northern Ireland. (Carryduff, Co Down)

Dr Susannah Clarke. Founder and director Embody Orthopaedic. For services to Engineering and to Entrepreneurship. (London)

Lawrence Paul Cleary. Founder and Chair Help Ear and Allied Research. For services to Deaf People. (Altrincham)

Miss Sandra Clelland. Estates Security Staff Member Hugh Baird College. For services to the community and to charitable services in Liverpool. (Huyton)

Mrs Jayne Anne Clemence. For services to the Magistracy and to the community in Colebrook, Devon. (Devon)

Mrs Julie Clements. Formerly Executive Officer, Midlands Clerical and Client Payment Services Team, Department for Work and Pensions. For services to Public Sector Diversity and to Young People. (Bromsgrove)

Stephen Cochrane. Founder and managing director Psyche Department Store. For services to the Economy and to Regeneration in Middlesbrough. (Yarm)

Andrew Leslie Cohen. Head of Air Travel Organisers' Licensing and Crisis Management Civil Aviation Authority. For services to Aviation. (London)

Emeritus Professor Christopher George Collier. Former head of Strategic Partnerships NCAS. For services to atmospheric science. (Tarporley)

Dr Gareth Collier. Consultant Respiratory Physician Glangwili Hospital. For services to Lung Cancer Treatment in Wales. (Carmarthenshire)

Ms Victoria Anne Harrison-Cook. Head of Media Transport for London. For services to Diversity in Public Relations. (Surrey)

Ms Susan Mary Cooper. For services to Conservation and to the Environment in Shropshire and Herefordshire. (Shrewsbury)

Roger Charles Coppock. Head Corporate and Forestry Support. For services to Forestry. (Clackmannanshire)

Mrs Rose Cory. Milliner. For services to the Millinery Industry. (London)

Ms Alexandra Cotton. Mental Health Nurse Street Triage Team, Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust. For services to Mental Health. (Coventry)

Peter John Cowan. For services to the community in Luton, Bedfordshire. (Bedfordshire)

Ms Emily Katherine Cox (Mrs Cooney). director, Public Affairs, Virgin Money. For services to Gender Diversity in Financial Services. (Gateshead)

Mrs Hilary Cox. Formerly Councillor, Norfolk County Council. For services to Local Government and to the community in Norfolk. (Cromer)

Mrs Susan Mary Cox. For political and voluntary service in the Vale of Glamorgan. (Cowbridge)

Dr John Dixon Craggs. For services to Education and to the community in Birmingham. (Sutton Coldfield)

Dr David Crichton Craig. Head of Sedation and Special Care Dentistry Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Dental Patients. (Staplecross, East Sussex)

Alan Michael Creighton. Senior Smart Grid Development Engineer Northern Powergrid. For services to the Energy Industry. (Wetherby)

Ms Kate Cross. For services to Young People's Theatre and to the community in Bath. (Bath, Somerset)

Mrs Sybil Jean Crowther. For political and public service. (Windsor)

Ms Niomi Arleen McLean-Daley. Rapper, Songwriter and Record Producer. For services to Music. (London)

Michael David Danby. Chief executive Advanced Supply Chain Ltd. For services to Business and to the community in West Yorkshire. (Sowerby Bridge)

Meerwis Daoud. Cultural Advisor to Senior British Representative Kabul. For services to Defence. (Cambridgeshire)

Mrs Laurian Davies. Business Development Executive, UK Fashion and Textile Association. For services to Young Fashion Entrepreneurs and Exporters. (London)

Robert Conrad Davies. Senior Executive Officer, HM Prison Berwyn. For services to the Prison Service Sports Association. (Doncaster)

Mrs Beverley Emma Dean. Founder, Special iApps. For services to Exports in Educational Technology for People with Learning Disabilities. (Shincliffe, Durham)

William Grieve Deans. Lifeboat Operations manager, Aberdeen Lifeboat Station, Royal Naval Lifeboat Institute. For services to Maritime Safety. (Belhelvie, Aberdeenshire)

Dr James Shackley Dearden. Founder Ruskin Association. For services to Culture. (Bembridge, Isle of Wight)

Dr Richard Ian Dewar. Consultant Physician, Cwm Taf University Health Board. For services to the NHS, particularly stroke patients. (Radyr, Cardiff)

Michael John Doane. Director of Sales Douglas. For services to British Airport Services and to International Trade. (Cheltenham)

Paul Frederick Dodds. Training manager WorldSkills UK. For services to the WorldSkills Competition. (Bedfordshire)

Dr Valerie Rose Doherty. Consultant Dermatologist, The Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh and Chair, Scottish Melanoma Group. For services to Cancer Care. (Edinburgh)

Mrs Violet Rose Susan Donovan. Co-Founder, The Chris Donovan Trust. For services to Restorative Justice. (Surrey)

Miss Stacey Dooley. Journalist and Presenter. For services to Broadcasting. (East Sussex)

Ms Mili Ranjit Doshi. Dental consultant Surrey and Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust. For services to NHS Dentistry. (London)

William Dougray. Chairman East Renfrewshire Citizens' Advice Bureau. For services to the community in East Renfrewshire. (Barrhead, Renfrewshire)

Mrs Gillian Patricia Drakeford. Formerly UK and Ireland Country manager, IKEA. For services to the Economy. (Carnforth, Lancashire)

Derek Dreher. Records Sensitivity Reviewer, Northern Ireland Office. For services to Information Management. (Hartley, Kent)

Detective Chief Superintendent Robert Scott Drennan. Police Service of Northern Ireland. For services to Policing and to the community in Northern Ireland. (Belfast)

Mrs Janet Sandra Drinkall. For services to Charitable Fundraising in York. (York)

Miss Catherine Mary Duffy. Formerly Principal Solicitor Legal Services Department, Police Scotland. For services to Law and Order. (Glasgow)

Dr Heather Mary Dunn. For services to Cardiac Care in Northern Ireland and to voluntary service in Malawi. (Limavady, Co Londonderry)

Ms Patricia Ann Earp. Director Independent Living and Crisis Response, South East England, British Red Cross. For services to Crisis Support. (Hertfordshire)

Ms Susanna de Martelly Eastburn. Chief executive Sound and Music. For services to Music. (London)

Dr Simon Leslie Edwards. Senior Lecturer in Youth Studies University of Portsmouth. For services to Youth Work and the Education of Young People. (West Sussex)

Steven Elworthy. Formerly director of Events English Cricket Board. For services to Cricket. (Radlett, Hertfordshire)

Philip Neil Evans. For services to charity and to the community in Lyme Regis Dorset. (Lyme Regis)

Dr Sally Ann Evans. Chief Medical Officer Civil Aviation Authority. For services to Aviation Medicine. (Guildford)

Mrs Dorcas Olayemi Amusani-Fagborun. Chief executive, Peacemakers International. For services To Community Cohesion and Women and Girls' Rights. (Bradford, West Yorkshire)

Barry John Farrimond. Chief executive OpenUp Music. For services to Accessible Music Technology. (Bristol)

Mrs Sally Hazel Fennemore. President, Milton Keynes Women in Enterprise. For services to Female Entrepreneurship. (Milton Keynes)

Dr Anne Marie Colette Ferguson. Director of Nursing Midwifery and Allied Health Professions, NHS Education for Scotland. For services to Health Education and Training. (Coatbridge, Lanarkshire)

Miss Catherine Ferrie. Formerly Senior Lecturer head of School and director of Curriculum, Dundee and Angus College. For services to Further Education. (Arbroath)

Adrian Fewings. Founder and chief executive Officer Derbyshire Aggregates Ltd. For services to Business and to the community in Derbyshire. (Bakewell)

Ms Helen Mary Fisher. Project Lead Academies Regional Delivery Group, Regional Schools' commissioner's Office, South East and South London. For services to the Department for Education. (Epsom)

Miss Jessica Anne Fishlock. Footballer. For services to Women's Football and the LGBT community.

Miss Menna Fitzpatrick. For services to Paralympic Winter Olympic Sport. (Macclesfield)

Ms Margaret Ann Fleming. Chief executive Scottish Volleyball Association. For services to Volleyball. (Linlithgow, West Lothian)

Mrs Sylvia Jane Fleming. Director, Extrordinair. For services to the Freight Forwarding Industry and to the Welfare of Animals in Transit. (Coldingham, Berwickshire)

Mrs Rachelle Louise Freeguard. Higher Officer, Border Force, Gatwick Airport. For services to the Prevention of Trafficking and Border Security. (Kent)

James Anthony French. For services to Young People in the Transport Industry. (Wantage)

Richard Neil Frost. Employment Specialist Team Lead Devon Partnership NHS Trust. For services to Mental Health. (Totnes)

Dominic Bryan Furby. Formerly assistant District Commander Calderdale, West Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service. For charitable services. (Halifax)

Professor Vincent Gaffney. Landscape Archaeology University of Bradford. For services to Scientific Research. (Staffordshire)

Mrs Hemlata Gandhi. Post Mistress, Risinghurst Post Office and General Store. For services to the Post Office and to the community in Oxfordshire. (Headington)

Mrs Gillian Mary Garlington. Senior Commercial Officer, Vehicle Support Team. For services to Military Procurement. (Bath)

Dr Alasdair Buchanan Gillies. Trustee Scottish Showbusiness Benevolent Fund and chairman, Gaelic Language Promotion Trust. For services to Music, to the Gaelic Language and to charity. (Milngavie, Dunbartonshire)

Thomas William Givans. Member Dungannon Rotary Club. For services to the community in Northern Ireland. (Dungannon)

Professor Haley Louise Gomez. Head of Outreach and Engagement School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University. For services to Astrophysics, to Astronomy and to Outreach Activities. (Llanishen, Cardiff)

Miss Sarah Margaret Gordy. For services to the Arts and People with Disabilities. (Lewes)

David Young Gourlay. Head Coach Scotland Lawn Bowls. For services to Bowls.

Mrs Autumn Tracey Jane Gray. Senior Warden, University of Warwick, Coventry. For services to Higher Education. (Coventry)

Mrs Margaret Isabel Grayson. Chair, Northern Ireland Cancer Research Consumer Forum. For services to Cancer Research in Northern Ireland. (Belfast)

Jonathan Greenwood. Director of Commercial Services University of York. For services to Higher Education. (North Yorkshire)

Gerald Brian Guest. For services to Local Government in Warwickshire. (Royal Leamington Spa)

Iain Alexander Gunn. (Gunn of Banniskirk) chief, Clan Gunn. For services to the Arts, Heritage and the Economy in Caithness. (Lybster)

Dr Sadhu-Ram Gupta. For services to Ophthalmology and to charity in the UK and Abroad. (Kilmacolm, Renfrewshire)

Neil Frederick Handley. For services to the community in Dartmoor. (Plymouth)

Alistair Handyside. For voluntary service to the Tourism Sector in the South West. (Devon)

Gary Hansman. Estimates Advisor HM Treasury. For public and voluntary service. (Essex)

Ms Kate Emily Hardcastle. Founding Partner Insight with Passion. For services to Business and Entrepreneurship. (West Bretton, West Yorkshire)

Ms Diane Patricia Harrill. Teacher Newent Community School and Sixth Form Centre, Gloucestershire. For services to Education. (Newent)

Mark Stephen Hartley. Headteacher, Barnes Primary School. For services to Educational Pedagogy. (London)

Ms Sarah Fiona Haughey. Formerly Executive director Nursing and Quality, Dorset Healthcare University NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Nursing. (Ringwood)

Ms Deborah Kay Hayman. Assistant director HMRC Fraud Investigation Service, Croydon. For services to Raising Awareness of Women's Health in the Workplace. (West Sussex)

David James Heather. Headteacher, Pulford Church of England VA Lower School, Bedfordshire. For services to Education. (Leighton Buzzard)

Ms Voirrey Joanne Heaton. Equality and Human Rights Advisor NHS Wales. For services to Equality and Patient Rights in the NHS. (Peel, Isle of Man)

Richard John Heckford. Chairman, Rugby Farmers Market. For services to Agriculture in the Midlands. (Rugby)

Mrs Moira Henderson. Owner, The Rings. For services to Accessible Tourism in Fife. (Cupar, Fife)

Mrs Annette Heslop. Financial director, Energy4All. For services to Community Energy. (Barrow-in-Furness)

Halford Hewitt. Chief executive Officer Ipswich Housing Action Group. For services to Homeless People in Ipswich. (Manningtree)

William James Hewson. For services to Sport and to the community in Hythe and Folkstone Kent. (Hythe)

Kenneth George Western Hicks. For services to the community in the Isle of Wight. (Isle of Wight)

Mrs Fiona Helen Highet. Senior Entomologist, Science and Advice for Scottish Agriculture. For services to Bee Health. (Cupar, Fife)

Reverend Colin William John Hodgetts. For services to Refugees through the Refugee Action Charity. (Abbotsham)

Thomas Dieter Dirk Hoffman. Member Court of Common Council, City of London Corporation. For services to Secondary and Tertiary Education and to the Arts in London. (London)

Mrs Betty Edith Holbrook. For services to Heritage and to the community in Harwich, Essex. (Essex)

Ms Sylvia Lorraine Holmes. Chief executive Officer Economic Growth Solutions. For services to the Economy. (Stourbridge)

William Hope. For voluntary service in Elgin and Moray. (Elgin)

Mrs Alison Kathryn Hopkins. Chief executive, Accelerate Community Interest Company. For services to Nursing. (London)

Brian Howard. For services to the community in Haslemere Surrey. (Surrey)

Alistair John Huddleston. Biology Teacher Peebles High School. For services to Education. (Penicuik, Midlothian)

Stephen Hudson. Divisional director Community Services, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Vulnerable People in Devon. (Exeter)

Maboob Hussain. For services to West Yorkshire Police and to charity. (West Yorkshire)

Ms Aphroditi Catherine Hutchison. Formerly Chair Netball Scotland. For services to Netball. (Shawlands, Glasgow)

Mohammad Iqbal. For services to charity and to community relations in Manchester. (Greater Manchester)

Dr Rosemary Sylvia Helen Irwin. Chair, Gilbert White Museum and Oates Galleries. For services to Education and to the community in Selborne, Hampshire. (Selborne)

Mohammed Ishaq. Director The Punjab Kitchen Ltd. For services to Innovation and to the Economy in Tyne and Wear. (Washington)

Alexander Jackson. For services to Cross Country Running in Scotland. (Edinburgh)

Mrs Carol Ann Jackson. Chair of Governors, Fordingbridge Infant School, Hampshire. For services to Education. (Fordingbridge)

Mrs Janet Anne Jackson. For services to the community in Macclesfield, Cheshire. (Cheshire)

Mrs Ruth Helen Jackson. Headteacher, Kitchener Primary School, Cardiff. For services to Education. (Cardiff)

The Reverend Thomas Charles Jackson. For services to Young People and to the community in London. (London)

Ms Eileen Chester-James. Chief executive Staffordshire Women's Aid. For services to Victims of Domestic Violence. (Staffordshire)

Richard Andrew Jarrett. Headteacher, Oldfield Primary School, Maidenhead. For services to Education. (Buckinghamshire)

Ms Veronica Claire Jobbins. Head of Learning and Participation (Dance) Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and Dance. For services to Young People. (London)

Richard Alan Johnson. For services to Children with Life Limiting Illnesses in North West England and North Wales. (Cheshire)

Ms Rosemary Johnson. Executive director Royal Philharmonic Society. For services to Music. (London)

Ms Gaynor Ann Jones. Senior Staff Nurse Prince Charles Hospital, Merthyr Tydfil and Chair, Royal College of Nursing Welsh Board. For services to the Nursing Profession in Wales. (Merthyr Tydfil)

Mrs Lynne Jones. For services to Community Flood Resilience in Keswick and the Derwent Catchment in Cumbria. (Keswick)

Ms Beverley Barnett-Jones. Frontline Children's Service manager Coventry Children's Services. For services to Vulnerable Children in Coventry. (West Midlands)

David Joy. Chief executive London and Continental Railways Ltd. For services to Urban Regeneration. (Lingfield)

Ms Jennifer Anne Kehoe. For services to Paralympic Winter Olympic Sport. (Salisbury)

John William Kelly. For services to the Motor Industry in Great Britain and Northern Ireland and to the community in North Belfast. (Antrim)

Professor Sally Kendall. Professor Community Nursing and Public Health, University of Kent. For services to Nursing and to Research. (St Albans)

David Edward Kendrick. Head of Airline Licensing Civil Aviation Authority. For services to Aviation. (Brentwood)

Miss Lynne Roberts Kennedy. Managing Editor Business Women Scotland Ltd. For services to the Promotion of Women in Business. (Glasgow)

Nur-ur-Rahman Khandaker. For services to catering and to the community in Aylesford Kent. (Aylesford)

Terence John Kitts. Headteacher Marchant Holliday School, Somerset. For services to Education. (Wincanton)

Ms Celia Jane Knight. Neighbourhood Development Officer Nottingham City Council. For services to the community in Nottingham. (Stapleford)

Mrs Amanda Knowles. Operations director, Future Horizons. For services to Children's Residential Care. (Newburgh)

Christopher John Koehli. Formerly Independent Member (Finance) Aneurin Bevan University Health Board. For services to Carers and to Healthcare in Wales. (Cwmbran)

Mrs Patricia Eve Lander. Formerly Deputy Headteacher, Colnbrook Special Needs School, Watford. For services to Children with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities. (Watford)

Oswald Lloyd Lattray. Higher Officer HM Revenue and Customs. For services to Diversity and to Equality. (Birmingham)

Mrs Helen Margaret Laverty. Professional Lead for Learning Disability nursing, University of Nottingham. For services to Nursing especially People and Families with Learning Disabilities. (Hardwick)

Lady Victoria Diana Leatham, DL. For services to the community in Northamptonshire and Cambridgeshire. (Fotheringhay)

Gareth John Ledbetter. Formerly head of Screening and Research Team Home Office. For services to Border Security. (West Sussex)

Stephen Lester. Member Education Funding Agency Academies Finance and Assurance Steering Group and Business manager, West Lakes Academy. For services to Education. (Whitehaven)

Mrs Kirsty Margaret Letton. For services to Curling. (Troon)

Ms Avril Lewis. Managing director ESTnet and Member, Welsh Government Information and Communication Technology Sector Panel. For services to the Technology Industry in Wales. (Tongwynlais, Cardiff)

Ms Susan Lindsey. Higher Executive Officer Ministry of Defence. For services to Defence. (London)

Mrs Vivienne Littlechild. Formerly chairman, Culture, Heritage and Libraries Committee, City of London Corporation. For services to Culture and to Heritage in the City of London. (London)

Mrs Marilyn Margaret Livingstone. Director, The Adam Smith Global Foundation and Chairperson, Cottage Family Centre. For services to the community in Kirkcaldy, Fife. (Kirkcaldy)

Mrs Lorraine Long. Foster Carer, Leeds City Council. For services to Children and Families. (Wakefield)

Ms Afriqnmun Lovejoy. Head International Climate Outreach, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. For services to Diversity and Inclusion. (London)

Mrs Sandra MacDonald. Captain, 34th Glasgow Girls' Brigade. For services to the Girls' Brigade and Govan and Linthouse Parish Church. (Paisley)

Archibald Robert MacMillan. Founder, The Kintyre Smokehouse, Macmillan Foods. For services to the Scottish Seafood Industry. (Kintyre)

Ewan Gordon Cameron MacPherson. Chairman, Royal Yachting Association Scotland. For voluntary service to Sailing. (Banchory, Aberdeenshire)

Charles Eamonn Magee. Principal St Patrick's and St Brigid's Primary School and Nursery Unit, Ballycastle. For services to Education. (Portstewart)

Guy Julian Maginn. Higher Officer Customs manager, Border Force, Home Office. For public service. (Kent)

Melian Barbara Mansfield. For services to Young People Play and Education. (London)

Mrs Flora Scott Martin. For services to Children and Young People, particularly through Action for Children Scotland. (Glasgow)

Mrs Jeanie Martin. Scientist, Northern Ireland Kidney Transplant Programme. For services to the Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratory and to Patients. (Co Down)

Dr Susan Martin. For services to Mental Health Welfare and to the community in Liverpool. (Liverpool)

Dr Bridget McCalister. Founder and secretary The Driving Force. For services to charity in Scotland. (Dunblane)

David McCallum. For services to Housing in Northern Ireland. (Lisburn)

Mrs Carole Anne McCarthy. President, Cosmetic Executive Women UK. For services to Female Entrepreneurs and to charity. (London)

Mrs Amelia Elizabeth McCourty. For political and public service. (Tarporley)

James McCrum. For services to the Rathfriland Farmers Co-op Society Limited and to the Farming community in South Down. (Newry)

Colin McEachran. For services to Target Shooting and to Commonwealth Games Scotland. (Edinburgh)

Douglas Donald McGeorge. For voluntary and charitable services through the Prince's Trust the Centre for Social Justice and The Healing Foundation. (Eccleston, Cheshire)

Mrs Alma Gauine McGing. For voluntary political service. (Liverpool)

Mrs Carol Diane McGregor. For services to charity. (Crieff, Perth and Kinross)

Mrs Lynette Valerie McHendry. Fundraiser and Educator, Inflammatory Breast Cancer. For services to Women in the UK with Breast Cancer. (Larne)

Miss Paula McIntyre. For services to Food Drink and Hospitality sector in Northern Ireland. (Portstewart)

William McKnight. Volunteer Coastal Warden Thanet Coast Project. For services to the community and Marine Environment. (Ramsgate)

Mrs Teresa McNally. Member, Scottish Federation of Housing Associations. For services to Community Housing. (Alloa)

Miss Sarah Jane Mears. Library Services manager Essex County Council. For services to Children and Young People. (London)

Dr Philippa Medcalf. Consultant Physician in Acute Medicine Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Homeless Patients. (Stroud)

Kerry Kyriacos Michael. Artistic director Theatre Royal Stratford East. For services to the Arts. (London)

Mrs Bernadette Michaelides. For services to Community Nursing. (Eglington, Co Londonderry)

Professor Melinda Catherine Mills. Nuffield Professor of Sociology and head of Department University of Oxford. For services to the Social Sciences. (Oxfordshire)

Ms Sally Joyce Mills. Matron/manager Halsey House Royal British Legion Care Home. For services to ex-Service Personnel. (Cromer)

Mrs Diane Modahl. Founder, Diane Modahl Sports Foundation. For services to Sport and to Young People in North West England. (Greater Manchester)

Michael Mogan. For services to charity in the UK and Abroad. (West Midlands)

Ms Rehana Mohammed. Learning manager, Workers' Educational Association. For services to the Education of Marginalised Women in Rochdale and Oldham. (Lancashire)

Anthony Paul Moncrieff. Chief executive, London Friend. For services to LGBT Equality. (London)

Ms Kathleen Moore. Managing director Women Into Construction. For services to the Construction Industry. (London)

Ms Sharon Anne Moore. Industry Technical Leader for Travel and Transportation IBM UK Ltd. For services to Women in Technology Based Industries. (Edinburgh)

Kenneth Alan Morcombe. Governor St Giles School, Croydon. For services to Children with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities. (Surrey)

Ms Grace Bolarinwa Moronfolu. Inclusion and Community Engagement manager East Midlands, Crown Prosecution Service. For services to Community Engagement. (Derbyshire)

William David Morris. For services to Rugby in Wales. (Aberdare)

Ms Clare Morrison. Lead Pharmacist (Quality Improvement) NHS Highland. For services to Healthcare. (Avoch, Ross and Cromarty)

Mrs June Margaret Dorothy Morrison. For voluntary political service. (Aberdeen)

Alan Stephen Moss. Senior Lecturer RAF Central Training School. For services to Apprentice Training. (Telford)

Alan Muddiman. Formerly Chair Civil Engineering Contractors Association and head, Health, Safety and Environmental, Renew Holdings plc. For services to Health and Safety. (Doncaster)

Simon Munn. For services to Wheelchair Basketball. (Peacehaven)

Ms Valerie Morag Munro. Trustee and Lately Chair North Edinburgh Arts. For services to Community Arts and Regeneration. (Edinburgh)

Ms Zoe Murphy. Border Force Officer, Heathrow Airport. For services to Border Security and Humanitarian Operations. (Buckinghamshire)

Ms Gillian Murray. For services to Charitable Fundraising. (Lanarkshire)

Paul Travis Murray. For services to charity and to the community in Winchester. (Winchester)

Dr Alexander Mustard. Underwater Photographer. For services to Underwater Photography. (Peterborough)

Ms Judith Lynn Naake. E2Exchange. For services to Entrepreneurship, to the community and to Philanthropy. (Nottinghamshire)

Mrs Roberta Jocelyn Narroway. Headteacher, Valley Primary School, Solihull. For services to Primary Education. (Solihull)

Mrs Mary Nelson. For services to The Girl Guides Association in Lincolnshire. (Waltham)

Mrs Anne-Maria Newham. Director, Nursing, Allied Health Professionals and Quality, Lincolnshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Nursing. (Rothley, Leicestershire)

Col Martin Newman, DL. Chairman, Jewish Committee for HM Forces. For voluntary service to Armed Forces Personnel. (Greater Manchester)

Alistair McInnes Newton. For services to People with Neurological Illnesses particularly Dystonia. (St Andrews)

Robert Nicholas. Head of Residence and Safety HM Prison Whitemoor. For public service. (Hertfordshire)

Firefighter Ronald Gordon Nicholl. For services to the Northern Ireland Fire and Rescue Service. (Antrim)

Ms Lindsay Nicholson. Formerly Editor, Good Housekeeping. For services to Journalism and Equal Opportunities. (Berkhamsted)

Michael John Wray Nield. For services to Mountain Rescue and to the community in Greater Manchester. (Ashton-under-Lyme)

Ray Noble. Director Solar BIPV Ltd. For services to Renewable Energy. (Consett)

Miss Helen Osbourne. Principal and chief executive Officer Learner Services manager, Friend's Centre, Brighton. For services to Adult Education. (Haywards Heath)

Mrs Jill Parker. For services to the Magistracy and to the community in Wolverhampton and South Staffordshire. (Pattingham)

Mrs Gargi Patel. Immigration Officer, Immigration Enforcement, Home Office. For services to Community Engagement and Immigration. (London)

Roger John Paterson. Chairman, Rural West Sussex Partnership. For voluntary service to the Rural Economy. (West Sussex)

Albert Pattison. Founder Hart Biologicals. For services to International Trade and to the Economy in the Tees Valley and to charity. (Hartlepool)

Ian Timothy Payne. For services to the Hospitality and Pub Industry. (Buntingford)

Nicholas Hale Peacey. Chair Lauderdale House. For services to the Arts and to the community in North London. (London)

Brian Thomas Pearce. For services to the Environment and to the community in Peterborough. (Peterborough)

Miss Philippa Mary Pearce. Conservator British Museum. For services to Metal Conservation. (London)

Mrs Carol Anne Peckham. General manager, Community Health Services, Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust. For services to the NHS and to voluntary service to Education in Gambia. (Swadlincote)

Ms Simone Pennant. Founder, The TV Collective Community Interest Company. For services to Diversity in the Media. (London)

Mrs Ingrid Perry. Founder, Teeth Team, Yorkshire and Humber. For services to Education and Improvement of Dental Health in Young People. (Leven)

John Lindskog Phibbs. Founder Capability Brown Festival. For services to Landscape Architecture. (Chalford)

Paul Warren Pickhaver. Director, Kingston Foodbank. For services to the Food Bank and to the community in Kingston-upon-Thames. (Surrey)

Mrs Tracy Pike. Chief executive Officer of Carmarthenshire Youth and Children's Association. For services to Young People. (Llanelli)

William Fox-Pitt. Equestrian. For services to Equestrianism. (Sturminster Newton, Dorset)

Nigel Porter. Senior Executive Officer, Ministry of Defence. For services to Defence. (London)

John Powell. For services to The Royal Naval Lifeboat Institute and to the community in Bournemouth Dorset. (Bournemouth)

John Colin Powell. National Lead End of Life Care, Association of Directors of Adult Social Services. For services to Vulnerable People. (Essex)

Mrs Rosemary Powell. For voluntary service to the Royal British Legion Poppy Appeal. (London)

Dr Parameswara Venugopal Prasad. General Practitioner Panton Surgery, Holywell. For services to the community in Holywell. (Hoole, Cheshire)

Ms Christine Mary Primrose. For services to Gaelic Music to Culture and to Education in Scotland and Internationally. (Isle of Skye)

Ms Lucy Prior. International Trade director Rail Alliance. For services to Rail Exports. (Sheffield)

Ms Jeannette Lynne Pritchard. Founder and Chair, Brand Amplifier. For services to Buisness and Entrepreneurship. (London)

Miss Gillian Pyatt. For services to the community in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire. (Gloucestershire)

Ms Barbara Quartey. Principal Insights Independent School and Skills Academy, West Ealing, London. For services to Children with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities. (London)

Ms Patricia Quigley. Head of School The Garden School. For services to Education. (London)

Mrs Sarah Therese Quinlan. Chief executive, Children's Heartbeat Trust. For services to Children and Young People with Congenital Heart Disease. (Whitehead, Antrim)

Mrs Jane Teresa Raca. For services to Mencap and to those with Disabilities and to their Families. (Birmingham)

Mohammed Mushtaq Raj. Senior Executive Officer Home Office. For services to Race Equality, to Diversity and to Inclusion. (Leeds, West Yorkshire)

Michael Richardson Ratcliffe. For services to Business and to the community in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire. (Cheltenham)

Dr Rabindra Vishanka Ratnasuriya. General Practitioner, Lordswood Medical Group and Chair, Our Health Partnership. For services to General Practice in the West Midlands. (Birmingham)

Miss Joan Margaret Redfern. For services to The Girl Guides Association in Staffordshire. (Burton on Trent)

Ms Suzanne Redfern. For services to Women's Cricket in the UK and Abroad. (Birmingham)

Ms Rosamund Mary Reece. For services to the Magistracy and to the community in Ealing London. (London)

Steven Reynolds. For services to the UK Cinema Industry. (Gwent)

Dr John Martin Ribchester. Senior and Executive Partner Whitstable Medical Practice, NHS Canterbury and Coastal Clinical Commissioning Group. For services to General Practice. (Whitstable)

Mrs Christine Vanessa Richards. Head of, Radiotherapy Services, Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells NHS Trust. For services to Cancer Patients. (Maidstone)

Mrs Eileen Maria Richards. Founder and managing director, Eileen Richards Recruitment Ltd. For services to the Promotion of Female Entrepreneurship. (Leicestershire)

Gordon Robertson. For services to Disability Athletics. (Glasgow)

Miss Gillian Mary Robinson. Formerly consultant Nurse for Acquired Brain Injuries Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Children's Nursing. (Swinton)

Orphy Everton Robinson. Musician and Composer. For services to Music. (Hertfordshire)

Ms Simone Roche. Founder, Northern Power Women. For services to Gender Equality in the North of England. (Liverpool)

Mrs Victoria Rockingham. For services to the Environment and to voluntary service. (Stockport)

Special Chief Officer Michael Richard Rogers. West Midlands Police. For services to Policing and to the community in the West Midlands. (Wolverhampton)

Dennis George Rollins. Jazz trombonist. For services to Music. (Nottinghamshire)

Royston Clive Rooke. National Volunteering Adviser, St John Ambulance. For voluntary service to First Aid. (Bristol)

Mrs Diane Margaret Ross. For services to the Scouting Movement and to the community in Edinburgh. (Edinburgh)

John Graham Russell Rudd, DL. For services to Schools and to the community in Derbyshire. (Hilton)

Mrs Carol Francis Russell. Chair, HOPE for Autism. For services to Speech and Language Therapy Education, to Autism Awareness and to charity. (Airdrie)

Dr David Adrian Sanders, TD. For services to charity and to the community in Hampshire and Sussex. (Hampshire)

Ms Nabila Sattar. For charitable and political services. (London)

Stephen Mark Saunders. For services to the Telecommunications Industry and Business. (Lewes)

Philip Richard Saunderson, JP. For services to Heritage to charity and to the community in Northamptonshire. (Northamptonshire)

Ms Barbara Elizabeth Schonhofer. Chief executive Schonhofer and Founder, Insurance Supper Club. For services to Women in Business. (Tenterden)

Mahesh Seewoodhary. Senior Lecturer, Adult Nursing, University of West London. For services to Opthalmology Nurse Training and to Sickle Cell Awareness. (London)

Ms Rosamund Jane Sellars. For services to the Arts and to the community in the North of England. (Clifford, West Yorkshire)

William Raymond Semple. Founder, Moyola Precision Engineering Ltd. For services to Economic Development in Northern Ireland. (Londonderry)

Dr Farnaaz Sharief. Governing Body Elected Clinical Member NHS Medway Clinical Commissioning Group. For services to Mental Health. (Chatham)

Mrs Christine Stanley Shaw. Governor, Eaglesfield Paddle CE Academy. For services to Education. (Cockermouth)

Douglas Shearer. Principal Social Worker Team Fostering, North Shields, Tyne and Wear. For services to Social Work. (Chester-le-Street)

Robert Hugh Sheldon. For services to the community in Thorpe on the Hill, Lincolnshire. (Thorpe on the Hill)

Mrs Stephanie Barbara Shields. For services to Conservation Heritage. (Grantham)

Victor Paul Silvester. For charitable and political services. (Oldbury)

Mrs Susan Simpson. Training manager, WorldSkills UK. For services to the WorldSkills Competition. (Southport)

Ronald Kenneth Sloan. Chairman SportsAid Scotland. For services to Sport and to charity. (Edinburgh)

John Robert Smart. For services to the Construction and Property Industries. (Peterson-super-Ely, Vale of Glamorgan)

Mrs Lorraine Smith. Station manager, South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue. For public service. (Holmfirth)

Mrs Keela Shackell-Smith. Advisor, Environment Agency. For services to Equality in the Workplace. (St Neots)

Detective Constable Gillian Sheila Squires. West Midlands Police. For services to Policing. (Warwickshire)

Dr Christopher Paul Stanley. General Practitioner Partner, Larwood Health Partnership, Nottinghamshire. For services to General Practice. (North Wheatley)

Paul Timothy Stanley. Export vice president for Europe MBDA UK Ltd. For services to Defence Exports. (Letchworth)

Martin John Steeden. Volunteer, Swanage Lifeboat Station, Royal National Lifeboat Institution. For services to Maritime Safety. (Swanage)

Ian Charles Stevens. Suicide Prevention Programme manager, Network Rail. For services to Vulnerable People. (London)

Mark Ian Stirling. Senior Investigation Officer National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement and to the Investigation of Serious and Organised Crime. (Bedfordshire)

Mrs Olive Strachan. Founder, Olive Strachan Resources. For services to Exports in Professional Business Services. (Greater Manchester)

Ms Moya Denise Elizabeth Sutton. Director, Education and Partnerships, Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Nursing. (Aughton, Lancashire)

Ms Vanessa Swann. For services to British Craft in London. (London)

Mrs Marie Sweeney. Front Line manager, HM Revenue and Customs. For services to the Deaf and Hard of Hearing. (Preston)

Mrs Ingrid Swenson. Director, Peer. For services to the Arts in East London. (London)

Timothy John Swift. Councillor, Calderdale Council. For services to Local Government and to Regeneration in Halifax, West Yorkshire. (Halifax)

Robert William Robertson Tait. For services to the Promotion of Music in Scotland and to voluntary service in Falkirk. (Polmont, Stirling and Falkirk)

Dr Opinderjit Kaur Takhar. Director Centre for Sikh and Punjabi Studies, University of Wolverhampton. For services to Higher Education and to the community in Wolverhampton. (Derbyshire)

Ms Penelope Jane Tassoni. Early Years Author and Trainer and Honorary president, Professional Association for Childcare and Early Years. For services to Early Years Education. (St Leonards-on-Sea, Sussex)

Mrs Alpana Taylor. Choreographer. For services to South Asian Dance. (Wisbech)

George Edward Taylor. Region and Wing Treasurer, London and South East, RAF Air Cadets. For voluntary service to Young People. (Birchanger, Essex)

Melvyn Roy Teare. For services to the community and to local charities in St Albans. (Driffield)

David John Thompson. For services to Young People and to the community in Cornwall. (Bodmin)

Stuart Joseph Thompson. For services to charity and to the community in Gretna and Annan Dumfries and Galloway. (Gretna)

Anthony Hugh Thornton. For services to Music in Yorkshire. (London)

Mrs Charlotte Tilbury. Make-up Artist and Entrepreneur. For services to the Beauty and Cosmetics Industry. (London)

Mrs Deborah Blanchard-Tobin. Higher Executive Officer, Work Coach manager, Department for Work and Pensions. For services to Welfare and voluntary service in Merseyside. (Huyton, Merseyside)

Stanley John Charles Todd. Helmsman, London Lifeboat Station, Royal National Lifeboat Institution. For services to Maritime Safety. (Brighton)

Keith Graham Tordoff. Owner and Proprietor, Oldest Sweet Shop in the World, Pateley Bridge, and Chair, Nidderdale Chamber of Trade. For services to Business and to the community in Nidderdale. (Harrogate)

Mrs Judith Margaret Totten. Managing director of Upstream Working Capital Ltd. For services to Economic Development in Northern Ireland. (Bangor)

Constable Hubert Treasure. West Midlands Police. For services to Policing. (Dudley)

Mrs Fiona Treharne. Chief of Staff, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP. For services to Business and to charity. (London)

Roger Edward James Turp. For services to the Lancashire Infantry Museum and Young People in Garstang and Preston. (Preston)

Walli Ullah. Founder and director EMU Films Ltd. For services to the Economy and Overseas Investment. (Greater Manchester)

Alexander Henry Usborne. Co-founder, 104 Films Ltd. For services to Exports in Media and Promoting Disability in Film. (Sheffield)

Ms Alison Jane Vaughan. Chair of Governors, Rhodes Avenue Primary School, Haringey. For services to Education. (London)

Jagdev Singh Virdee. For services to statistics and to the Sikh community. (Gravesend)

Ms Jannine Waddell. Managing director, Waddell Media. For services to Independent Television Production in Northern Ireland. (Co Down)

Nicholas Anthony Wainwright. Chairman, Boodles. For services to UK Jewellery Exports and to charitable fundraising. (Heswall, Merseyside)

Miss Janet Waldron. Head Teacher, Pontarddulais Comprehensive School, Swansea. For services to Education. (Neath Port Talbot)

Michael Wall. Chair of Governors, Federation of Moorlands and Park Lane Primary Schools. For services to Education. (Reading)

Mrs Anita Pamela Wallace. Chair, Lymphoedema Support Network. For services to Lymphoedema Awareness and to Patient Support. (Loudwater)

Ms Louise Wallwein. Poet, Playwright and Spoken Word Performer. For services to Music. (Greater Manchester)

Mrs Maxine Elizabeth Walton. Assistant director, EU Turkey Agreement Liaison, Athens, Home Office. For services to Border Security. (Huddersfield)

Dr Nigel Frank Watson. General Practitioner, The Arnewood Practice, Hampshire. For services to General Practice. (New Milton)

Mrs Ann Marr Wells. World War One Commemorations Officer, Scottish Government. For services to the History of World War One in Scotland. (Edinburgh)

Mrs Hilary Anne Wiggans. Tayside Regional In-Court Adviser, Dundee Citizens' Advice Bureau. For services to the Justice System in Scotland and to the community in Dundee. (Dundee)

Alexander Craig Wilkie, DL. Formerly Business Development and Relationship director, Muller Dairy. For services to the British and International Dairy Industry and to the community in Lanarkshire. (Blantyre, Lanarkshire)

Michael James Worthington Williams. For services to Automotive History. (Newcastle Emlyn)

Miss Kim Ann Williamson. Inclusion and Community Engagement manager, Crown Prosecution Service, Cymru, Wales. For services to Law and Order. (Energlyn, Caerphilly)

Gary Wilmot. Actor. For services to Drama and to charity. (Buckinghamshire)

Henry Richard Wilson. Project director REACH Community Projects. For services to the community in Haverhill, Suffolk. (Haverhill)

Ronald Bruce Wilson. Formerly Company secretary Border Union Agricultural Society. For services to Agriculture and to the community in the Scottish Borders and North Northumberland. (Kelso)

Mrs Hilda Margaret Winter. Proprietor, Dan Winter's House, Loughgall. For services to the community in County Armagh. (Portadown)

Denis Woulfe. Formerly Partner Deloitte UK. For services to Women and Equality. (Cheltenham)

Frederick Young. Formerly chief executive, The Scottish Schools Education Research Centre. For services to STEM Education in Scotland. (Kinross)

Mrs Mandy Elizabeth Young. For services to Young People in Corby, Northamptonshire. (Corby)

Mrs Susan Tracy Abnett. Childminder and lately Volunteer, Professional Association for Childcare and Early Years. For services to Early Years Education. (Barnsley)

Mrs Frances Acton. For services to the community in Barrow Upon Soar, Leicestershire. (Leicestershire)

Mrs Joy Adams. Volunteer, Edenholme Care Home. For services to Older People in Stonehaven, Aberdeenshire. (Stonehaven)

Ms Pavandeep Ahluwalia. Henna Artist. For services to the Beauty Industry. (Essex)

Mrs Patricia Ainger. For services to the community in Daventry, Northamptonshire. (Northamptonshire)

Andrew Davidson Ainslie. Pipe Major Duns Pipe Band. For services to Music and to the community in Berwickshire. (Duns)

Dr Frank MacDonald Akerman. Trustee and lately Honorary secretary Romsey and District Society Buildings Preservation Trust. For services to Conservation in Romsey, Hampshire. (Romsey)

James Lawrence Allen. For services to the community in Byfleet, Surrey. (Byfleet)

Mrs Siobhan Mary Allister. For charitable services. (Fermanagh)

Donald William Andrews. For services to the community in Pewsey, Wiltshire. (Pewsey)

Peter John Angus. For services to the community in Dingwall, Ross-shire. (Dingwall)

Mrs Jane Asher. For voluntary service to Swimming. (London)

Mrs Gina Lorraine Awad. For voluntary service to those with Dementia in Devon. (Exeter)

Mrs Joyce Angela Jasmine Azis. For services to the community in Petworth, West Sussex. (West Sussex)

Lyndon Howard Baglin. For services to Brass Band Music. (Chepstow)

Archibald Campbell Baird. Curator Heritage of Golf Museum, Gullane. For services to the History of Golf. (Aberlady, East Lothian)

Gordon Balmforth. For services to Music and to charity in Kirklees. (Huddersfield)

Ms Olga Margaret Bannister. Branch head, South Yorkshire Motor Neurone Disease Association. For services to those with Motor Neurone Disease and to their Carers. (Sheffield)

Raymond Barden. For services to the community in Pett, East Sussex. (Hastings)

John Gerald Barley. For charitable services in Berkshire. (Finchampstead)

Michael Frederick Barnes. For services to Charitable Fundraising and to the community in Haslemere, Surrey. (Surrey)

Robert Sydney Barnes. Trainer and Parent consultant Adoption UK. For services to Adoption. (Carlisle)

Mrs Iva Dorothy Barr. For services to Charitable Fundraising in Bedford. (Bedfordshire)

Laurence John Bates. For services to Young People in Lancashire. (Leyland)

Mrs Margaret Amethe Napier Baxter. For services to People with Sight Impairment and to the community in Stowmarket, Suffolk. (Needham Market)

John Berry. For services to Young People in the UK and Abroad and to the community in Northern Ireland. (Porthcawl)

Joseph Henry Berry. For services to Music and to the community in Newry, County Down. (Newry)

Mrs Joan Mary Bishton. For services to the community in Wigan. (Wigan)

Firefighter Denis Henry Black. For services to the Northern Ireland Fire and Rescue Service in County Tyrone. (Cookstown)

Mrs Cynthia Lesley Bond. For services to the community in Chippenham, Wiltshire. (Marshfield)

Mrs Ann Elizabeth Boorman. Founding Member, Truro Homeless Action Group. For services to Homeless People in Truro, Cornwall. (Truro)

James Arthur Bowron. For services to Cricket in County Antrim. (Antrim)

Colin Boyd. For services to Young People in West Allotment Northumberland. (Alnwick)

Arnold Joseph Bradbury. For services to charity and to the community in Barnstaple, North Devon. (Barnstaple)

Miss Mary Brennan. For services to the community in Cross Green, Leeds. (Leeds)

Brian Robert Budge. World Wars Historian. For services to Military History in Orkney. (Kirkwall)

Michael Francis Burke. Peripatetic Caseworker Staffordshire County Council. For services to Children and Young People with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities. (Staffordshire)

Mrs Janette Elizabeth Burt. Volunteer, Dementia UK. For services to those with Dementia and to their Families. (Hertfordshire)

Mrs Gwendoline Butler. Founder, Bunny Burrows Rescue. For services to Animal Welfare and Rescue in North Yorkshire. (Richmond)

Miss Doreen Mary Malize Calder. For services to Equestrianism and to the community in Berwickshire. (Duns)

Leveson Granville Andrew Campbell. For services to the Church of England and to the Community in East Suffolk. (Aldeburgh)

Enrico Fortunato Capaldi. For services to charity and to the community on Teesside. (North Yorkshire)

John Maurice Chambers. For services to Equestrian Sport. (Omagh)

Robert Samuel Charleston. Volunteer Rescue Officer St Ives Coastguard. For voluntary service to the Coastguard Rescue Team. (Cornwall)

Roger Mason Charnley. For services to Business and to the community in Burley-in-Wharfedale, West Yorkshire. (Ilkley)

Mrs Anne Fiona Cherriman. Governor's secretary and Management Co-ordinator, HM Prison Stafford. For services to charity and to the community in Stafford. (Staffordshire)

Keith John Clarke. For services to charity and to the community in Northern Ireland. (Dungannon)

Special Chief Officer Benjamin Peter Clifford. British Transport Police. For services to Policing. (Surrey)

Miss Christabel Cofie. Programme Support Officer. For charitable service in the UK and Ghana. (Stevenage)

Mrs Rosemary Cole. Director of Music, Tamar Valley Male Voice Choir and Accompanist, South Hams Folk Dancing Club. For services to the Performing Arts in South West England. (Kingsbridge)

Mrs Carol May Coleman. For services to Amateur Theatre and to the community in Rhiwbina. (Rhiwbina)

David Kenneth Compton. Volunteer Warden Old Winchester Hill National Nature Reserve, Hampshire. For services to Nature Conservation. (Petersfield)

David Conder. Volunteer. For charitable services. (London)

Ms Jessica Helen Cook. Founding director Can You Hear Us. For voluntary services to Neurofibromatosis Type 2 Patients. (Halesworth)

Mrs Lowri Ann Cope. For services to the community in Helmshore, Lancashire. (Helmshore)

James John Corcoran. For services to charity in the UK and Abroad. (Widnes)

Mrs Elizabeth Margaret Costello. For services to the Arts and to charity in the community in Leigh, Greater Manchester. (Astley)

Hugh William Crawford. Telephony Adviser. For services to the community in County Durham through Martial Arts. (Peterlee)

Mrs Colette Margaret Catherine Cunningham. Director, Scottish North American Business Council and Events manager, CBI Scotland. For services to Business and Public Service. (Johnstone)

Stewart Dakers. For services to Disadvantaged People in Farnham, Surrey. (Farnham)

Mrs Joan Elizabeth Darbyshire. For charitable services. (West Cross, Swansea)

Ms Susanna Daus. Service manager Adoption, Fostering and Contact, Islington Borough Council, London. For services to Adoption and Fostering. (London)

Mrs Christine Charlotte Louise Mathez-Davey. Chairman, Friends of Kenwood. For services to the Preservation of Historic Houses. (Godalming)

Wyndham Richard Davidson. Swimming Coach. For services to Swimming Coaching in Shropshire and the West Midlands. (Bridgnorth)

Mrs Elsie May Davies. For services to Disadvantaged People in County Durham. (Durham)

John Malcolm Davies. For services to the community in Waltham Forest, London. (London)

Mrs Margaret Ann Davies. Co-founder and Trustee, South Bucks Down's Syndrome Group. For services to those with Down's Syndrome. (Marlow)

Mrs Sharon Davies. Senior Executive assistant, Health and Social Services Department, Welsh Government. For public service. (Pontypridd)

Mrs Eluned Margaret Ramsey Clifton-Davies. First Aid Trainer and Assessor, St John Ambulance Wales. For voluntary service to First Aid Training. (Cardiff)

Stephen George Davis. For services to the community in Milborne Port, Somerset. (Milborne Port)

Mrs Gladys Dawson. For services to charity and to the community in Clifton, Bedfordshire. (Bedfordshire)

Mrs Eleanor Marshall Deans. For services to the community in Londonderry. (Londonderry)

Mrs Eileen Dorothy Elsie Dilley. For services to the Women's Institute in Herefordshire. (Herefordshire)

Mrs Joan Dixon. For services to Young People Abroad and in Barnstaple, North Devon. (Barnstaple)

James William Donaldson. For services to Cricket in the community in Bristol. (St George, Bristol)

Ms Cliona Donnelly. For services to Music and Young People in Northern Ireland. (Belfast)

Robert Eric Donnison. For services to Football in Nottinghamshire. (Bestwood Village)

Mrs Susan Downer. For services to Children with Disabilities and Young People in Dorset and Somerset. (Dorset)

Mrs Mary Cleland Bilsland Duckett. For voluntary service in Larkhall, Hamilton and South Lanarkshire. (Larkhall)

Councillor Lisa Ann Duffy. For services to the community in Ramsey, Cambridgeshire. (Huntingdon)

Michael John Duggan. For services to Disability School Sport. (Stoneygate)

Mrs Marie Ann Dunbar. Playgroup Leader, St Columba's Playgroup, Annan. For services to Early Years Education and to the community in Dumfries and Galloway. (Annan)

Mrs Christine Dunster. For services to the community in Solihull, West Midlands. (Solihull)

Ms Yvette Suzanne Duval. BAME Mental Health manager Diverse Cymru. For services to the BAME community in Wales. (Cardiff)

Anthony Clive Ebbutt. For services to charity and to the community in Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire. (Burton upon Trent)

Mrs Sarah Ann Edwards. Volunteer Engagement Officer, Professional Association for Childcare and Early Years. For services to Early Years Education. (Retford)

Mrs Caroline Dorothy Evans. For charitable services in Dorking, Surrey. (Dorking)

Mrs Hilary Pauline Evans. For services to the community in Burnham, Buckinghamshire. (Buckinghamshire)

Mrs Jane Alison Ewing. Office manager, Galleywall Primary City of London Academy. For services to the community in Bermondsey, London. (London)

Samuel James Fanaroff. Founder, The Sussex Guild. For services to Craftspeople in Sussex. (Westham)

Lowry Alexander Ferguson. For services to the community in County Tyrone. (Cookstown)

Miss Emily Jane Findlay. For services to Cancer Awareness and to charity in Orkney and the North of Scotland. (Orphir, Orkney)

Jeffrey Thomas Fletcher. For services to the community in Telford, Shropshire. (Telford)

Mrs Brenda Fogg. For services to Homeless People in Llandudno, Wales. (Llandudno)

Ms Emma Louisa Ford. For services to Riding for the Disabled in Buckinghamshire. (Berkshire)

Mrs Dorothy Mary Fowler. For services to Young People and to the community in Sawtry, Cambridgeshire. (Peterborough)

Andrew Paul Gilliat. For services to the community in Shobdon, Herefordshire. (Breinton)

Mrs Malgorzata Kazimiera Goddard. Executive Officer, Polish Records Section, Army Personnel Centre. For services to Defence and to the Polish Veterans' community. (London)

Philip Gomersall. For services to Horticulture in Yorkshire. (Leeds)

Mrs Kathryn Gower. For services to the community in Cross Roads with Lees and Haworth, West Yorkshire. (West Yorkshire)

Edward Leszek Gradosielski. For services to Beekeeping and to voluntary service. (Nazeing)

Mrs Isabel Ann Grant. Formerly Finance and Administration assistant, Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce. For services to the Aberdeen Business Community. (Kemnay, Aberdeenshire)

Mrs Jane Jeanie Jenny Gray. For services to the Scouting Movement and to the community in Newmachar and Aberdeen. (Newmachar, Aberdeenshire)

Mrs Margaret Ellen Gray. For services to the Ulster Garden Scheme. (Ballywalter)

William Arthur Gribben. For services to the Ulster Branch Irish Rugby Football Union and to Disability Sports. (Armagh)

Mrs Jacqueline Dawn Haggerwood. For voluntary and charitable services to the community in Clapham, Bedfordshire. (Clapham)

Special Constable Russell Alan Hall. Special Constable Devon and Cornwall Police. For services to Policing and the community in Fowey and Looe, Cornwall. (Lostwithiel)

Robert Terence Halliday. For services to the community in Anfield, Liverpool. (Liverpool)

Mrs Evelyn Elizabeth Hanna. For services to the community in County Down. (Castlewellan)

Ms Frances Hannaway. For services to the community in Northern Ireland. (Belfast)

Dr Nadine Hachach-Haram. Plastic Surgery Registrar NHS Clinical Entrepreneur, Founder of Proximie. For services to Surgery and to Innovation. (London)

Miss Angela Harding. For services to Girlguiding and Young Girls in Sefton, Merseyside. (Liverpool)

Mrs Jennifer Anne Harrison. Chair of Trustees, Birmingham Vernon Unit, Sea Cadet Corps. For voluntary service to Young People and to the community in Birmingham. (West Midlands)

Mrs Margaret Elise Hassall. For services to the community in Stafford. (Little Haywood)

Mrs Maureen Hawe. For services to the community in Castlecaulfield, County Tyrone. (Tyrone)

Mrs Barbara Fay Hawkins. For services to charity and to the community in Port Isaac, Cornwall. (Port Isaac)

Gordon Hawkins. For services for the Boys' Brigade and to the community in West Moor, Tyne and Wear. (Newcastle upon Tyne)

Professor Josephine Angela Haythornthwaite. Convenor Board of Trustees, Maryhill Integration Network. For services to Asylum Seekers in Glasgow. (Glasgow)

Mrs Ada Anna Haywood. For voluntary service to Cancer Research UK. (Newcastle-under-Lyme)

Scott Heath. For services to LGBT community. (London)

James Somerville Henderson. For services to the Royal Scottish Pipe Band Association (Northern Ireland) and to the community in Ballinamallard and Trillick. (Fermanagh)

Mrs Margaret Iris Henderson. For services to the community in Northern Ireland. (Antrim)

Mrs Maureen Hindle. Volunteer, Patient Experience Team, Mid Essex Hospital Services NHS Trust. For services to Patients and to the community in Essex. (Chelmsford)

Thomas Edwin Hirst. For services to the community in Wakefield West Yorkshire. (Chester)

Mrs Eleanor Scott Hogarth. Founder and manager, Charity for Care Shop, Kelso. For services to charity in the Scottish Borders. (Kelso)

Mrs Patricia Irene Holder. For charitable service to Save the Children. (Dingwall)

Miss Jennifer Mary Holloway. Volunteer Acocks Green Badgers, St John Ambulance. For voluntary service to First Aid Training and to the community in Birmingham. (Birmingham)

Stephen Andrew Holmes. Recovery Worker Intensive Team, Avon and Wiltshire Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust. For services to Mental Health. (Swindon)

Mrs Linda Anne Howe. For services to the community in Honington and Sapiston, Suffolk. (Bury St Edmunds)

Roger Charles Hudd. For services to charity and to the Arts. (Porthcawl)

Edward Hudson. Founder and chairman Bibles for Children. For services to Education. (Bath)

David Raymond Humphreys. For services to Education and to Geology. (Deeside, Flintshire)

Ivan Hunter. National Charter and Rules Advisor, The Royal Naval Association. For voluntary service to Naval Personnel. (Newtownabbey, Antrim)

Christopher Paul Illsley. For services to charity in Lincolnshire. (Waddington)

David Arthur Ireland. For services to the community in Mickleham, Surrey. (Dorking)

Mrs Margaret James. For services to the Jubilee Sailing Trust and to the community in Olveston, Bristol. (Olveston, Bristol)

Michael Ebrahim Jeewa. For services to Asian People with Disabilities in London. (London)

William Henry Gerwyn Jenkins. For services to the Samaritans in Swansea. (Llanelli)

James Richard Johnston. For services to Royal Ulster Constabulary George Cross Association, County Armagh. (Armagh)

Charles Byron Jones. For services to charity and to the community in Bristol. (Bristol)

Mrs Frances Kilgour McFarlane Jones. Founder and lately Organiser, Coeliac Group, Glasgow. For services to People with Coeliac Disease. (Bearsden)

Mrs Pamela Susan Jones. For services to Disabled Children, Young People and their Families in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire. (Drybrook)

Mrs Susan Jones. For services to Foster Care Children and to the Church. (Lytham St Annes)

Mrs Courtney Christine Pamela Saunders-Jones. Volunteer, The Connor Saunders Foundation. For services to Young People in Brighton and Hove. (Brighton)

Frank Jordan. Honorary president Menzieshill Whitehall Swimming and Water Polo Club. For services to Swimming and Water Polo in Dundee. (Dundee)

Michael John Jukes. Volunteer Community First Responder South Central Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Emergency Response and to Fundraising. (Bransgore)

Mrs Noreen Elizabeth Kavanagh. For services to the community in Northern Ireland. (Antrim)

Mrs Dorothy Kay. For services to the community in Dane Valley, Cheshire. (Rushton Spencer, Macclesfield)

Leslie Kay. For services to Older People in the Jewish community in Manchester. (Hale)

Ewen Grant Kellas. For services in the community in Horsmonden, Kent. (Kent)

Dr Colin Kenny. For services to Diabetes Care in Northern Ireland. (Dromore)

Professor Ralph Charles Kester. For services to Rugby Union Football in Yorkshire. (Leeds)

Mrs Georgina Valerie Kitchener. For services to Sport in Surrey through the Pony Club. (Reigate)

Alastair Knowles. For services to the community in Musselburgh. (Musselburgh)

Mrs Diana Clare Knox. For services to the community in Wrotham, Kent. (Sevenoaks)

Mrs Gillian Lake. For services to the Voluntary Sector in Bedfordshire. (Brickhill)

Samuel David Briers Larmour. For services to Boxing and to Community Relations. (Co Down)

Mrs Hazel Latus. For voluntary service to the Arts in Bognor Regis. (Bognor Regis)

Robert John Lawrence. For political and public service. (Rhiwbina, Cardiff)

Mrs Maureen Janis Lee. For services to Young People and to the community in Chelmsford, Essex. (Essex)

Mrs Susan Lewis. Paediatric Epilepsy Specialist Nurse, County Durham and Darlington NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Nursing. (Chester-le-Street)

Mrs Sylvia Lewis. For services to Charitable Fundraising in Merseyside. (Rainhill)

Soorendra Lingiah. Chair Minority Ethnic Group for All, Kingston Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. For services to BAME Patients. (Fleet)

Mrs Ann Elizabeth Liverton. For services to Families, to Children and to the community in East Devon. (Sidmouth)

Miss Margaret Kathleen Livingston. Secretary Bronte Society, Irish Section. For services to Literary Culture in Northern Ireland. (Craigavon)

Ms Jennifer Elizabeth Sara Livingstone. For services to the community in County Armagh. (Armagh)

Mrs Maureen Frances Lloyd. For services to Older People and to the community in Chippenham, Wiltshire. (Wiltshire)

Ms Patricia Lock. Senior Clerical Officer, School of History, Anthropology, Philosophy and Politics, Queen's University Belfast. For services to the community in Northern Ireland. (Carryduff)

Mrs Margaret Rose Lodge. For services to the community in Bishop Monkton, North Yorkshire. (Harrogate)

John Herbert Lowe. Trustee Institution of Mechanical Engineers and the Museum of Power. For services to STEM Education. (Chelmsford)

Ms Charlotte Elizabeth MacDonald. For services to the Special Olympics and to Riding for the Disabled. (Whitecairns, Aberdeenshire)

Mrs Rosemary MacDonald. For services to the community in Wiltshire. (Wiltshire)

Mrs Diana Clark MacIntosh. Chair, Save the Children, Helensburgh. For services to charity. (Helensburgh)

Tom Maddison. For services to the community in Great Ayton, North Yorkshire. (Great Ayton)

Stephen Maden. For services to Blind and Partially Sighted People in Pendle, Lancashire. (Nelson)

Dr Nishma Manek. General Practitioner Trainee and Founder Next Generation GP. For services to General Practitioner Leadership Development. (Cambridge)

Miss Margaret Rose Marley. For voluntary service to the community in Londonderry. (Londonderry)

Mrs Elizabeth Marshall. For services to the community in Great and Little Chesterford, Essex. (Essex)

Ms Sarah Marzaioli. Team Administrator Speech and Language Therapy Department, East Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust. For services to Speech and Language Therapy. (Hastings)

Tahir Masood. For services to Young People to the community in Peterborough. (Peterborough)

John David Mathers. Proprietor Newforge House, Magheralin. For services to Hospitality and Tourism in Northern Ireland. (Craigavon)

Mrs Sandra Fenella Matlow. For services to the community in South Manchester. (Altrincham)

Mrs Cecilia Rosalind Giselle Denlegh-Maxwell. For services to the community in Worcestershire. (Worcestershire)

Kenneth McChlery. Administrative assistant Border Force, Glasgow. For public service and to the community in Glasgow. (Glasgow)

Dr Kelvin John McCracken. For voluntary service to the community in Ballynahinch Northern Ireland. (Co Down)

Mrs Karen Anne McCurry. Manager, Multiple Sclerosis Centre, Mid Argyll. For services to Healthcare and charity. (Lochgilphead)

William Hugh McFetridge. For services to Sport. (Garvagh, Co Londonderry)

Mrs Dorothy Ann McGovern. For services to the community in Folkestone, Kent. (Kent)

Francis Ashcroft McKnight. Treasurer Lancashire Branch, SSAFA. For voluntary service to ex-Service Personnel the Royal Naval Lifeboat Institute and to charity. (Thornton-Cleveleys)

Mrs Deborah McLean. Honorary president, Save The Children Grampian Branch. For services to the community in Aberdeenshire and to charity. (Alford, Aberdeenshire)

Mrs Mary McLean. For services to the community in Northern Ireland. (Lisburn)

Mrs Linda Davidson McLeod. Chair, Breathe Easy Clackmannanshire. For services to those with Lung Conditions. (Alloa)

James Ronald McMurray. For services to Education. (Lurgan)

Dr Derek McPherson. For services to Education and to charity. (Monmouthshire)

James McQuade. For services to Music in the community in Sleaford, Lincolnshire. (Sleaford)

Mrs Vijya Mehta. For services to Heritage in the Public Sector. (Middlesex)

Stephen Merredew. For services to the community in New Addington, Croydon. (Surrey)

John Barry Metcalfe. For services to the community in Mickleton, Gloucestershire. (Mickleton)

Ms Rosalind Jane Miller. Development director Islington Faiths Forum. For services to Interfaith Cohesion in the London Borough of Islington. (Dorchester)

Mrs Cathleen Anne Millwood. For services to the community in Stratford-Upon-Avon, Warwickshire. (Welford-on-Avon)

William Miles Morgan. For charitable services to the Bristol Aero Collection Trust. (Tockington)

Meirion Lloyd Morris. Chairman Hoddesdon Youth Centre. For services to Young People. (Hoddesdon)

Robert Morrow. For services to the community in Glenarm, County Antrim. (Glenarm)

Walter Bruce Mullan. For services to the Boys' Brigade in Stewartstown, County Tyrone. (Cookstown)

Tyler Murphy. Founder and Volunteer Tylers Trust. For services to Young People with Debilitating Illnesses and Vulnerable Families in West Sussex. (Barnham)

Mrs Christine Drusilla Neil. For services to charity in Shropshire. (Yockleton)

Mrs Jacqueline Neill. For services to Education and to the community in Northern Ireland. (Ballymena)

Mrs Sheenah Nelson. For services to Macmillan Cancer Support and to Heart charities in West Dunbartonshire and Lomond. (Alexandria, Dunbartonshire)

Mrs Jennifer Hazel Newman. For services to the community in Exmouth, Devon. (Exmouth)

Mrs Jayne Nicholls. For services to Care Standards for Patients with Learning Disabilities in Wales. (Baglan, Neath Port Talbot)

Mrs Jennifer Mary Haldane Nutt. For services to the community in Pangbourne, Tidmarsh and Sulham, Berkshire. (Reading)

Gordon Danson Oates. For services to the community in Fleetwood, Lancashire. (Fleetwood)

Ms Geraldine Ann O'Kane. For services to Peace Building and to Community Development in Whitewell, Northern Ireland. (Belfast)

Clive Owen. For services to Older People in Wales. (Taibach, Neath Port Talbot)

Mrs Anne Pack. Personal assistant to the chief executive, Hutton Institute. For services to Agricultural Research, to Scottish Culture and to charity. (Inchture, Perth and Kinross)

Alastair Paisley. For political and public service. (Edinburgh)

Trevor Palmer. For services to People with Disabilities in Wales. (Newport, Gwent)

Mrs Diane Jean Pannell. For services to Amateur Music Making in the community in Suffolk. (Haverhill)

Robert Alfred Parke. For services to the community in Eglinton County Londonderry. (Eglinton, Co Londonderry)

Mrs Patricia Ann Parker. For services to the community in Hull. (East Riding of Yorkshire)

Mrs Nicola Parry. Associate director of Nursing and head of Midwifery, Blackpool Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Midwifery. (Preston)

Mrs Ruxmani Thakorbhai Patel. Secretary, Krishna Temple. For charitable and voluntary services to the community in Bolton. (Bolton)

Thomas John Patrick. For charitable service to the community in Northern Ireland. (Cookstown)

David John Pearce. Trustee Midland Freewheelers Blood Bikes Charity. For voluntary and charitable services to Healthcare. (Cradley Heath)

Mrs Bernice Pearlman. For services to the community in Leeds, West Yorkshire. (Leeds)

Mrs Elizabeth Clark Pearson. For services to Music and Education in Lanarkshire. (Wishaw)

Mrs Pamela Mary Pearson. For services to Young People and to the community in Macclesfield, Cheshire. (Macclesfield)

Raymond Henry Peart. For services to Injured Service Personnel and to charity. (Abbeydale)

Martin James Perry. Services Officer Intellectual Property Office. For services to Intellectual Property and to charity. (Newport, Gwent)

Fylaktis Philippou. For services to Hairdressing and to the community in St James's London. (London)

Neil Ronald James Phillips. Volunteer and Fundraiser Uttoxeter Community First Responders. For services to Emergency Care. (Uttoxeter)

Mrs Rosemary Shelley Phillips. For charitable services to the local community in West Kent. (Tonbridge)

Ms Mairi McIntyre Philp. For services to the community in Comrie, Perthshire. (Crieff)

David Neil Poole. For services to the community in Pinner, Middlesex. (Pinner)

Allan James Pope. For services to Young People and to the community in Brixworth, Northamptonshire. (Northamptonshire)

Mrs Shirley Diana Potts. For services to the community in South Gloucestershire. (Staple Hill)

Dr Agimol Pradeep. Volunteer Nurse Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Organ Donation. (Ashford)

Mrs Wendy Avril Pressdee. For services to Welsh Netball. (Gower)

Miss Elizabeth Ann Price. For services to the community in Great Milton, Oxford. (Great Milton)

Mrs Janet Susan Price. For services to charity and to the community in Bewdley, Worcestershire. (Bewdley)

Terence John Henry Price. For services to the community in West Bromwich, West Midlands. (Walsall)

Miss Alison Pugh. Clinical Nurse manager Royal Gwent Hospital. For services to Haematology and Cancer Care. (Blaina, Gwent)

Roger William Pullen. Patient Experience Volunteer Northern Devon Healthcare NHS Trust. For services to the community and Patients in North Devon. (Bideford)

Kenneth John Hilary Pullin. For services to Archaeology and Heritage in Northern Ireland. (Belfast)

David Robertson Ramsay. For services to Heritage to Special Needs Education and to charity in Kincardineshire. (Stonehaven)

Mrs Maureen Reilly. Chair, Lostock Community Partnership. For services to the community in Lostock, Manchester. (Stretford)

Ms Judith Catherine Reynolds. Project director Social Enterprise. For services to Higher Education. (Exeter)

Mrs Elizabeth Rice. Piper, Moodiesburn and District Pipe Band. For services to Music Education. (Glasgow)

Mrs Mary Anne Richardson. District Nursing Sister, County Durham and Darlington NHS Foundation Trust. For services to Patient Care. (Sacriston)

Jonathan James Ridd. For services to Care Standards for Patients with Learning Disabilities in Wales. (Baglan, Neath Port Talbot)

Mrs Ruth Ridge. For services to the Gower Society and to the community in Gower. (West Cross, Swansea)

John Edward Riley. For services to the community in Chester. (Cheshire)

Matthew Ring. For services to the communities in the City of London and City Fringe. (London)

Matthew Ritchie. For services to Older People in Larne, County Antrim. (Larne)

Luke Steven Rodgers. Director and Founder Foster Focus. For services to Children and to Families. (York)

Stuart Jeffrey Rogers. Postmaster Ashburton Post Office. For services to the Post Office and to the community in Ashburton, Devon. (Newton Abbott)

Terence John Rogers. For services to the community in Saffron, Leicester. (Leicestershire)

Howard Rose. Funding and Publicity director Balsall Common Primary School, Coventry. For services to Education. (Coventry)

Mrs Barbara Rosenberg. For services to the community in Maidenhead, Berkshire. (Buckinghamshire)

Mrs Anne Elizabeth Ross. For services to Families of Young People with Special Needs. (St Albans)

Mrs Patricia Morven Roulston. Police Service of Northern Ireland. For services to Policing. (Belfast)

Mrs Diana Rudd. For services to Girlguiding and to Young People in Londonderry. (Caw, Co Londonderry)

Ralph Owen Rudden. For voluntary services to the community in Sale West, Greater Manchester. (Sale)

Mrs Anne Elizabeth Sarah Rush. For services to the community in Barnham Village, North Suffolk. (Thetford)

Mrs Pamela Ida Mable Ruthvan. Formerly Chair, Pokesdown Community Forum. For services to the community in Pokesdown, Dorset. (Bournemouth)

Abdul Aziz Sardar. For services to the community in Tower Hamlets, London. (London)

Mrs Darran Francis Saunders. Volunteer, The Connor Saunders Foundation. For voluntary service to Young People in Brighton and Hove. (Brighton)

Mrs Sheila Constance Saunders. For services to the community in Ketton and Barrowden, Rutland. (Rutland)

Alexander Derek Scott. Honorary president Angus, Fife and Perthshire, Royal British Legion Scotland. For voluntary service to ex-Service Personnel. (Arbroath)

Dr Hasmukhlal Vadilal Shah. For services to the Hindu community in Cardiff. (Penylan, Cardiff)

Mrs Pauline Bradley-Sharp. For services to the community in Hirst Wood, Shipley, West Yorkshire. (Shipley)

Gordon Robert William Simmonds. For services to the Church Community in Rochford, Essex. (Essex)

George Ronnie Simmons. For services to the community in Rye, East Sussex. (Rye)

Mrs Marie Louise Skelton. Executive Officer, Northern Ireland Court Service. For charitable and voluntary service. (Antrim)

David James Slack. For voluntary services to the community in Kent and Berkshire. (Yattendon)

Herbert William Michael Slaughter. For services to the Royal Artillery Association and to the community in Norwich, Norfolk. (Norfolk)

Mrs Elaine Sleeman. For services to Music. (Deeside, Flintshire)

Mrs Connie Smillie. Executive Officer, Programme Support to UK Aid Direct. For public and voluntary service. (East Kilbride)

Mrs Debra Elizabeth Smith. Manager, Macmillan Cancer Information and Support Centre, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Wythenshawe Hospital. For services to Nursing. (Stockport)

Lawrence Tristram Smith. For services to the community in Lewisham and Bromley, London. (Kent)

Mrs Nicola Anne Spinks. Fell Runner. For services to Sport and charity. (West Yorkshire)

Mrs Rhona Phylis Stanex. Chair and Events Organiser, The Belles of Belmont Ladies Club. For services to the community in East Belfast. (Belfast)

Mrs Caroline Steffens. For services to Vulnerable People in Devon. (Dawlish)

Allan Hamilton Stewart. Founder Team Chivas. For charitable service. (Balloch)

Andrew Francis Stimson. For services to Older People in Wandsworth, London. (London)

Garry Swann. Honorary Archivist Doncaster and Bassetlaw Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. For services to the NHS. (Doncaster)

Mrs Marie Louise Tait. Healthcare assistant, Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust. For services to Older and Mentally Ill Patients. (Nuneaton)

Mrs Sue Ann Tatham. For services to the community in Mickleham, Surrey. (Surrey)

Mrs Anne Kathleen Tattersall. For services to the community and to charity in North Devon. (Devon)

Kevin Harold Taylor. Chairman Hyde Fundraisers. For charitable service. (Droylsden)

Peter Andrew Templeman. Curriculum Technician in Carpentry and Joinery Oaklands College, Hertfordshire. For services to Technical Education. (St Albans)

Mrs Janet Thompson. Secretary, Farnborough and District Stroke/Aphasia Group. For services to Aphasia Sufferers. (Camberley)

George Markby Thornton. For services to Cross Community Relations in Bellanaleck, County Fermanagh. (Enniskillen)

Ms Jill Diana Todd. For services to the community in Tower Hamlets London. (London)

Watch Cdr Joanne Todd. Hertfordshire Fire and Rescue Service. For services to the Prince's Trust Team Programme, Hertfordshire. (Biggleswade)

Mrs Elaine Sandra Mary Trump. Volunteer, Buckinghamshire Healthcare NHS Trust. For services to Fundraising and Voluntary Support for the NHS. (Aylesbury)

Michael Gregory Tye. For services to the community in Heath and Holmewood Chesterfield, Derbyshire. (Chesterfield)

Mrs Susan Jane Veale. For services to Disabled People in Devon. (Crediton)

Mrs Anne Veck. For services to Figure Skating. (Ballymena)

David Paul Walker, JP. For services to the community in Sandwell, West Midlands. (West Midlands)

Nicholas Richard Walker. Director Puffer Preservation Trust and Skipper, the VIC 32. For services to Tourism, to Marine Heritage and to charity. (Lochgilphead)

Mrs Pauline Walker. For services to Swimming for Young People with Down's Syndrome. (Buckinghamshire)

Paul Wallace. Head Gardener Queen's University Belfast. For services to Higher Education and to the community in Belfast. (Newtownards)

Ralph James Warburton. For services to the community in Audlem Cheshire. (Audlem)

Phillip Lewis Ward. For services to the community in Bayton and Clows Top, Worcestershire. (Kidderminster)

John Watson. For services to Charitable Fundraising and to the community in West Scrafton, North Yorkshire. (North Yorkshire)

The Reverend Marina Jeffrey-Watson. For services to the Church and to the community in Westgate-on-Sea Kent. (Kent)

Mrs Charlotte Elizabeth Weir. Volunteer, Glasgow City Mission. For voluntary service in Glasgow and Arran. (Isle of Arran)

Mrs Iris Whitaker. For services to charity and to the community in Ainsdale, Merseyside. (Merseyside)

Mrs Lily Pamela Whymer. For services to the Church and to the community in Stetchworth, Cambridgeshire. (Stetchworth)

Norman John Wileman. For services to the community in Kendal, Cumbria. (Cumbria)

Joseph Ian Willgoose. Formerly Estates director University of Derby. For services to Higher Education. (Derbyshire)

Mrs Cecilia Woods. For services to the community in Bolton. (Bolton, Lancashire)

Trevor Alfred Workman. For services to the British Carillon Society and to the community in Bournville, West Midlands. (Birmingham)

Dr Stephen Graham Worrall. For charitable service in Eastern Europe. (Shrewsbury)

Mrs Leigh Yates. Chair of the Porthleven School Association of Friends, Helston. For services to Education. (Cornwall)

Mrs Shirley Yates. For services to the community in Calderdale, West Yorkshire. (Halifax)

John Samuel York. Volunteer Young Witness Service, NSPCC. For services to Children. (Co Down)

Sir Stephen Mark Jeffrey Lamport, KCVO. Receiver-General, Westminster Abbey.

Timothy Mark Hitchens, CMG, LVO. Formerly chief executive, Commonwealth Summit Unit, Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Brig Melville Stewart Jameson, CBE. Lord-Lieutenant of Perth and Kinross.

Maj Gen Martin White, CB, CBE. Lord-Lieutenant of the Isle of Wight.

Mrs Meriel Rose Afia, LVO. Lady in Waiting to Princess Alexandra, the Honourable Lady Ogilvy.

Mrs Janet Margaret Bowen. Lord-Lieutenant of Ross and Cromarty.

David Ellis Brownlow, DL. Formerly chairman, The Prince's Foundation for Building Community.

Mrs Helen Andrea Louise Cross, LVO. The Queen's Diary secretary, Royal Household.

Dame Amelia Chilcott Fawcett, DBE. Formerly chairman, The Prince of Wales's Charitable Foundation.

Sir Gregory David Green, KCMG. Chairman, The Prince's School of Traditional Arts.

Sir Brian Gammell Ivory, CBE. Formerly chairman of Dumfries House Trust.

Jonathan David Jagger, LVO. Surgeon-Oculist to The Queen.

Lt Col Grenville Shaw Johnston, OBE, TD. Lord-Lieutenant of Moray.

Mary The Lady Nicholas Gordon Lennox, LVO. Lady in Waiting to Princess Alexandra.

Satyajit Bhattacharya. Serjeant-Surgeon to the Royal Household.

Mrs Patricia Curtis, MVO. Senior Honours and Investiture Clerk, Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood.

Mrs Hannah Margaret Louise Howard. Assistant Communications secretary, Royal Household.

John Brian Pickett, MVO. Chief executive, The Duke of Edinburgh's Commonwealth Study Conferences (Australia).

Col Timothy Corran Richard Brooke Purdon, OBE. Formerly Lieutenant of the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen at Arms.

Kevin Arthur Sharp. Clerk to the West Yorkshire Lieutenancy.

Ms Mary Margaret Thomson. Formerly chairman Outward Bound International.

Mrs Laura Baker. Assistant private secretary to The Duke of Cambridge.

David William Black. Property Information manager Royal Household.

Michael Andrew Davies. Household of The Duke of York.

Gary David Ganley, RVM. Carpet Planner, Windsor Castle.

Mrs Debbie Maxine Reich Goodenough. Head Gardener, Highgrove Estate.

Miss Charlotte Jane Ingle. Executive assistant to the private secretary to The Duke of Cambridge.

Paul Roger Ludwig. Formerly The Queen's Bargemaster.

Christopher John Morton. Chief Yeoman Warder HM Tower of London.

Ms Cecily Ann Pearson, OAM. Formerly Deputy Official secretary to the Governor of Queensland.

Maj Harry Joe Pilcher. Equerry to The Prince of Wales.

Cdr Anne Gillian Sullivan. Assistant private secretary to The Princess Royal.

Martin Swift. Formerly Crown Jeweller.

Miss Sarah Elizabeth Townend. Deputy secretary Master of the Household's Department.

Mrs Julie Townsend. Personal assistant to the Legal and Records Team, Duchy of Lancaster.

Ms Jane Whaley. Domestic Bursar Cumberland Lodge.

Ms Helen Wiffen. Formerly Deputy Official secretary to the Administrator of the Northern Territory.

Miss Panorea Alexandratos. Cassiano Dal Pozzo Project Co-ordinator Royal Collection Trust.

George Brodie, BEM. Formerly Yeoman Serjeant, HM Tower of London.

Philip James Chatwin. Keeper of the Closet Her Majesty's Chapels Royal, St James's Palace.

Philip Fernie. Deputy head Stalker Balmoral Estate.

Michael Anthony Fyfe. Joiner Balmoral Estate.

Paul Michael Goodall. Fire Safety and Access Control Officer Buckingham Palace.

Miss Michelle Ann Maynard. Groom The Duke of Edinburgh's Driving Team.

Stephen Colin Meen. Horticulturist Crown Estate, Windsor.

Mrs Sarah Jane Penney. Cook, Government House, Guernsey.

Matthew John Powers. Coaching Instructor Royal Mews, Royal Household.

Allen James Shuttlewood. Team Leader Crown Estate, Windsor.

Philippus Louwrens Steenkamp. Household of The Duke of York.

Rear Admiral Nicholas William Hine. Royal Navy

Maj Gen Robert Andrew Magowan, CBE. Royal Marines.

Vice Admiral Antony David Radakin. Royal Navy

Capt Michael Bruce Knott. Royal Navy

Cdr Stephen Ronald Anderson. Royal Navy

Col Steven John Francis. Royal Marines

Cdr Ian Harrop. Royal Navy

Cdr Tristram Andrew Harry Kirkwood. Royal Navy

Cdr Graeme Peter Knox. Royal Navy

Cdr Christopher Maxwell New. Royal Navy

Acting Lt Col Lloyd John Purser, MBE. Royal Marines.

Lt Cdr William John Edgar Ball. Royal Navy

Lt Cdr Hugh Walter Scott Botterill. Royal Navy

WO 1 Engineering Technician (Communication Information Systems) Daniel Castle. Royal Navy

CPO (Seaman) Jay Early. Royal Navy

Lt Cdr Fiona Jean Haynes. Royal Navy

Leading Engineering Technician (Weapon Engineering) James Gordon Jose. Royal Navy

Cdr Andrew Kellett. Royal Navy

Lt Cdr Alastair Blevins Ley. Royal Navy

Marine (now Lance Cpl) Nirmal Purja. Royal Marines

Cdr Heather Elizabeth Rimmer. Royal Navy

Lt Cdr Brian Joseph Trim. Royal Navy

Lt Gen Thomas Anthony Beckett, CBE.

Lt Gen Mark William Poffley, OBE.

Lt Gen James Ian Bashall, CBE.

Maj Gen James Robert Chiswell, CBE, MC.

Maj Gen Ivan Bartholomew Leonard Jones.

Col Michael Edward George Caldicott, MBE.

Col John Etherington, OBE.

Brig Simon Peter Hamilton, OBE.

Acting Brig Michael Robert Keating.

Col Francis Alexander James Piggott, OBE.

Lt Col Diane Margaret Allen. V.R. Intelligence Corps, Army Reserve

Lt Col Kevan Bolam. Royal Corps of Signals

Lt Col William Bolam. Royal Regiment of Artillery

Lt Col Dean David Canham. The Mercian Regiment

Lt Col Raymond Carolin. V.R. General List, Army Reserve

Lt Col Michael David Cornwell. The Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment

Lt Col Nathan Crew. The Royal Logistic Corps

Lt Col Timothy John Gerald Stevens Purbrick. V.R. The Royal Lancers, Army Reserve

Lt Col Piers Guy Beresford Strudwick. The Royal Regiment of Scotland

Lt Col Craig Sweeting. Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers

Lt Col Huw William Islwyn Thomas. Royal Army Medical Corps

Staff Sgt Sohail Ashraf. Adjutant General's Corps (Staff and Personnel Support Branch)

Maj Nicola Jane Parry-Belcher. The Royal Logistic Corps

WO Class 2 Duncan Edward Booth. Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers

Acting Col David John Michael Carson. Army Cadet Force

Maj Daryl Richard Collins. Royal Corps of Signals

Maj Daniel Michael Conlon. The Mercian Regiment

Maj Pardeep Singh Dhillon. Intelligence Corps

Capt Gareth Edward Dibble. Royal Regiment of Artillery Army Reserve.

Capt Rebecca Pogson-Hughes-Emanuel. Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers

Maj Christopher Fogarty. Royal Corps of Signals

WO Class 1 Sean Henry Pawlin-Gardner. 1st The Queen's Dragoon Guards Army Reserve.

Lt Col Paula Michelle George. Adjutant General's Corps (Educational and Training Services Branch)

Acting Lt Col Stuart Wesley Grout. Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers Army Reserve.

WO Class 2 Andrew Ian Halliday. Royal Army Physical Training Corps Army Reserve.

Maj John Edward Mead Carey-Hughes. The King's Royal Hussars

Maj Walter George Hunter. The Royal Regiment of Scotland

Staff Sgt Kenneth Joseph Johnston. Queen Alexandra's Royal Army Nursing Corps

Acting Maj Lucy Diana Kirkpatrick. Royal Regiment of Artillery

WO Class 2 Jason Liddy. Small Arms School Corps

Maj Joel Thomas Malpas. Army Air Corps

Maj Jonathon Mark Murley. Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers

Maj Stephen Palfreyman. Royal Corps of Signals Army Reserve.

Sgt Timothy James Rice. The Parachute Regiment

Maj Anthony Mark Richardson. Royal Regiment of Artillery

Lt Col Terence Robson. Adjutant General's Corps (Staff and Personnel Support Branch)

Colour Sgt Trevor Hamilton Ross. The Royal Irish Regiment Army Reserve.

Capt Louis Sebastian Rudd. The Parachute Regiment

WO Class 2 Craig John Rutter. The Yorkshire Regiment Army Reserve.

WO Class 2 Darren Sobey. Royal Regiment of Artillery

Lt Col Justin George Edward Stenhouse, DSO. 1st The Queen's Dragoon Guards.

Maj Guy Allan Hadley Thoburn. Intelligence Corps

Cpl Thomas Alexander Whyte. Intelligence Corps

Maj Edward Michael George Willcox. The Royal Welsh

Lt Col David Alistair Willey. Royal Army Dental Corps

Maj Karen Dorothy Jamieson. Queen Alexandra's Royal Army Nursing Corps

Air Vice-Marshal Anthony Sean Corbett, MBE.

Air Vice-Marshal Graham Michael Russell.

Group Capt Andrew David Green.

Air Commodore Richard Hill.

Group Capt James Anthony Beck.

Wing Cdr Simon James Boyle.

Group Capt Emily Jane Flynn.

Group Capt Paul David Froome.

Wing Cdr Martin James Higgins.

Wing Cdr Christopher Jones.

Group Capt Simon Robert Strasdin.

Flt Lt Victoria Anne Atherton.

WO Richard Phillip Barber.

Sqn Ldr Stephen Matthew Beardmore.

WO Kevin Ffrancon Beattie.

Master Aircrew Mark Andrew Bradley.

WO Alan Stuart Bruce.

Sqn Ldr James Niall Doyle.

Flt Sgt Hywel Anthony Greening.

Flt Lt Kathryn Hannah Janes.

Wing Cdr Adrian Russell Jarvis.

Sqn Ldr Stuart Gray McAdam.

Sqn Ldr Vanessa Jasmin Kathleen Plumley.

Flt Sgt Louise Jane Simpson.

Sgt Kevin John Stannard.

WO Lee Raymond Twyning.

Cpl Melvin Robert David Whyte.

Mrs Janet Bloomfield. Formerly Sergeant, Essex Police.

Paul Brandon. Deputy chief Constable Kent Police.

Chief Superintendent Sally Ann Burke. South Wales Police.

Dean Graham Haydon. Deputy assistant commissioner Metropolitan Police Service.

Paul Francis Dominic Hurley. Formerly Detective chief Superintendent South Wales Police.

Sgt Abed Hussain. Greater Manchester Police.

Superintendent Helen Louise Isaac. City of London Police.

Detective Chief Superintendent Russell Jackson. Greater Manchester Police.

Stephen James Kavanagh. Chief Constable Essex Police.

Neville Kemp. Assistant chief Constable Surrey Police.

Constable Geraldine McConaghy. Merseyside Police.

Chief Superintendent Paul Terence Money. West Yorkshire Police.

Ms Hannah O'Sullivan. Formerly Detective Sergeant Metropolitan Police Service.

James Rentell. Formerly Constable British Transport Police.

Chief Superintendent Vicky Skeels. Cambridgeshire Constabulary.

Detective Chief Inspector Peter Sparks. Metropolitan Police Service.

Alistair Michael Sutherland. Assistant commissioner City of London Police.

Sgt Lindsey Sweeney. South Wales Police.

Superintendent Suzanne Mertes. Police Service of Scotland.

Inspector Craig Rankine. Police Service of Scotland.

Andrew Glen Archibald. Police Service of Northern Ireland.

Noel Christopher Mullan. Police Service of Northern Ireland.

Paul Stanton Slaine. Police Service of Northern Ireland.

Group Manager Karen Adams. Dorset &amp; Wiltshire Fire and Rescue Service.

Deputy Chief Fire Officer Paul Andrew Argyle. Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service.

Watch Manager Robert David Coss. Derbyshire Fire and Rescue Service.

Chief Fire Officer Huw Dennis Jakeway. South Wales Fire and Rescue Service.

Watch Manager Rosemary Curtis. Scottish Fire and Rescue Service.

Group Manager Elizabeth Logan. Scottish Fire and Rescue Service.

Area Manager William David Rout. Scottish Fire and Rescue Service.

Neil Barnes. Deputy director North West Ambulance Service NHS Trust. For services to the North West Ambulance Service NHS Trust.

Jason Frederick Collins. Finance manager Welsh Ambulance Service. For services to the Welsh Ambulance Service.

Mrs Leanne Hawker. Patient Experience Lead and Community Involvement, Welsh Ambulance Service. For services to the Welsh Ambulance Service.

Ian Jeffrey Walton. Deputy director of Operations Yorkshire Ambulance Service NHS Trust. For services to the Yorkshire Ambulance Service NHS Trust.

Patrick McGrattan. Paramedic Scottish Ambulance Service.

Richard John Bendall. Paramedic Northern Ireland Ambulance Service. For services to the Northern Ireland Ambulance Service.

WO 1 Logistician (Supply Chain) Janice Pauline Cox. Royal Naval Reserve

Maj Nial Philip Browne, TD. The Royal Logistic Corps, Army Reserve.

Capt Andrew James Stephen Holsgrove. The Duke of Lancaster's Regiment Army Reserve.

Maj Thomas George McFarland. The Royal Irish Regiment Army Reserve.

Staff Sgt Gordon Andrew Pursley. The Royal Logistic Corps Army Reserve.

Lt Col Gillian Heather Wilkinson. The Royal Logistic Corps Army Reserve.

Professor Paul Preston, CBE. For services to UK/Spain relations. (London)

Geoffrey Alan Tantum, CMG, OBE. For services to British interests overseas.

Miss Karen Elizabeth Pierce, CMG. (Mrs Roxburgh), For services to British foreign policy.

The Right Reverend David Andrew Urquhart. For services to international relations.

Robert Mark Wainwright. For services to policing and to security.

Adolfo John Canepa, OBE. For services to Gibraltar.

Mrs Jill Gallard. For services to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Ms Judith Mary Gough. For services to British foreign policy.

Peter Edward Jones. For services to British foreign and security policy.

Martin Alexander Baillie Reynolds. For services to British foreign policy.

Sir Christopher John Greenwood, CMG. For services to international justice.

Mrs Rosalie Louise Adams. For services to the British Virgin Islands.

Professor David Alexander. For services to UK/US links in the space industry and to higher education.

Ms Sarah Bartholomew. For services to British foreign policy and to the Commonwealth.

James John Beer. For services to British foreign policy.

Chief Superintendent Simon Blatchley. For services to UK police.

Ms Julia Bond. For services to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Mrs Mary Catherine Brown. For services to charity.

James Alexander John Burns. For services to UK/Spain relations.

David Stuart Burton. For services to British foreign policy.

Mrs Elizabeth Louise Chapman. For services to British foreign policy.

Ms Joanna Coles. For services to journalism and the media industry.

Ms Diane Louise Corner. For services to UK/Africa relations and international peace and security.

Miss Kalpna Doshi. For services to the financial services industry.

Ms Flora Jane Duffy. For services to sport in Bermuda.

Ms Claire Evans. For services to British foreign policy and the Commonwealth.

Mark Allen Farrell. For services to British foreign policy.

Ms Judith Ann Gibbins. For services to British foreign policy.

Duncan Norman Hill. For services to national security.

Martin Robert Johnston. For services to UK trade and exports to Iran.

Paul Meyer. For services to British foreign and security policy.

Jerry Mimassi. For services to British foreign policy.

Richard Peter Pascoe. For services to UK/China relations.

Leonard Arthur Phillips. For services to international security.

Dr Matthew James Tertius Preston. For services to British foreign policy.

Ms Jane Frances Rumble. For services to Polar science marine conservation and diplomacy.

Ms Rebecca Ann Sagar. For services to British foreign policy.

James Michael Harold Spencer. For services to health to social development, to education and to the environment in Madagascar.

Lt Col Giles Alick Parry Taylor, MBE. For services to UK interests in Lebanon and to UK and Lebanon national security.

Miss Iona Clare Thomas. For services to British foreign policy.

Simon Derek Thomas. For services to British foreign policy.

Stephen Peter Wallis. For services to international security.

Mrs Justina Susannah Alexander. For services to British Nationals in Dominica.

Ms Rebecca Emma Bell. For services to British foreign policy and to the Commonwealth.

Joseph Chiara. For services to St John's Ambulance Gibraltar.

Robert Hatherell Craig. For services to conservation.

Peter John Derby-Crook. For services to education and to the British Community in Singapore.

Miss Sharleen Sabrina Dabreo. For services to disaster management in the British Virgin Islands.

Anthony James Day. For services to the homeless and underprivileged in China.

Ms Fiona Dean. For services to the British Community in Andorra.

Mrs Louise Mary Ellis. For services to British foreign policy and to the Commonwealth.

John Percival Morey Farrand. For services to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Ernest Gomez. For services to Gibraltar.

Ms Nichola Margaret Valerie Hayton. For services to UK/Germany relations.

Peter McNeill Helme. For services to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Christopher Hugh Hildesley. For services to charity.

Joseph Solomon Horn. For services to charity to educational development and to UK relations with China and Thailand.

Ms Jane Elizabeth Bickmore-Jaffer. For services to education in Oman.

Ms Samantha Clare Whay-Jenkins. For services to education and to the promotion of British business.

Stephen Jones. For services to British Nationals overseas.

Paul Anthony Lewis. For services to UK/Australia bilateral trade and commerce.

Franz Manderson. For services to the Cayman Islands.

Alan McLean. For services to the security of Her Majesty's Government staff overseas.

Mrs Judith Joy Mewburn. For services to nursing in the developing world.

Frederick Vijay Hutton-Michel. For services to National Security.

Dr Anthony Wynne Pereira. For services to UK/Brazil relations.

Sister Imelda Mary Magdalen Poole. For services to combating modern slavery.

Mrs Anne-Marie Pieterz-Powell. For services to British Nationals overseas.

Sunil Rattu. For services to British foreign policy.

David John Reynolds. For services to UK/Philippine relations and to underprivileged children in the Philippines.

Mrs Winifred Leigh Roebuck. For services to British foreign policy and security.

Norbert Nicholas Sene. For services to Gibraltar.

Howard Martin Silverstone. For services to British business in the USA.

David Nicolas Wahl. For services to UK/France relations.

James Robert Wasilenko. For services to British foreign and security policy.

John Heseltine Cameron-Webb. For services to British Nationals overseas.

Mrs Anya Kashora Williams. For services to the Turks and Caicos Islands.

Gavin Willis. For services to British foreign policy.

David Alfred Wood. For services to British Nationals in Guadeloupe.

Ms Jacqueline Louise Wrafter. For services to children with disabilities in Vietnam.

Mrs Ann Desson Wragg. For services to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Mrs Susan Veronica Auguste. For services to British Nationals and children with special needs in Mauritius.

Maj Benjamin Layton Beasley. For services to Bermuda.

Mrs Jacqueline Marijke Codd Moore. For services to the British Community in the Balearic Islands.

Mark James Davies. For services to the British Community in Croatia.

Neil Winter De Ste Croix. For services to sport in Bermuda.

Mrs Joyce Inmaculada Diaz. For services to Gibraltar.

Ms Corrine Cendra Richeux Hua. For services to education and disadvantaged children in China.

Ms Jacqueline Keningale. For services to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and to UK Visas and Immigration.

Elihu Rudolph Rhymer. For services to the British Virgin Islands.

Michael Christopher Saunders. For services to British foreign and defence policy.

Ms Melanie Jane Williams. For services to British foreign policy.

Detective Chief Inspector Na'imah Rosalie Astwood. Bermuda Police Service.

Chief Inspector Jerome Anthony Laws. Bermuda Police Service.

Jurat Stephen Murray Jones. For services to the Royal Court to Local Charities and to the Community in Guernsey. (Guernsey, Channel-Islands)

Keith William Robins. For services to vulnerable young people and their families in Guernsey. (Guernsey, Channel-Islands)

Mrs Rosemary Caroline James. For services to Sport and the Community in Alderney. (Alderney, Channel-Islands)

Roger William Smith. For services to British watchmaking.

Mrs Lesley Anne Turnbull. For services to seriously ill children, their parents and to their families on the Isle of Man.

Wing Cdr Pheric Charles Seamus Thrussell. For services to the Isle of Man Cadet Forces.

Andre Bonjour. For services to the Sea Cadet Corps in Jersey. (Jersey, Channel-Islands)

Ian Robert Richardson. For services to Jersey hospice care. (Jersey, Channel-Islands)

Mrs Susie Hilary Josling Robins. For services to Jersey Citizens' Advice Bureau. (Jersey, Channel-Islands)

Dr Reginald Murphy. For contribution to preservation and promotion of Antigua and Barbuda's history and heritage.

Bennett Minnis. For services to business and to the community.

Capt Vernon Ritchie. For services to business and to the community.

His Excellency Tom John Marsters. For services to the public and to the community.

Rua Nga. For services to the community.

Iro Pae Puna. For services to the public service and to the community.

Mrs Rima Lizzie David. For services to the public service and to the community.

Mrs Vainepoto Makita. For services to business and to the community.

Leslie Ramdhanny. For services to business and to the community.

Mrs Madonna Harford. For services to Trade Unionism.

Wayne Horsford. For services to education.

Peter Bain. For services to culture.

Ms Denise Williams. For services to sport.

Christopher Charles Abel. For services to the community through supporting rural agriculture extension and to citizen participation in business activity.

Melchior Pesa Togolo. For service to economic development particularly in the mining and petroleum sectors and to the community.

Mrs Nora Vagi Brash, OBE. For service to the community through active promotion of local culture and heritage in her roles as author, playwright and poet.

The Honourable Michael Buku Nali, CBE. For services to commerce to politics and to the community as Member of National Parliament and former Deputy Prime Minister.

Col Paul Mai, OBE. For distinguished service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Col Raymond Numa, MBE. D.M.S. For distinguished service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.,

Ms Lucy Blanche-Lee Badina Bogari, ISO. High commissioner to Fiji. For distinguished public service through her senior roles in the nation's foreign service.

The Honourable Mike Reynolds, AM. For promoting relations between Queensland and Papua New Guinea including as Mayor of Townsville and as Patron of YWAM Medical Ships Programme.

Barry James Tan. For services to commerce to sport and to charitable causes.

The Honourable Justin Tkatchenko, BEM. O.L. For services to the community, particularly in the National Capital District, and to sports and major events in his role as Minister for Lands &amp; Physical Planning and APEC 2018.

Lt Col Tau Rupa. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Lt Col Ricky Tavaperry. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Lt Col Kingsley Wawada. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Gregory Robert Anderson. For services to the community and commerce in the mining and petroleum sectors.

Ian Chatfield Clarke. For services to the legal profession and to the business community.

The Reverend Father Philip Gibbs. For services to the Enga Province community and to the Catholic Church.

Samson Kaipu. For service to law to higher education and to the community.

Baundo Ludwik Kir. For service to the community of Simbu Province.

Mrs Margaret Erik Korai. For service to women's participation in agribusiness.

Mrs Susan Patricia McGrade. For services to commerce and to the community of Rabaul.

Stephen Pokanis. For public service in the Correctional Service.

Ms Alurigo Ravusiro. For public service community and sport.

Michael Varapik. For service to corporate governance and to the community.

The Reverend Binora Yunarec. For service to the community and to the Evangelical Lutheran Church.

George Ariku. For services to education and to the community.

Eddie Mariosu Avosa. For service to the Gulf provincial administration.

Anthony Paul Carbry. For service to business management and to sport.

Ms Morivetta Eka. For diplomatic service and to the community.

Philip Fae Eka. For public service in the Correctional Service.

Basil Morehari Gregg. For service to traditional music and to culture.

William Rauwal Gwaiseuk. For public service in agriculture.

Tony Yalomo Hobiagi. For service to rural smallholder farmers.

Peter Iggy. For service to business and to the community.

Mame Kinahen Kasalau. For public service.

Mrs Babau Dinabe Keru. For service to the United Church Tatana women fellowship.

Mrs Elizabeth Konmil. For service to the community and to women's development.

Joshua Maiyap. For service to the community and religion.

Mrs Mariana Maru. For service to the Assemblies of God Church.

Craig Douglas McConaghy. For service to rural development and to the community.

Ranyia Mesaka. For service to rural administration and to the community.

Upu Kila Navu. For service to sport particularly Hobie Cat sailing.

Emmanuel Pilai. For service to education and to aviation.

Henry Koiaie Pisimi. For service to education and to the community.

Peter Philemon Pokowas. For service to Air Niugini and to sport.

Mrs Kini Rema. For service to education and to women's development.

Joshua Uvau. For public service.

John Mark Vellacott. For services to commerce and to humanitarian endeavours.

Jerry Peter Yarl. For service to education and to the community.

Kai Chuen Yee. For service to the Police Force.

Nicks Sasingian Maniha. For public service.

Ms Barbara Mimino. For public service.

WO (Navy) John Bade. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Sgt Kale Ekol. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Sgt Alex Gini. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Chief WO Balthazar Saviembi. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

WO (Army) Moses Waradu. For service to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force.

Mrs Elizabeth Koite Aihi. For public service.

Edward Alua. For services to the community.

Mrs Lelly Biyang. For services to the Police Force.

Mrs Ruth Miro Daingo. For services to Air Niugini.

Mare Erima. For services to law and to justice.

Moses Erowal. For services to the community.

Hiri Evoe. For services to the community.

Steven Tuperi Gija. For services to education.

Amos Goronsin. For services to the community.

Mrs Heroho Hilake. For public service.

Mrs Kari Ken Hira. For public service.

Tau Hovaro. For services to the community.

Japhet Kaiae ITAU' Pe. For public service.

Veari Kapi. For public service.

Navai Seth Kevari. For public service.

Bafua Kobati. For services to the community.

Soweyom Kon. For services to the community.

Mrs Jane Mumure Kware. For services to the Police Force.

Wandibe Mobe. For services to the community.

Mrs Nancy Eunage Neantele. For services to the Police Force.

Mrs Martha Nola Nero. For services to healthcare.

To'oro Oa. For public service.

Henry Ori Ori. For services to the community.

Stonewigg Orovo. For services to the community.

Ragagalo Raga. For public service.

Rupa Ray Raraimo. For public service.

Mrs Ruth Sireh. For services to education.

Nehap Soal. For services to the community.

Alexis Samuel Tam. For services to entrepreneurial training.

Mrs Christine Madeline Temu. For services to the aviation industry.

Emile Tenoa. For services to journalism and to radio broadcasting.

The Reverend Frank Tipora. For services to the Evangelical Lutheran Church.

Livai Wapia. For services to the community.

Bauk Huinz Wesi. For services to the community.

Chief Sgt Paul Miae. For service to the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary.

Inspector Leana Moere. For services to the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary.

Superintendent Samson Siguyaru. For services to the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary.

Dr Herbert Marius. For services to health care.

Mrs Augusta Ifill. For contribution to education.

John Calixte Leon. For his contribution to the field of finance and economics.

Ms Melzar Bruce B. E.M. For her contribution to education.

Ms Felicite Hetty Lucien. For her commitment to community service.

Alphonsus Stephen Stanislas. For services to education and to community service.

Julius Adjodha. For services to the community.

Ms Christina Alcide. For services to the community.

Mrs Rita Catherine Dyer. For services to education.

Alfred Jude Aihunu. For services to education and to rural development.

Samson Panda. For services to education to the Church and to rural development.

Selwyn Sahu. For services to policing and to rural and community development.

Charles Fox Rudgard Ngalimwane. For services to education and to community development.

Isaac Vula Tatapu. For public service and to community development.

Nelson Thoa. For services to nursing and to the community.

Chief Superintendent Ian Bara. For services to the Royal Solomon Islands Police Force.

Timothy Manele. For services to rural and to community development.

Chief Superintendent Mostyn Mangua. Royal Solomon Islands Police Force.

Chief Superintendent Stanley Riolo. Royal Solomon Islands Police Force.

Sgt Elizabeth Tekaingo. Royal Solomon Islands Police Force.

Superintendent Steve Rex Waiwori. Royal Solomon Islands Police Force.