Sign in using your wpxi profile

Need a profile? Register now.

Welcome back. Please sign in

By submitting your registration information, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

We have sent a confirmation email to {* data_emailAddress *}. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your account.

We look forward to seeing you on [website] frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.

Click here to return to the page you were visiting.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Edit your profile

Sorry we could not verify that email address. Enter your email below and we'll send you another email.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

A Pittsburgh restaurant owner is in the Allegheny County Jail, accused of sexually assaulting a sleeping woman after breaking into her home in the city’s South Side, Channel 11 News has learned.

According to a criminal complaint, Adnan Pehlivan broke into the home on Josephine Street early Tuesday. Investigators believe he forced open a window to get inside.

Sources told Channel 11’s Mike Holden that Pehlivan owns Istanbul Sofra on Forbes Avenue in Regent Square, where he was arrested about 8 p.m. Tuesday while people were dining.

JUST IN: Mugshot of acclaimed restaurant owner Adnan Pehlivan. He’s charged with breaking into a woman’s home and sexually assaulting her while she was asleep. She fought back. He fled.... But left his suit coat behind. Victim says he ran back inside to get coat. @WPXI pic.twitter.com/2WJnMtj56z

The victim told police she was “jolted” awake by Pehlivan, who was in her bed and was sexually assaulting her, the complaint said. She fought him to get off her and he punched her to get away.

TRENDING NOW:

After running off, Pehlivan quickly returned to the house to grab a suit coat he left behind, police said. He then fled a second time.

Police said the woman recognized Pehlivan from a bar Monday night. She said she was out with friends and he bought them shots and talked with them.

The owner of Kopy's in South Side, Hope Keshavarz, said Pehlivan and the group of friends are on surveillance at the bar -- evidence that is now in the hands of police. 

DOWNLOAD THE CHANNEL 11 NEWS APP

The woman said she and her friends left the bar to go home and Pehlivan was not with them.

Pehlivan was seen earlier that night posting pictures to his restaurant's Facebook page with County Executive Rich Fitzgerald, Braddock Mayor John Fetterman and Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto.

Peduto's office released a statement to Channel 11 News saying:

"These are shocking and horrifying allegations. People regularly ask the mayor for photos countless times per week and was at a public event where his photo was taken with this individual, as it has in the past."

Channel 11 checked our archives and found Pehlivan is no stranger to city and county leaders.

In July 2016, he was a featured speaker alongside the mayor and county executive in a news conference about the economic contributions immigrants make in Allegheny County.

He faces charges including sexual assault, involuntary deviate sexual intercourse, aggravated indecent assault, simple assault and burglary.



© 2018 Cox Media Group.

About Us


© 2018 Cox Media Group.


By using this website, you accept the terms of our Visitor Agreement and Privacy Policy, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.


This station is part of Cox Media Group Television.


Learn about careers at Cox Media Group.

