Sign in using your wpxi profile

Need a profile? Register now.

Welcome back. Please sign in

By submitting your registration information, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

We have sent a confirmation email to {* data_emailAddress *}. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your account.

We look forward to seeing you on [website] frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.

Click here to return to the page you were visiting.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Edit your profile

Sorry we could not verify that email address. Enter your email below and we'll send you another email.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

WHITE OAK, Pa. - A former White Oak volunteer firefighter is charged with sexually assaulting a 13-year-old for almost a year, according to a criminal complaint. 

Justin Vidra, 32, was arrested Friday by Allegheny County police and faces charges of rape, statutory sexual assault, unlawful contact with a minor and related crimes, according to court records.

The victim, now 14, knew Virda and told police the sexual assaults took place in her home in White Oak and continued over the past year at least three times a week.

"Justin told her that if she told anyone what he was doing, he would take everything they owned away...including all of the money in the bank," police said in the criminal complaint, 

James Booth, president of White Oak VFC #1, said the company finds the charges “very disturbing.”

TRENDING NOW:

“We have been made aware of some very serious allegations against a former member; said member was already facing action from a previous matter,” Booth said in a statement. “Once we were made aware of the current accusation, said member has been terminated from our company effective immediately.”

Channel 11 was told the previous matter involving Vidra was something that violated the fire company's social media policy. 

DOWNLOAD THE WPXI NEWS APP

Vidra was arraigned Saturday and is currently housed in the Allegheny County Jail, unable to make $50,000 bail.

He is scheduled to appear in court July 9 for his preliminary hearing. 



© 2018 Cox Media Group.

About Us


© 2018 Cox Media Group.


By using this website, you accept the terms of our Visitor Agreement and Privacy Policy, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.


This station is part of Cox Media Group Television.


Learn about careers at Cox Media Group.

