A Nigerian newspaper and Online version of the Vanguard, a daily publication in Nigeria covering Nigeria news, Niger delta, general national news, politics, business, energy, sports, entertainment, fashion,lifestyle human interest stories, etc

Muslim prison inmates have won a major battle in Alaska as the court ruled that they should no longer be fed with pork during Ramadan.
Over 35,000 Ahmadi Muslims converged at the Oakland Farm, Hadeeqatul Madhi, Hampshire, London

A federal judge granted a restraining order on Thursday forcing prison guards to stop giving Muslim inmates pork as they break their fasts during Ramadan, rights campaigners said.


The Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) filed a lawsuit on Tuesday claiming Anchorage Correctional Complex had violated constitutional prohibitions against “cruel and unusual punishment.”

CAIR said the US District Court for Alaska had granted its request for an emergency temporary order requiring guards to provide adequate meals in accordance with government health guidelines.

“CAIR has reported an unprecedented spike in bigotry targeting American Muslims and members of other minority groups since the election of Donald Trump as president,” the Washington-based organization said in a statement.

Muslims are currently marking the holy month of Ramadan, fasting from dawn until sunset, which means going without food for around 18 hours in Anchorage.

Inmates observing the festival are given rations equating to 1,100 calories a day at most, according to the complaint, far short of the recommended daily amount of around 2,500 calories for men.

The packages contain food made of pork, which is forbidden in Islam, rendering the actual nutritional value of the meals even more inadequate.

CAIR said the treatment contravened the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act and violated First and 14th Amendment rights to equal protection and free exercise of religion.

The suit seeks a “balanced nutritional diet” for inmates, as well as policy changes and compensatory and punitive damages.

The Alaska corrections department did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Ramadan began on May 16 in the United States and will end on or around June 15. (AFP)

The call became necessary because the wheel of justice is extraordinarily slow in Nigeria. It is even slower when it com...



Following more than two decades of consistent investment in community development, Guaranty Trust Bank plc is taking its...



Related



I am happy to be here in Ekiti State, and among the good people of Ekiti. Ekiti State people are dear to me. My earliest...



The Nigerian equities market, on Thursday rose by 65 bases points, bps on renewed bargain hunting activity with the Nige...

CLICK VIEW TO THE NEWSPAPER ARCHIVES

I am sure there would have been a war in the Senate Chambers to forcefully remove such audacious president

Sixty per cent of Nigeria’s bank loans are shared amongst a 100 people who don’t even repay them; are we surprised there...

Buhari came in angry and was trying to catch thieves and people were clapping for him. The time is gone. Fighting corrup...

Like a house built with spittle which the Yoruba say will be washed away by dew, the contraption that was the APC appear...

“As herdsmen are in reality business men engaged in the business of cattle rearing for their own personal financial gain...

Deliberate efforts should be made by the Federal, States and Local government to properly engaged our youth in profitabl...