All 12 boys and their coach have been rescued from a cave after an audacious search and rescue mission. Watch the timeline of their ordeal.

Rain. Afternoon clouds. Cool.

(iStock)


	        Multimedia    ·   User Galleries   ·   News in Pictures
	        Send us your pictures   ·  Send us your stories
	    

Alaska — Muslim inmates are suing state corrections officials, arguing that officials at an Alaska jail are providing them with inadequate nourishment as they break their daily fasts during Ramadan.


The lawsuit was filed by the Council on American-Islamic Relations Legal Defense Fund. It asks a federal judge to require the Anchorage Correctional Complex provide the men with meals with sufficient calories.


The lawsuit argues the existing policy is unconstitutional cruel and unusual punishment and has a chilling effect on the men's rights to exercise their religion.


Ramadan is the Muslim holy month, marked by daily fasting from dawn to sunset. In Alaska, for those who observe Ramadan, that can mean going about 18 hours without food.


A message seeking comment was sent to a state corrections spokesperson on Wednesday.

24.com encourages commentary submitted via MyNews24. Contributions of 200 words or more will be considered for publication.





Check out Newtown's The Heads installation and the accompanying free festival 

The shopping struggle is real

Take a closer look at these foods and you might be surprised to see animal ingredients.

Bieber splurged on this one. 

See all the pics from the special day. 

Sharks player Ross and wife Madelein Geldenhuys on their miracle babies

Here are six ways you can save by claiming tax deductions.

Warm up to winter at these wineries and wine events.

2018 has seen the rise of the the “furbaby” – an animal that an owner treats as a member of the family – sparking an increase in what has quickly become known as pooch parties.



Outbound

Cape TownWestern Cape Corporate Placements

Western CapeStor-Age Property REIT Ltd

Cape TownN &amp; Z INSTRUMENTATION &amp; CONTROL

Houses
		                R 7 490 000

Houses
		                R 4 300 000

Apartments / Flats
		                R 1 250 000

RSS feeds
        News delivered really simply.
        

E-mail Newsletters
        You choose what you want 
        

News24 on Android
        Get the latest from News24 on your Android device.
        

SMS Alerts
        Get breaking news stories via SMS.
        

Creating your profile will enable you to submit photos and stories to get published on News24.


This username must be unique, cannot be edited and will be used in the URL to your profile page across the entire 24.com network.


                            News24 allows you to edit the display of certain components based on a location.
                            If you wish to personalise the page based on your preferences, please select a
                            location for each component and click "Submit" in order for the changes to
                            take affect.


                        Hi News addict,
                    


                        Join the News24 Community to be involved in breaking the news.
                    


                        Log in with Facebook to comment and personalise news, weather and listings.
                    