All 12 boys and their coach have been rescued from a cave after an audacious search and rescue mission. Watch the timeline of their ordeal.

Rain. Afternoon clouds. Cool.

A federal judge granted a restraining order on Thursday forcing prison guards in Alaska to stop giving Muslim inmates pork as they break their fasts during Ramadan, rights campaigners said. 


The Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) filed a lawsuit on Tuesday claiming Anchorage Correctional Complex had violated constitutional prohibitions against "cruel and unusual punishment."


CAIR said the US District Court for Alaska had granted its request for an emergency temporary order requiring guards to provide adequate meals in accordance with government health guidelines.


"CAIR has reported an unprecedented spike in bigotry targeting American Muslims and members of other minority groups since the election of Donald Trump as president," the Washington-based organisation said in a statement.


Muslims are currently marking the holy month of Ramadan, fasting from dawn until sunset, which means going without food for around 18 hours in Anchorage.


Inmates observing the festival are given rations equating to 1 100 calories a day at most, according to the complaint, far short of the recommended daily amount of around 2 500 calories for men.


The packages contain food made of pork, which is forbidden in Islam, rendering the actual nutritional value of the meals even more inadequate.


CAIR said the treatment contravened the Religious Land Use and Institutionalised Persons Act and violated First and 14th Amendment rights to equal protection and free exercise of religion.


The suit seeks a "balanced nutritional diet" for inmates, as well as policy changes and compensatory and punitive damages.


The Alaska corrections department did not immediately respond to requests for comment.


Ramadan began on May 16 in the United States and will end on or around June 15.


KEEP UPDATED on the latest news
by subscribing to our FREE newsletter.


-
FOLLOW News24 on Twitter




24.com encourages commentary submitted via MyNews24. Contributions of 200 words or more will be considered for publication.





Check out Newtown's The Heads installation and the accompanying free festival 

The shopping struggle is real

Take a closer look at these foods and you might be surprised to see animal ingredients.

Bieber splurged on this one. 

See all the pics from the special day. 

Sharks player Ross and wife Madelein Geldenhuys on their miracle babies

Here are six ways you can save by claiming tax deductions.

Warm up to winter at these wineries and wine events.

2018 has seen the rise of the the “furbaby” – an animal that an owner treats as a member of the family – sparking an increase in what has quickly become known as pooch parties.



Outbound

Cape TownWestern Cape Corporate Placements

Cape TownN &amp; Z INSTRUMENTATION &amp; CONTROL

Western CapeStor-Age Property REIT Ltd

Houses
		                R 29 995 000

Houses
		                R 29 750 000

Houses
		                R 5 500 000

RSS feeds
        News delivered really simply.
        

E-mail Newsletters
        You choose what you want 
        

News24 on Android
        Get the latest from News24 on your Android device.
        

SMS Alerts
        Get breaking news stories via SMS.
        

Creating your profile will enable you to submit photos and stories to get published on News24.


This username must be unique, cannot be edited and will be used in the URL to your profile page across the entire 24.com network.


                            News24 allows you to edit the display of certain components based on a location.
                            If you wish to personalise the page based on your preferences, please select a
                            location for each component and click "Submit" in order for the changes to
                            take affect.


                        Hi News addict,
                    


                        Join the News24 Community to be involved in breaking the news.
                    


                        Log in with Facebook to comment and personalise news, weather and listings.
                    