


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The hotel industry is starting the year with a healthy clip of new hotel renovations.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Los Angeles Airport Marriott's M Lounge has a view of the airport. (Photo: Marriott International)

The hotel industry is starting the year with a healthy clip of new hotel renovations. Here are a few notable ones.


Hilton Miami Downtown


Miami’s Downtown continues to get hotter than ever. Hotels are popping up or being renovated. The latest renovation is the Hilton Miami Downtown, located in the city’s Performing Arts District.


The hotel, which just completed its $35 million makeover, is located on the site of the former Omni International Mall, which had a large shopping complex, movie theater and hotel.


The Hilton Miami Downtown by Resort World Miami now has re-imagined guest rooms, meeting spaces, a restaurant, and new lobby.


HBA Atlanta (Hirsch Bedner Associates), a hospitality interior design, renewed the property with an urban look, new technology and contemporary fashion and art influences.


The hotel is near Miami’s Performing Arts District.


The hotel has a new executive chef, Didier Pouzier, who has re-designed the hotel’s Brisa Bistro with a fusion menu that combines Caribbean, South American and European cuisine.


Later this year, the hotel will introduce a new rooftop pool deck, an outdoor bar and grill called CityVu, and the 1601 Lounge.


LAX Marriott


Los Angeles International Airport has had a $44 million top-to-bottom renovation of its 984 guestrooms and 20 suites as well as its public spaces.  


The hotel originally opened in 1973. In its new iteration, the hotel now has a new M Club Lounge, a 4,000 square-foot space on the 18th floor for Elite Marriott Rewards members. It has floor-to-ceiling windows with views of the Hollywood Hills, downtown Los Angeles and airport runways. It’s open 24 hours a day.


A new 1,554 square-foot presidential suite has a bar, entertainment room, bathroom with spa-style shower, and King bed in a separate bedroom.


L.A. hotels are gearing up for the 2022 Super Bowl and 2028 Summer Olympics.


“The city is evolving to meet the needs of the modern traveler, and concurrently so is our hotel,” says Jeff Hart, general manager of LAX Marriott.


A new Great Room has a bar, full-service Starbucks, and alcoves for both work and play.


New food and beverage outlets include the Hangar 18 with craft beer and cocktails and bites located in the Great Room. Social Market &amp; Eatery has California-inspired fare. JS’s Steakhouse is the fine dining outlet.


A resort-style pool has been refreshed with new palm trees and a large whirlpool. There is more than 55,000 square feet of event space, side-to-side ballrooms and 25 breakout meeting rooms.  


December hotel roundup: The latest openings, renovations, brand updates


The LaPlaya Beach &amp; Golf Resort, a Noble House Resort


This Naples, Fla., beachfront resort is celebrating its 50th anniversary with a $30 million renovation.


Its Beach House got a multimillion renovation in 2016. The property also got new tropical landscaping, chaise loungers and updated furniture for private cabanas at the pool area, new Precor cardio machines at the fitness center, and a new morning coffee bar at the resort’s signature restaurant, BALEENnaples.


Most recently, the property completed its multi-year renovation with new guestrooms in the Gulf Tower, a re-imagined lobby and a complete re-do of BALEENnaples.


The hotel has views of the Gulf of Mexico. The property has a 4,500 square-foot SpaTerre, a private white sand beach with butler service, a full service Tiki Bar, three outdoor pools with cabanas and spa sercices, a golf club and course, and a 23-slip marina with yachts.


Hilton experiments with the hotel room of the future


Hotel Kabuki in San Francisco


The Hotel Kabuki in San Francisco has undergone a $31 million renovation of its 225 guest rooms and other spaces.


The property, part of Joie de Vivre Hotels, has an expansive new lobby, a lobby bar, and a 3,000-square foot fitness studio. It is located in Japantown in what was once a 1960s community center connected to the former Japanese Consulate.


The hotel incorporates Japanese-inspired design, such as the shou sugi ban technique which is used to fireproof housing by burning or charring the wood to evoke the texture of crocodile skin. Many of the brackets that hold the beams together are hot-rolled steel brackets used in old Japanese houses.


The lobby lounge and library have 19-foot-tall ceilings. The new lobby bar has Japanese cocktails. There is a 3,000 square foot fitness center and a 400 square-foot yoga studio.


A designated floor has 13,000 square-feet of dedicated meeting and event space.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
