

By David R. Baker

Caption


Close

Caroll Niel leans on her husband, firefighter Tony Niel, in the motorhome where they are staying following the Tubbs fire on Friday, Oct. 13, 2017, in Forestville, Calif.

Caroll Niel leans on her husband, firefighter Tony Niel, in the motorhome where they are staying following the Tubbs fire on Friday, Oct. 13, 2017, in Forestville, Calif.

Santa Rosa Assistant Fire Marshal Paul Lowenthal walks through his Oxford Ct. residence, which burned during the Tubbs fire, on Thursday, Oct. 12, 2017, in Santa Rosa.

Santa Rosa Assistant Fire Marshal Paul Lowenthal walks through his Oxford Ct. residence, which burned during the Tubbs fire, on Thursday, Oct. 12, 2017, in Santa Rosa.

A man shows a burnt paper  after a wildfire moved through the area in Santa Rosa and Napa Valley in California, United States on October 13, 2017. Massive out-of-controls wildfires have claimed at least 31 people and destroyed 3,500 homes in Northern California as the deadliest in state history.  (Photo by Tayfun Coskun/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images)


A man shows a burnt paper after a wildfire moved through the area in Santa Rosa and Napa Valley in California, United States on October 13, 2017. Massive out-of-controls wildfires have claimed at least 31


The remains are seen after a wildfire moved through the area in Santa Rosa and Napa Valley in California, United States on October 13, 2017. Massive out-of-controls wildfires have claimed at least 31 people and destroyed 3,500 homes in Northern California as the deadliest in state history.  (Photo by Tayfun Coskun/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images)


The remains are seen after a wildfire moved through the area in Santa Rosa and Napa Valley in California, United States on October 13, 2017. Massive out-of-controls wildfires have claimed at least 31 people and


Chrystal Couto holds a poster of her grandmother as Aaron Austin looks on in Santa Rosa, Calif. on Friday, Oct. 13, 2017. The couple from Redway, are searching for Couto's grandmother and her husband, who haven't been heard from since a wildfire tore through the older couple's Santa Rosa neighborhood. They are hanging flyers in evacuation centers with photos of the older couple. (AP Photo/Paul Elias)


Chrystal Couto holds a poster of her grandmother as Aaron Austin looks on in Santa Rosa, Calif. on Friday, Oct. 13, 2017. The couple from Redway, are searching for Couto's grandmother and her husband, who


Flowers mark the spot where their father died as Chuck and Mike (R) Rippey stand in the ruins of the house of 100-year-old Charles and 98-year-old Sara Rippey, who were killed in the Atlas Fire just after it began, on October 12, 2017 near Napa, California. Thousands homes have burned and two dozen people have been confirmed dead so far as numerous wildfires continue to spread in eight Northern California counties.   (Photo by David McNew/Getty Images)


Flowers mark the spot where their father died as Chuck and Mike (R) Rippey stand in the ruins of the house of 100-year-old Charles and 98-year-old Sara Rippey, who were killed in the Atlas Fire just after it


In this Tuesday, Oct. 10, 2017, photo provided by Sam Brinkerhoff, his wife Monica Brinkerhoff takes a photo of her wedding ring that was found in the burned remains of her home in Santa Rosa, Calif. She had hoped to retrieve a passport from her fire-resistant safe, but that too was consumed by the flames. She wasn't prepared for what she did find, the couple's soot-covered engagement rings, with a pair of etched hearts still visible on one of the bands. (Sam Brinkerhoff via AP)


In this Tuesday, Oct. 10, 2017, photo provided by Sam Brinkerhoff, his wife Monica Brinkerhoff takes a photo of her wedding ring that was found in the burned remains of her home in Santa Rosa, Calif. She had


Firefighters try to extinguish a house fire during the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have burned tens of thousands of acres and destroyed over 3,500 homes and businesses in several Northern California counties.  (Photo by Justin Sullivan/Getty Images)


Firefighters try to extinguish a house fire during the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have burned tens of thousands of acres


A CalFire chief runs past burning grass during a firing operation while battling the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have burned tens of thousands of acres and destroyed over 3,500 homes and businesses in several Northern California counties.  (Photo by Justin Sullivan/Getty Images)


A CalFire chief runs past burning grass during a firing operation while battling the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have burned


A CalFire firefighter uses a hand tool as he monitors a firing operation while battling the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have burned tens of thousands of acres and destroyed over 3,500 homes and businesses in several Northern California counties.  (Photo by Justin Sullivan/Getty Images)


A CalFire firefighter uses a hand tool as he monitors a firing operation while battling the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have


The Puerta la Cruz female inmate firefighter crew clears vegetation near homes in Dry Creek Canyon to try to save them as the Partrick Fire approaches on October 12, 2017 west of Napa, California. Inmate hand crews work under the supervision of Cal Fire, which refers to them as firefighters rather than prisoners because they perform the same job as the elite Hot Shot firefighter crews. Thousands of homes have burned, at least 31 people confirmed killed with hundreds still missing as California wildfires continue to spread out of control.   (Photo by David McNew/Getty Images)


The Puerta la Cruz female inmate firefighter crew clears vegetation near homes in Dry Creek Canyon to try to save them as the Partrick Fire approaches on October 12, 2017 west of Napa, California. Inmate hand


Firefighters try to extinguish a house fire during the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have burned tens of thousands of acres and destroyed over 3,500 homes and businesses in several Northern California counties.  (Photo by Justin Sullivan/Getty Images)


Firefighters try to extinguish a house fire during the Tubbs Fire on October 12, 2017 near Calistoga, California. At least thirty one people have died in wildfires that have burned tens of thousands of acres


A grove of trees near Trinity Road glows as it burns near a vineyard after a mandatory evacuation was called in the area of Glen Ellen, Calif., on Wednesday, October 11, 2017. The Napa and Sonoma valleys continue to be under threat from several fires not yet under control and growing fears that strong winds might worsen the situation.


A grove of trees near Trinity Road glows as it burns near a vineyard after a mandatory evacuation was called in the area of Glen Ellen, Calif., on Wednesday, October 11, 2017. The Napa and Sonoma valleys


Four California legislators on Monday said they plan to introduce a bill that would bar electric utilities from passing on to their customers the costs of wildfires caused by the companies’ negligence.

The move comes as investigators are exploring whether Pacific Gas and Electric Co. power lines played a role in starting this month’s Wine Country wildfires, which killed at least 43 people. And San Diego Gas and Electric Co. has asked state regulators for permission to make its customers pay some of the costs of settling lawsuits triggered by a deadly series of fires in 2007.

“This practice is an outrage,” state Sen. Jerry Hill, D-San Mateo, said in a news release. “Victims of devastating fires and other customers should not be forced to pay for the mistakes made by utilities. It’s time to stop allowing utilities to push the burden of their negligence onto the backs of customers.”

In response, PG&amp;E issued a statement that did not directly address the proposed legislation itself but called dealing with wildfires a statewide safety issue.

“To be clear, the investigations into these fires are still ongoing and we are cooperating with the (California Public Utilities Commission) and Cal Fire’s reviews,” PG&amp;E spokesman Keith Stephens said in a statement. “While we all want answers, we must address these climate-driven natural disasters and come together to find solutions that protect our infrastructure and keep our communities and customers safe.”

Hill and three other legislators — Democratic state Sens. Mike McGuire of Healdsburg and Scott Wiener of San Francisco and Assemblyman Marc Levine, D-San Rafael — said they plan to introduce the legislation in January.

With the bill’s language still under development, it remains unclear whether it will also prohibit utility companies from making customers pay the costs of wildfires that were sparked by the equipment but were not the result of poor maintenance or other forms of negligence. Under a legal concept called “inverse condemnation,” utilities can be made to pay damages for wildfires linked to their equipment even if they followed all the applicable safety regulations.

SDG&amp;E wants to pass on to its customers $379 million of the $2.4 billion in settlements that the company paid after three massive fires in 2007. PG&amp;E and Southern California Edison support SDG&amp;E’s position. 

PG&amp;E this summer also asked the California Public Utilities Commission for permission to create an account to track the company’s lawsuit costs from the 2015 Butte Fire. If the commission allows PG&amp;E to create that account, the company could later ask for permission to incorporate some of those costs into its electric rates. 

 David R. Baker is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: dbaker@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @DavidBakerSF
                  