Cpl. Mujahid A. Ramzziddin killed; Suspect identified as Glenn Tyndell, 37

Cpl. Mujahid A. Ramzziddin killed; Suspect identified as Glenn Tyndell, 37

Cpl. Mujahid A. Ramzziddin killed; Suspect identified as Glenn Tyndell, 37

An off-duty Prince George's County police corporal was killed Wednesday morning while saving a woman's life during a domestic situation and shooting in Brandywine, police said.


A neighbor came to Cpl. Mujahid A. Ramzziddin's home in the area of Chadds Ford Drive and Chadsey Lane at 10:18 a.m. pleading for help, police said.


"He was not working," Prince George's County Police Chief Hank Stawinski said. "He immediately responded to that plea for help and shortly thereafter found himself in a confrontation with a man armed with a shotgun -- cold, callous -- (Ramzziddin) stood his ground to defend the life of the individual who came to him for help."


Home security video showed Ramzziddin was fatally shot while stepping in to protect the woman, police said.


Stawinski said cellphone video shows the suspect, identified as 37-year-old Glenn Tyndell, advance upon Ramzziddin and shoot him five times.


Stawinski said two rounds of shots were fired; the first involved three shots, the second involved two shots. He said Ramzziddin was grievously shot within the first three shots.


Stawinski said Tyndell was involved in relationships with three individuals: an ex-wife, an estranged wife and a current relationship. The woman involved in Wednesday's shooting was Tyndell's estranged wife, Stawinski said.


"I am profoundly sorry to come to my community today and talk about the death of Mujahid Ramzziddin, a proud member of the Prince George's County Police Department, an officer who was selfless throughout his career and a 2006 Medal of Valor winner. Today was not the first time he demonstrated his heroism," Stawinski said.


"This is a gentleman who lived his life giving to others, giving service. He was home. He was off duty. He didn't have to answer the door. He didn't have to walk out that door," Prince George's County Executive Rushern Baker said. "Their (police officers') badge doesn’t come off at night. It's 24 hours, and they run to service."


"Somebody in his community needed him, knew he was a police officer and sought him for help and assistance, and he instantly, without hesitation, assisted another community member and saved a life," Fraternal Order of the Police Lodge No. 89 President John "Zeek" Telechea said.


After the confrontation, Tyndell took Ramzziddin's gun, Stawinski said. No shots were fired from Ramzziddin's gun at the scene during the initial confrontation, based on the forensic services division examination, Stawinski said.


Following the incident, Tyndell drove away from the scene, police said.


"He fled in a vehicle, left Prince George's County (and) traveled into Charles County. Our peers in Charles County were completely aware of the situation. They deserve tremendous credit for not allowing him to elude sight. They brought this to our attention as they came into Prince George's County, where we, together, intervened," Stawinski said.


There was a second confrontation with two Prince George's County police officers.


"He tried to flee from his cowardly act," Stawinski said. "(The suspect) was subsequently shot and killed by Prince George's County police officers."


"A number of officers have stated clearly that Mr. Tyndell exits his vehicle armed with a handgun, a number of shots are exchanged, and what I will say to you is that we have collected numerous shell casings," Stawinski said.


Stawinski said that while no shots were fired from Ramzziddin's gun at the initial scene, a number of rounds are missing from his gun and were found in Tyndell's possession.


Forensic scientists will be comparing shell casings found with Ramzziddin's gun and the guns of the two officers who engaged Tyndell, officials said.


Witnesses said it was like something out of a movie.


"It was scary, scary situation, scary situation for the person to really do this (they) have a death warrant," witness Carnell Smith said.


Telechea praised the officers who pursued the suspect, acknowledging that they also put their lives in danger.


"Although a murderer was successful once today, he was no longer successful again. He'll no longer be a threat to this community. That is not how we wish to see incidents unfold or end, but they also are heroes because they protected their community," Telechea said.


Ramzziddin, a 14-year veteran of the PGPD, was assigned to the Special Operations Division Harbor Unit. He was an only son, a husband and father of four.


"I've been with his mother and wife. They are devastated. But right now, this institution is grieving," Stawinski said. "He led a consequential life and he suffered a consequential death, but he saved her (the victim's) life by giving his own. I'm extraordinarily proud of him, not just for the way we lost him, but for the totality of his career."


Officials with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives said the bureau's special agents from its Hyattsville II Field Office are at the scene to help Prince George's County police. Authorities said the ATF is also helping to conduct a search warrant.


The investigation is ongoing.


Authorities said there appears to be a history of domestic incidents involving Tyndell that spans multiple jurisdictions. 


Stawinski said Tyndell's ex-wife and estranged wife each sought protection from the court against him because of his violent behavior. 


WBAL-TV 11 News confirmed Tyndell had three warrants out for assault. Neighbors said police had been around looking for Tyndell to turn himself in.


"The police officers were coming to our homes, like, all last week, all times of the night morning looking, in search of him, trying to get him to turn himself in," neighbor and retired police officer Aarline Harris said.


Officials said they do not believe Tyndell should have had access to firearms.


"Preliminarily, I believe he should not have had a firearm based on that (domestic violence) history," Stawinski said.


Prince George's County State's Attorney Angela Alsobrooks echoed Stawinski's sentiments.


"We ask also to renew our commitment to ending domestic violence (in our community). That was what the call was today, and again, without a thought for safety, (Ramzziddin) jumped in front of danger and gave his life," Alsobrooks said.


This is our fallen officer. Proud public servant, father, husband and son. He wore our badge for 14 years. He will live in our hearts every day. pic.twitter.com/cNPidw6N99

We cannot thank you enough for the love respect and support as we transported our fallen brother to Baltimore earlier this afternoon. pic.twitter.com/WUTYHJqI76

"Hero, mentor, father, son, husband. By all accounts, this man was doing everything in life right. He was a devout Muslim. He assisted his brothers and sisters on this department in adhering to the religious practices. Mentored other young police officers to be better fathers and better husbands," Teletchea said. "Selflessly gave of himself to our nation in the United States Marine Corps and to the citizens of Prince George's County."


"We are all better off that this man lived and that this man served," Teletchea said.


During a news conference Wednesday afternoon, officials expressed their condolences.


"On behalf of all of Prince George's County, our prayers and condolences go out to Mujahid's wife, mother and family," Baker said. "This is a sad day for us in Prince George's County. We're going to grieve the loss of this talented young man, but it's also a proud day for us in Prince George's County because he's an example of the men and women who put on the uniform each and every day and go out there and serve. That's the caliber of the quality we have in this county, and that's what I'm proud of."


Baker said Gov. Larry Hogan called him to extend his condolences to the family and to Prince George's County on behalf of the state.


Governor Larry Hogan today released the following statement on the death of Prince George’s County police officer Corporal Mujahid Ramzziddin: pic.twitter.com/mu0UDcD2T0

Baker also encouraged fellow officers to tell their families they love them. Meanwhile, Telechea emphasized the role of law enforcement.


"The question is often raised: What makes a police officer different? Why are police officers special? It's on display for you here today -- what makes police officers special. Officer Ramzziddin -- a father, a son, a husband, a peacekeeper. Not a peacekeeper in a far-off land, a peacekeeper who lives in his community and serves in his community, and he's on his day off and his community needed him," Telechea said.


"We absolutely mourn the fact that his life was taken in a senseless act, but we thank God for officers like Officer Ramzziddin -- a police officer, a former United States Marine who defended his country and proudly today, defended his community," Telechea said. "Immediately, when a call for help went out, officers came to assist, as did the community."


Telechea said community members have been calling, asking what they can do to support officers.


"They can honor the life and service of Officer Ramzziddin. They can thank a police officer. Instead of being rash and quick to judgment, they can take a minute to understand the plight of law enforcement and what they strive to do and it is no less than selfless sacrifice. We ask for the community to pray for the entire Ramzziddin family," Telechea said.


"This is an extremely difficult time for the Prince George's County Police Department. We are wrapping our arms around one another and the family, who is grieving deeply and is within moments of having found out they have lost their loved one. We are asking for respect at this time," Prince George's County spokeswoman Jennifer Donelan said.


"I am proud of the men and women of the Prince George's County Police Department -- 1,700 strong -- who are prepared to do the same thing every day. I know you, and I will rely upon you to show this family the respect that I know you know they deserve," Stawinski said.


"Today, a gutless coward took the life of a very important part of our community. Officer (Cpl.) Ramzziddin was not only an amazing officer, a valor-award-winning officer, but he just also happened to be his mother's only son. He was a husband to his wife, and a father of four children," Alsobrooks said. "He was in his home in a place where he should've been safe, and came out to save a neighbor, and died in his own community."


Officials with police agencies around Maryland also shared their condolences for Ramzziddin's family and the PGPD.


Our deepest condolences to Cpl. Ramzziddin's family and colleagues. We mourn with you @PGPDNews pic.twitter.com/zlJTfTvN4F

Our fallen hero is Corporal Mujahid Ramzziddin.  He was assigned to our Special Operations Division, Harbor Unit.  He served his community for 14 years.

With broken hearts, we are announcing that one of our officers was shot and killed today. The brave officer was shot https://t.co/TUXlg06RGu




With broken hearts, we are announcing that one of our officers was shot and killed today. The brave officer was shot while stepping in to protect a woman threatened in a domestic situation. Please keep his family and our department in your prayers.

Chief of PGCO Police says officer who was killed this morning protected woman during domestic situation was off duty. #wbal pic.twitter.com/LgSa983hAK




With broken hearts, we are announcing that one of our officers was shot and killed today. The brave officer was shot https://t.co/TUXlg06RGu

Per Police Chief Hank Stawinski.  We are asking for patience and respect at this time.  Our sole focus is an officer’s family.

Governor, Mayor, BPD Commissioner,  MSP Superintendent et al..paused before news conf on crime initiative in moment of silence for PG Co officer shot and killed pic.twitter.com/R83phpMeo3

.@LarryHogan says Maryland flags being lowered in honor of PG Co officer killed..says officer was off duty, stepped in to intervene in domestic violence incident he witnessed and was killed. pic.twitter.com/IVOFJh7dMP





							AlertMe
						

Hearst Television participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on purchases made through our links to retailer sites.