


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police said Sharalyn Stura lied to officers about being kidnapped, which triggered an extensive manhunt the in Prescott area.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Sharalyn Stura
(Photo: Prescott Police Department)

A Prescott woman has been arrested on suspicion of murder after police say she lied to them about being kidnapped from the home where her boyfriend was slain, causing a massive manhunt Thursday.


According to Prescott police, 57-year-old Sharalyn Stura told officers she had been forced from her home near Williamson Valley Road and Pioneer Parkway, where police found the dead body of boyfriend Jay Michael Freeman. 66.


She told officers the kidnapper forced her to drive to an area near Montezuma's Well in Rimrock before she managed to escape, police said Friday in a statement.


Stura told police she drove toward Interstate 17 and State Route 179 when a passer-by stopped to assist her. Arizona Department of Public Safety troopers found her with her hands tied to the steering wheel at about 11:50 a.m., police said. 


Troopers alerted police to do a welfare check of the home, where they discovered Freeman's body. Police have not said how Freeman was killed. 


Stura told officers that her kidnapper was armed and fled on foot toward Montezuma's Well and Beaver Creek. Police conducted an extensive search and did not find the person, according to police. 


Police said evidence gathered at the home and an interview with Stura revealed conflicting evidence about what had occurred. Police determined her story about the kidnapping and person at large was fabricated. 


Stura later admitted her involvement in the murder to police and was booked into Yavapai County Jail, police said. 


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.