
					   © 2017 Observer Media · Terms · Privacy
				   

When interviewing Jeff Blau, the CEO of Related Companies, for this year’s Power 100 we asked a question Commercial Observer had never raised in the past:


Who do you think should be No. 1 on our list?

To revamp the old saw that every time a senator looks in the mirror they see a president, we imagine that every time a developer is asked his or her position in the real estate pecking order the only number they recognize is “one.” (Blau—along with Stephen Ross and Bruce Beal—got the nod himself last year.) However, if they took themselves out of the equation, who should be No. 1?

“You should pick Google,” Blau said. “They’re doing more real estate than anybody. You put Google on, everybody will say, ‘Holy shit!’ ”

Google’s $2.4 billion purchase of Chelsea Market in February was the third-largest single-building office transaction ever in New York City history—and the buy also said something even subtler about the future of the city. As Gotham jockeys to be named the new East Coast headquarters of Amazon with 19 other cities, this was a remarkable vote of confidence in this city. It said something about where the newer, techier, younger workforce wants to be.

The other thing the Google real estate purchase proved was that while many real estate players regularly say that real estate is in a holding pattern, or that we’re in “extra-innings” in an interminably long market cycle, there are players who are taking the initiative and not shying away from big things.

And that was one of the most important characteristics of those who rose in our estimation this year—they didn’t shy away from thinking big.

Brookfield Property Partners’ Ric Clark was No. 8 last year, but the company seemed unusually peckish this year; not only was it wading into multifamily with The Eugene at Manhattan West and Greenpoint Landing with the Park Tower Group in Brooklyn; not only was it leasing millions of square feet of space (like, say, EY taking 600,000 square feet at 1 Manhattan West, or Amazon taking 305,000 square feet at 5 Manhattan West); not only was it making big trades (a $2.21 billion sale of 245 Park Avenue to HNA) but after a first rebuffed attempt it managed to acquire GGP, itself one of the country’s heavyweight REITs.

Some of the heavy hitters didn’t have much room to go any higher. RXR Realty was tapped—along with Vantage Airport Group—to lead the multibillion-dollar expansion of the JetBlue terminal at John F. Kennedy Airport. Normally, this is the kind of deal that could send a developer into the top five. Unfortunately, RXR CEO and Chairman Scott Rechler was No. 4 last year, so there wasn’t a lot of room for improvement. (He’s No. 4 again.)

Silverstein Properties has always had a fairly high ranking in Power 100, but with its winning $1 billion-plus bid for the Upper West Side ABC campus it merited a spot in the top 10.

Every year publicists, landlords and brokers call Commercial Observer and ask two things: Where are they on the list? (We keep that strictly under wraps.) And what’s our methodology?

Our methodology is never going to satisfy everybody. (A “popularity contest” is how one publicist dismissed it when I tried to walk him through it.) How does one compare a landlord with a broker? It’s a difficult question. If the broker disappears from the deal, can he be replaced? Sure. But if a landlord has a great piece of real estate and nobody believes in the project or the neighborhood or the transportation, will it go empty? Sure again. Who’s more powerful? The answer is that it depends. CO’s editorial staff spent many hours wading through these questions, assigning spots on the list and trying to provide answers to questions like, “Is Google—a tech company—really a real estate powerhouse?”

Answer: Absolutely.—Max Gross

1. Ric Clark

2. Marc Holliday and Andrew Mathias

3. Stephen Ross, Jeff Blau and Bruce Beal

4. Scott Rechler

5. Sundar Pichai

6. Steven Roth

7. Rob Speyer

8. William Rudin

9. Jonathan Gray, Ken Caplan and Kathleen McCarthy

10. Larry Silverstein and Marty Burger

11. Douglas Durst and Jody Durst

12. Bill de Blasio

13. Barry Sternlicht

14. Adam Neumann and Miguel McKelvey

15. Mary Ann Tighe

16. Owen Thomas and Douglas Linde

17. Anthony Malkin

18. Jed Walentas

19. Jeff Sutton

20. Gary Barnett

21. Blake Hutcheson and Andrew Trickett

22. Christopher Kahl, Matt Bronfman and Michael Phillips

23. Peter Riguardi

24. Darcy Stacom and William Shanahan

25. Masayoshi Son

26. MaryAnne Gilmartin, Robert Lapidus and David Levinson

27. Andrew Cuomo

28. Sam Zell and David Neithercut

29. Douglas Harmon and Adam Spies

30. Jimmy Kuhn, Barry Gosin and David Falk

31. Ron Moelis, Lisa Gomez and David Dishy

32. John Banks

33. Brett White, John Santora and Bruce Mosler

34. Yoel Goldman

35. Ziel Feldman and Nir Meir

36. Richard LeFrak

37. David Simon

38. Christopher Schlank and Nicholas Bienstock

39. Mitchell Steir and Michael Colacino

40. Tommy Craig

41. Jeffrey Gural

42. Hu Gang

43. Joseph Moinian

44. Joseph Sitt

45. Stephen Siegel and Scott Gottlieb

46. Kenneth Bernstein and Christopher Conlon

47. Mitchell Hochberg and David Lichtenstein

48. Steve Witkoff

49. Simon Dushinsky and Isaac Rabinowitz

50. Jeffrey Feil and Jay Anderson

51. Stanley, Isaac, Haim and Richard Chera

52. Bobby Cayre

53. David Weinreb

54. Charles Bendit and Paul Pariser

55. Eliot Spitzer

56. Albert Behler

57. Robert Knakal

58. Sam Chang

59. Robert Stuckey

60. Daun Paris and Peter Hauspurg

61. Joseph Chetrit

62. Joanne Podell

63. Marisa Lago

64. Daniel Moore

65. Aby Rosen and Michael Fuchs

66. David and Norman Sturner

67. David Kramer

68. Ken, Steven and Winston Fisher

69. David Amsterdam and Michael Cohen

70. Rick Cotton

71. Josh Zegen, Brian Shatz and Adam Tantleff

72. Toby Moskovits

73. Meredith Marshall and Geoff Flournoy

74. Earle Altman, Peter Burack, Gregg Schenker and Steven Hornstock

75. Gary LaBarbera

76. K. Thomas and Frederick Elghanayan

77. Joseph Stavrach

78. Fred Wilpon and Saul Katz

79. Henry Elghanayan and Justin Elghanayan

80. Francis Greenburger

81. Arthur Mirante and A. Mitti Liebersohn

82. Burton Resnick and Jonathan Resnick

83. Michael Shah

84. Stephen Meringoff and Leslie Himmel

85. Arthur Zeckendorf and William Zeckendorf

86. David Firestein, Chase Welles and Jacqueline Klinger

87. Martin Dorph

88. Richard Coles and Gary Tischler

89. Joe Cayre

90. Donald Capoccia, Joseph Ferrara and Brandon Baron

91. Robert K. Futterman

92. T.J. Gottesdiener

93. Joe Lhota and Andy Byford

94. Steven Kaufman

95. Jeff Winick

96. Jonathan Mechanic

97. Héctor Figueroa

98. Veronica Mainetti

99. James Wacht, Peter Braus and Joel Herskowitz

100. Amol Sarva

The most recent trends and transactions driving the industry

Industry news and trends in the commercial real estate finance industry

This month's biggest leases, national and market-level analysis, exclusive Q&amp;As, guest columnists and more

Covering the greater Los Angeles commercial real estate market’s latest lease, sales, and financing transactions; market trend analysis; and exclusive Q&amp;As with LA’s most active players

Thank you for signing up! Enter another email

E-Newsletter signup:

Thank you for signing up!   Enter another email