Mark Morris repeatedly stabbed Emma day on a South London street, court hears

A man who launched a “horrific attack” on the mother of his daughter over a disagreement about childcare payments has been convicted of murder.

Mark Morris, 39, stabbed 33-year-old Emma Day to death on a South London street in May. 

The pair ended their eight year relationship in 2016 and their daughter went to live with Day, along with her older son from a previous relationship.

Day sought Child Support Agency payments from Morris for their daughter, but he was not happy with this request, London's Old Bailey heard. 

Around a year after the couple separated, Day called a friend and asked her if she could accompany her and her two children home.

She explained that Morris had been around and that he had made her feel nervous because he was so unpredictable, the court heard. 

As they made their way Morris emerged from an alleyway and approached them and begged Day not to make him pay child support.

He said he was in a lot of debt and if he had to pay it he would be left homeless, the court heard. 

But Ms Day was adamant that he should pay, which resulted in Morris, who was under the influence of alcohol, calling her names.

At this point that Ms Day’s friend sent the children away because she was worried he was going to hit their mother, so they left the scene.

Day eventually said that nothing was being resolved and her friend left and started walking away, at which point Morris dropped his bag to the floor and ran towards her with a knife, stabbing her repeatedly.

Although her friend rushed to her defence and tried to fight Morris off, he continued his attack. The friend eventually managed to get him off, at which point he ran away.

Officers searching the area, later found a bag with a number of items inside belonging to Morris - including correspondence from the Child Maintenance Service. The murder weapon was also recovered nearby.

The 39-year-old pleaded guilty to murder at the Old Bailey. He had previously pleaded guilty to manslaughter but it was not accepted by the court.

Detective Inspector John Massey, the senior investigating officer from the Met’s Homicide and Major Crime Command, said: “This was a pre-meditated, brutal attack where Morris laid in wait for Emma so he could confront her.

"When the conversation did not go his way, he has followed Emma, produced a large knife and stabbed her to death before fleeing the scene.

”This horrific attack on a defenceless young woman was witnessed by Emma’s lifelong friend who desperately tried to protect her from Morris. Thankfully, Emma’s children did not witness the attack but they have still had their loving mother taken away from them.

“I hope today’s conviction will give Emma’s family and friends a measure of comfort and closure."

or register with your social account

Already have an account? Log in