The Hinsdale Village Board is considering whether a day care and eight-home subdivision is a good use for the long vacant Amlings property on Ogden Avenue.


The owners of Kensington School, which provides all-day childcare and preschool, want to subdivide the 4-acre site on the southeast corner of Monroe and Ogden Avenue. The preschool would be located on the north portion, with the parking lot along Ogden Avenue. To the south of the school, eight single-family houses would be built on a cul-de-sac that extends east from Monroe.


To do that, Kensington needs village approval to change the zoning of the site from residential to office use and subdivide it. Nearby homeowners prefer the entire property be used for single-family houses.


Hinsdale Village President Thomas Cauley, Jr. said the village tried for more than 10 years to find a developer to build homes there, but none was interested in building houses along Ogden, despite the fact the property is zoned for single-family residential. It was not for want of trying, Cauley said.


Developers have suggested putting town houses on the property, which would have created greater density than the Kensington proposal, Cauley said.


Karen Moberly, who lives east of the site, said the Hinsdale Animal Hospital, at Ogden and Vine Street, which plans to build a new facility on York Road, is marketing its property for homes.


“I assume Ogden Avenue is not that heinous if they think they are going to build four houses just two blocks east of this facility,” Moberly said.


But the Amlings site is next to the Hinsdale Orthopaedics, and ManorCare nursing home is west of that, which generate a lot of activity, Cauley said.

ManorCare and Hinsdale Orthopaedics have been leasing parking spaces for their employees on the vacant Amlings site because their parking lots are too small.


If the property is redeveloped as proposed, they would have to find other solutions to their parking problems.


Some neighbors of the site are concerned cars will overflow onto their streets to park.


They also are concerned about the hazards of increased traffic from parents and staff going to and from the day care.


Charles Marlas, co-owner of the Kensington Schools, said the school would be open from 6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. with children arriving and leaving throughout the day. The peak periods are between 6:30 a.m. and 9 a.m. and between 3:30 p.m. and 6 p.m. Parents will have to park their vehicle and enter or leave the school with their children, so cars will not be lined up waiting to pull up and drop off a child.


Enrollment would be limited to 150 children, ages 6 months to 5 years old.


Although the day care will have an educational component, there will not be set hours for a morning session and afternoon session, as some preschools have, Marlas said.


The Hinsdale location would be the 12th Kensington School the Marlases own, and all are in the western suburbs.


The Illinois Department of Transportation, which has jurisdiction over Ogden Avenue, recommends vehicles not be allowed to make a left turn from the site onto Ogden to head west.


A left turn into the school parking lot from westbound Ogden would be allowed, as would right turns to and from the site and Ogden Avenue.


Some residents expect people wanting to go west when they leave the school will head south on Monroe to North Street and then east to Madison where there is a traffic signal at Madison and Ogden.


“Much more of the traffic is going to go around the block . . .and be in our neighborhood,” said Dirk Landis, who lives on North Street.


A traffic study done for Kensington concluded the neighborhood streets can handle the added traffic and noted the preschool would be closed after 6:30 p.m. and on weekends. But Moberly pointed out the traffic study was done in in February, when few pedestrians are out.


Marlas is asking the Village Board to rezone the property to an office district, which allows preschool to operate as a special use.


After two meetings, including a public hearing, the village Plan Commission recommended the zoning change by a 4-3 vote.


The Village Board is expected to vote on the proposal at its April 17 meeting. If the zoning changes are approved, the Plan Commission would hold a public hearing April 18 on Marlas’ application to build the new Kensington School.


kfornek@pioneerlocal.com


Twitter @kfDoings