Comprehensive, authoritative and easy to digest, Econsultancy’s award-winning research offers
          practical advice on all aspects of digital business, marketing and ecommerce.

Subscribe Now


          Browse all Research
        


          Browse all Research
        


        Econsultancy subscriptions are designed to help individuals and teams make the most of digital.
      


          More from our Blog
        


            Our market-leading Digital Pulse newsletter is an invaluable source for digital and ecommerce analysis, inspiration and learning.
          


            View a sample Digital Pulse
          

Latest digital marketing and ecommerce insight from multi- award-winning team
        of analysts and experts.

Find out more

Econsultancy's Digital Cream is one of the landmark industry moderated roundtable events for marketers.

View all Events

Econsultancy regularly hosts exciting and informative events for multi-disciplines all over the globe.

Regular training courses run globally for individuals across all digital topics including
                Search, Ecommerce, Email, Analytics and more.

Your team is not like any other. You're addressing specific challenges and opportunities with a
                particular skill set. That's where our bespoke, in-company digital training comes in.

Learning that fits around your schedule and available on any device, 24/7.
              Top up your knowledge through microlearning or grow your expertise through our in-depth
              online programmes.

What type of marketer are you? Digital Whiz Kid, Marketing OG or Perfect PI?

View all Training Courses

Up-to-date and relevant training from our passionate researchers, analysts,
        consultants and practitioners.


          Econsultancy's Digital Transformation programme helps companies identify the gaps between where they are and
          where they need to be, then closes them.
        


          Find out more
        

Identify your team’s knowledge gaps and get benchmarked against others in your industry.

Uncover areas of weaknesses in your digital capabilities with a clear scoring framework to address these factors.


        Econsultancy's Digital Transformation helps the world's biggest brands accelerate their journey to digital excellence.
      

Search our directory containing profiles of organisations, including agencies, consultancies, technology
              vendors, freelancers and contractors, who provide digital marketing or ecommerce services, solutions or
              technology.

Buyer's Guides, RFPs and Agency Top 100 to help you find a supplier.

If you're transforming your organisation's digital capabilities, skills and resources, talk to us.




              {{ item.short_summary }}
            


    Enter a search term such as “mobile analytics” or browse our content using the filters above.
  


    That’s not only a poor Scrabble score but we also couldn’t find any results matching
    “”.
    Check your spelling or try broadening your search.
  


    This service is currently undergoing maintenance.
    Please try again later.
  

You are here:

By Ben Davis @ Econsultancy

Koru Kids offers London-based childcare services such as nanny sharing through an Airbnb-style website.

Rebecca Hamilton is Head of Marketing at the startup. Here's what her day-to-day looks like. (P.S. Don't forget to check out the Econsultancy jobs board if you're looking for a new role yourself.)

Rebecca Hamilton: I’m the Head of Marketing at Koru Kids. We’re a marketplace that helps parents arrange great quality childcare. Our first service was nanny share -- connecting local families together so they could share the same nanny. Now we also have an after-school nanny service where we recruit, vet and train the top university students and then match them to local families to help with childcare after school.

It’s my job to communicate the brand to parents and students. In a startup that usually means running hundreds of experiments on our digital marketing channels to find the most efficient and effective ways to grow the business. I’m also constantly testing out new messaging and making sure our tone of voice reflects who we are as a brand.

RH: I report into Rachel Carrell, our CEO and Founder.

RH: I started off my career in consulting and then joined a health tech business. I had no marketing experience but was driven, naturally curious and had strong analytical skills. My boss at the time taught me everything on the job plus I read A LOT. We’re recruiting for the marketing team at the moment and we’re open to applications from people with no marketing experience because I believe the intrinsics are much more important.

My main challenge at the moment is time [said everyone working in a startup ever] so you have to be able to prioritise. I try to take an agile approach and do one thing at a time, finish it and move on -- but that’s easier said than done! It’s also really important for me to understand our customers so I can communicate effectively with them in our copy and creative. I constantly read their feedback and listen in to our customer calls.



Rebecca Hamilton

RH: My role covers everything from online marketing and content marketing to PR and partnerships, so every day is completely varied! I always wake up, clear my inbox and check Slack. This means when I get to the office I can get straight into my first task of the day.

A typical day at the moment involves reviewing job applications and interviewing candidates as we’re hiring for roles across the business. I also try and speak to as many other Heads of Marketing targeting the same markets as us. Everyone’s really open to sharing ideas and telling you what they tried that didn’t work -- which is really valuable!

The rest of the day will most likely be spent optimising our online marketing accounts, making new creative, testing new ideas or planning our next PR campaign.

RH: Our team is amazing – we took the decision to hire slow (but ideally fast!) and get it right. So far it’s 100% paid off. Everyone is committed and driven but most importantly really nice! It’s the best team I’ve ever worked with.

I’m constantly testing new things and often they don’t work, which initially sucks. I’m the type of person who hates to fail but it just makes me even more determined to make it work next time.

RH: My main areas of focus are parent and student acquisition numbers and the percentage of those that end up as customers. I track cost per acquisition (CPA) at top of the funnel as well as further down – this way I’m tracking quality too. 

RH: Google Analytics is really important for me as it allows me to see a snapshot of our performance at any time and measure campaign success. I also love Slack - it’s easy to communicate with the team and also keep up to date on all our consumer feedback. We use Front to manage our inboxes and CRM. It has so many features that save me time and help me manage my working day.

RH: I was previously the Head of Ecommerce at the world’s largest Online Doctor, DrThom.com. Rachel (my boss) was the CEO there before she started Koru Kids. When I was ready to leave I went to chat to her for some career advice, as she had always been a great mentor, and she offered me a job! To everyone else it seemed like a huge risk, as at this point we had no funding. But I knew Rachel was going to build something amazing and I’m so proud to be doing it with her.

I haven’t thought about my next role - I’ll think of that when Koru Kids is the world’s leading childcare brand. For now I’m just focused on making that happen.

RH: I’m really excited about the opportunities the world has with data. I’m currently reading a lot in this space. There are so many companies doing amazing things with machine learning and it opens up a whole world of new possibilities. I also think it could bring about amazing social change in healthcare and education if done in a responsible way.

RH: Start with no or small budgets and find out what works. We only started paid marketing a year after I joined. Then when you find what works put budget in and grow fast. Otherwise there is a risk you’ll spend a lot of budget acquiring the wrong customers and only realise when there is no budget left.

Published 4 June, 2018 by Ben Davis @ Econsultancy

Ben Davis is Editor at Econsultancy. He lives in Manchester, England. You can contact him at ben.davis@econsultancy.com, follow at @herrhuld or connect via LinkedIn.

1228 more posts from this author
          

Our market-leading Digital Pulse newsletter is an invaluable source for digital and ecommerce analysis, inspiration and learning.


        The best Asia-Pacific digital marketing stats from June 20186 days ago
      


        Energy brand Bulb is doing great things with UX (here are five examples)7 days ago
      


        Influencer marketing agency Pulse says "regulation needs to happen"5 days ago
      

Keep up to date with the latest analysis, inspiration and learning from the Econsultancy blog with our free Digital Pulse newsletter. You will receive a hand-picked digest of the latest and greatest articles, as well as snippets of new market data, best practice guides and trends research.


            Copyright © 2018 Econsultancy.com Limited. All rights reserved. This material is for personal use only.
            Use of this website constitutes acceptance of the
            Website Terms and Conditions and
            Privacy &amp;
            Cookies Policy.
          


                Part of 
                
              

https://bitesize.econsultancy.com