Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Johnathan Sails was sentenced to two years of probation in the 2013 death of KeAir Swift, who was found in the bottom of the East Detroit High pool.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


Johnathan 
Sails

(Photo: Regina H. Boone, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

A former substitute teacher was sentenced to two years probation Wednesday in the 2013 death of a student who drowned during a swimming class in the pool at a Macomb County high school.


Johnathan Sails, 28, of Detroit also was sentenced by Macomb Circuit Court Judge James Maceroni  to one day in the county jail, with credit for a day served, 60 hours of community service and fees.


Sails was charged in the Nov. 8, 2013 death of KeAir Swift, 14, of Detroit, who was at the bottom of the deep end of the East Detroit High School pool. The school is now known as Eastpointe High School.


KeAir was pulled unconscious out of the water by an acting assistant principal who jumped in wearing his dress clothes. The boy — who did not know how to swim, according to his family — died after several days on life support.


Related:


Judge dismisses charge in '13 school pool drowning case


Oxford Twp. boy, 16, drowns trying to reach swim platform


Sails pleaded no contest to involuntary manslaughter, a 15-year felony, in April.


In 2015, the involuntary manslaughter charge against Sails was dismissed by Maceroni based on a ruling by the Michigan Supreme Court in a similar school drowning case.


The prosecutor's office appealed and the Court of Appeals reversed Maceroni's ruling.


Rob Leonetti, Sails' attorney, then appealed to the Michigan Supreme Court, but the court did not take up the matter.


The case was going to go to trial this year, but Sails pleaded no contest to involuntary manslaughter.


According to court records, the plea in April was taken under advisement with a Cobbs agreement between Sails and the court that would cap county jail time for Sails, which would be for one year.


Instead, Maceroni sentenced Sails to two years of probation. Leonetti said he could understand KeAir's family being upset with the sentence.


Leonetti said that he believes Maceroni took several factors into consideration in his sentence, including that there were "so many different factors involved in this tragedy." He said his client wasn't the only one involved and shouldn't have been the only one criminally charged.


"You never know what you're gonna get when you go in there. You certainly hope the facts, as presented as they are, go toward mitigating any client's sentence," Leonetti said. "I think there was an overwhelming amount of factors."


He reiterated Wednesday that Sails was the first adult in the water to try to save KeAir.


The prosecution previously had said that Sails lied to the school about having lifeguard certification.


A witness testified in a prior district court hearing that Sails was sitting in the bleachers, fully clothed, during the class. They said he at first resisted, then went into a changing area to remove his clothes and once he jumped into the water, said it was too deep to rescue KeAir.


Sails was a teacher until his plea in April, Leonetti said.


Contact Christina Hall: chall@freepress.com. Follow her on Twitter: @challreporter.
