Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Reports of Noah Anderson's alleged crime, background as uneducated drifter differ from historical records. He owned property, was long-time resident.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Noah Anderson, an African-American accused of murder and lynched by a white mob in New Richmond in 1895, had confided in writing to a white friend that he was harassed by many whites for his success. Anderson owned a house, which he had sketched.
(Photo: Provided/Greg Roberts)

Neither Clermont County nor its one documented black lynching victim, Noah Anderson, have a place in the new lynching memorial that opened this past week in Montgomery, Alabama.


Yet the conflicting accounts of Anderson's background and the crime of which he was accused fit a pattern of 30 percent of the 4,400 cases memorialized in Alabama. Anderson was accused of but never tried for murder.


In addition, the "official" version of Anderson's death in 1895 doesn't jibe with historical evidence, leaving one local historian with questions about what happened.


Among the names inscribed in steel monuments at the National Memorial for Peace and Justice are six from Butler and Boone counties. Anderson's name and those of four additional Boone County victims are missing from the roll of African-Americans lynched across the United States from 1877 through 1950.


Without a trial, The Enquirer and the Columbus Evening Dispatch convicted Anderson of murder in their August 1895 coverage of his public lynching in New Richmond.


Anderson was accused of fatally choking a wealthy banker president and business owner, Franklin Fridman, 79.  Fridman drove in his horse and buggy two miles back to his home in Clermontville after conducting business in New Richmond. Fridman had stopped at one of the houses he owned, hitched the horse and walked into an adjoining field. There, the Dispatch reported, Anderson attacked Fridman. 


By the time Anderson was arrested and taken to New Richmond to be locked up, a crowd of 300 had gathered by the jail, The Enquirer reported. The marshal attempted to take Anderson to a more secure jail in Batavia, but the mob rushed the officer and seized the prisoner.


He was hanged and, according to reports, died within 20 minutes. The extralegal death sentence was executed by the white mob within four hours of the killing that Anderson was accused of committing.


The Enquirer story described Anderson as "shiftless, half-witted negro." The Dispatch wrote that Anderson had arrived in New Richmond a few months before killing Fridman on a "shanty boat and claimed to be a paperhanger."


But historical documents reveal Anderson was a long-time Clermont County resident and an educated man who owned a house and property. Some whites resented Anderson's success, said Greg Roberts, a local historian and Ulysses S. Grant scholar who also is New Richmond's village manager.


Noah Anderson is listed in this program for the 1875 graduation ceremony at Clermont Academy in Clermontville. (Photo: Provided/Greg Roberts)

Roberts has a copy of an 1894 letter Anderson wrote to James K. Parker, an abolitionist and the principal of the Clermont Academy in Clermontville.


Anderson detailed that he had been harassed by whites because of his acquired wealth. Anderson was listed as the guest speaker in the 1875 graduation program at the academy, a school that educated students regardless of race or gender. 


The school closed in 1892 after it failed to get financing for an expansion into a co-ed, multi-race institution in the Oberlin College model. Though some people in Clermont County were abolitionists and provided shelter on the Underground Railroad, Roberts said, others fought any attempt by African-Americans to lift themselves and wanted to keep them down.


"That he choked the life out of Fridman is false, I believe – at least I have serious doubts," Roberts said. "There are many, many contradictions and untruths in the official accounts."


 
