Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Awards given to best photojournalism produced in 2017.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Margaret Daniels, 75, poses for a portrait at the first annual Mothers Against Gun Violence cookout Saturday, September 9, 2017 at Burnet Woods Park. Her grandson, Marcus Daniels, was shot and killed April 13, 2012. She has been attending homicide monthly support meetings hosted by the victims advocates office in the Cincinnati Police Department.
(Photo: The Enquirer/Meg Vogel)Buy Photo

Enquirer photojournalist earned 17 awards for work published in 2017 by the Ohio News Photographers Association.


Competing against other Ohio newspapers of similar size, Enquirer photojournalists finished second as photography staff of the year and had four first-place finishes in the categories of General News, News Video, Feature Video and Team Video, among several other finishes.


Here is the list of the awards given to The Enquirer by the judges of the competition from Athens, Ohio:


Meg Vogel, Staff Photojournalist 


Meg Vogel, staff photojournalist. (Photo: The Enquirer/Carrie Cochran)

Tennessee Titans quarterback Marcus Mariota (8) dives for the end zone in the second quarter during the Week 10 NFL game between the Cincinnati Bengals and the Tennessee Titans, Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017, at Nissan Stadium in Nashville, Tennessee. (Photo: Kareem Elgazzar)

Kareem Elgazzar, Staff Photojournalist


Kareem Elgazzar, Enquirer sports photographer. (Photo: The Enquirer/Patrick Reddy)

Riccy Enriquez Perdomo hugs her 11-month-old son, Rony, and is met by her sister Rita Enriquez as she is released from custody at the Boone County Jail in Burlington, Ky., on Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017. Riccy Enriquez Perdomo was released from county jail, after being arrested Aug. 17. Enriquez, had been granted legal status two times through DACA (Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals) but was arrested at an immigration office in Louisville. She had gone there to post bond for another immigrant being held who was eligible for release. (Photo: Sam Greene)

Sam Greene, Staff Photojournalist


Sam Greene, photojournalist Enquirer Media. (Photo: The Enquirer/Cara Owsley)

Enquirer staff awards
