Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In the race to replace retiring Robertson County Sheriff Bill Holt, the histories of the three candidates who’ve thrown their names into one of the most hotly contested races of the summer are as varied as the weather.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The Robertson County Sheriff's Office in Springfield, Tennessee.
(Photo: Mark Humphrey, File,  AP)

Personnel files, previous work experience, commendations and reprimands.


In the race to replace retiring Robertson County Sheriff Bill Holt, the histories of the three candidates who’ve thrown their names into one of the most hotly contested races of the summer are as varied as the weather.


That’s not to say there aren’t connections. 


All three have deep ties to Robertson County with two graduating from Jo Byrns High School years apart, according to their resumes.


Another considers Springfield his hometown and has an established 27-year career within the local department.


As August draws closer and residents prepare to head to the polls, the Robertson County Times pulled employee files for all three of the candidates engaged in the sheriff’s race.


Here’s a look at them in alphabetical order:


Teddy Douglas addresses the crowd gathered for a Meet and Greet with the candidates at the Robertson County Senior Center. (Photo: Ken Atkinson / For the USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee)

A 1976 graduate of Jo Byrns High School, Douglas has more than 36 years in law enforcement, mostly with the Tennessee Highway Patrol (THP).


He holds numerous state and Federal training certificates and has completed coursework at Austin Peay State University, Volunteer State Community College and Nashville State Tech Community College.


Douglas’s work history includes a stint with TRANE, where he worked as a computer operator for a little less than two years.


In May of 1978, he joined Robertson County Emergency Medical Services as an emergency medical technician, serving a little more than two and a half years before joining the THP.


He stayed with the THP for almost seven years before accepting work in January of 1987 as a service advisor at Beaman Automotive, where he remained for three months.


In April of 1987, he joined the Goodlettsville Police Department as an officer and remained there for a little more than five years before heading back to the THP in July of 1992.


Douglas advanced through the ranks at THP, reaching the title of lieutenant before his retirement in July of 2017.


There were no disciplinary actions or commendations in his file.


Joe MacLeod addresses the crowd gathered for a Meet and Greet with the candidates at the Robertson County Senior Center. (Photo: Ken Atkinson / For the USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee)

A self-professed hometown guy from Springfield, MacLeod has logged 27 years with the Springfield Police Department, beginning his career as a patrol officer in February of 1991.


In 1992, MacLeod was assigned to the 19th Judicial Task Force, for Robertson and Montgomery Counties, as a narcotics investigator and joined the special weapons and tactics unit at the Springfield Police Department.


He was promoted to the rank of corporal in 1997, but stepped down to patrol in 1998 so he could become a K-9 handler.


After more than 10 years in the K-9 role, MacLeod was promoted to corporal and assigned to the Springfield Police Department’s bike unit, where he remained until 2014. Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of sergeant and presently works as a patrol supervisor on the night shift.


Like Douglas, he holds numerous state and Federal training certificates.


His employee file was the thickest of the candidates, reflecting good reviews dating back to 1991, several reports detailing minor automobile crashes while on duty, three commendations, three written reprimands and two suspensions from duty.


The commendations were from March of 1995, December of 1997 and October of 2000.


MacLeod was praised for his role in a countywide manhunt for two shooting suspects in the letter from 1995. He was praised for his professionalism during a burglary call at the Bank of America in Goodlettsville in the letter from 1997, and, in the letter from 2000, he was praised for his work in the apprehension of a suspect involved in the armed robbery of a Springfield video store, in which two employees were sexually assaulted and kidnapped. 


The commendation from 2000 said the suspect was under investigation for 12 additional video store robberies in Nashville, Franklin, Hendersonville, Gallatin, Dickson and Bowling Green, Ky.


The written reprimands were from April of 1998, December of 2003 and March of 2005.


During the 1998 incident, MacLeod was attending a week-long training session in Goodlettsville and had several issues with time management, according to a letter written by then Springfield Police Lt. Jimmy Grogan.


In the 2003 incident, MacLeod violated the Springfield Police Department’s pursuit and mobile video/audio recording equipment policies when he was responding to a vehicle pursuit with several other officers, according to a letter written by then Springfield Police Lt. Jeff White.


And, during the 2005 incident, MacLeod was reprimanded by then Chief Mike Wilhoit after Wilhoit received a complaint about a confrontation between MacLeod and a General Sessions Court officer. He was ordered to apologize to the officer, the sheriff and the General Sessions Court judge for his behavior and told to report back.


“Persons who were present during this incident only saw a Springfield Police Officer raise his voice in an angry manner and ‘go off’ on a county deputy,” Wilhoit wrote. “From the public’s view, you started this altercation.”


Wilhoit also called the incident “much like I would find in dealing with juveniles,” the letter also notes.


The personnel file also includes detailed accounts of two suspensions, the first in August of 1992 for a period of two days, and the second in March of 2002 for a period of seven days.


In the 1992 incident, MacLeod agreed to change days off with another officer but did not report for duty, causing the department to pay another officer overtime to cover the shift, Wilhoit wrote.


In the 2002 incident, MacLeod was scheduled to report for duty at 6:30 p.m. on a Monday, having returned that day to Nashville International Airport from a planned vacation. He was also scheduled for K-9 training in Hendersonville, according to a letter from Wilhoit.


More than an hour after he was supposed to report for duty, MacLeod called dispatch and reported he was sick, Wilhoit noted. At some point, upper management was informed that MacLeod’s return flight wasn’t due in Nashville until 10:30 p.m., the letter said.


“It is apparent that you never intended to return until after 10 p.m. … yet you submitted a vacation slip stating that you would return to normal duty at 6:30 p.m.,” Wilhoit wrote.


“When questioned about returning to Nashville after 10 p.m., you changed from being sick to going to training late. You intentionally did not return to work and you called in sick when you were intentionally out of town.”


As a result of the incident, MacLeod’s work hours were changed, he was ordered to attend regular training sessions and was advised that all future sick leave would require a doctor’s excuse and written explanation of illness.


Mike Van Dyke addresses the crowd gathered for a Meet and Greet with the candidates at the Robertson County Senior Center. (Photo: Ken Atkinson / For the USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee)

A 1999 graduate of Jo Byrns High School, Van Dyke currently serves as chief deputy of the Robertson County Sheriff’s Office, a position he’s held since September of 2010.


Like Douglas and MacLeod, Van Dyke holds numerous state and Federal training certificates. He’s also an Eagle Scout and graduated from Austin Peay State University in 2003 with a Bachelor of Science in agricultural science.


Van Dyke’s work history includes time with the Montgomery County Sheriff’s Office, City of Clarksville, Austin Peay State University and the Robertson County Sheriff’s Office.


He served as a volunteer reserve deputy in Robertson County from June of 1999 to October of 2000, and for much of that same time, he was employed at Austin Peay as a police officer before leaving campus in 2002 to pursue a career opportunity with the City of Clarksville. 


Van Dyke served as division commander of the Clarksville Park Rangers until May of 2009, when the division consolidated. 


He joined the Montgomery County Sheriff’s Office in June of 2009 and worked as a school resource officer until 2010, when he left to assume his current role as chief deputy in Robertson County.


There were no disciplinary actions or commendations in his file. However, there were several documents included from prior employers praising Van Dyke.


Reach Nicole Young at 615-306-3570 or nyoung@tennessean.com.
 
