Partly cloudy. High 96F. Winds light and variable..

Mainly clear. Low 68F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:56 pm

While the 2017 numbers of opioid related deaths increased from the 2016 numbers, the rate of increase in opioid deaths was markedly reduced compared to the previous year, cites a press release received from the Dent County Health Center. From 2015 to 2016 there was a 35 percent increase in opioid- or heroin-related deaths in the state, but the 2016 to 2017 numbers increased by only 4.7 percent.

In 2016, there were 908 opioid- or heroin-related deaths in the state, a 35 percent increase over 2015’s number of 672. During this past year, the opioid related deaths increased only 4.7 percent. In total, there were 951 opioid deaths in Missouri, with 298 heroin deaths and 653 opioid deaths that were non-heroin.

Missouri is suffering through an opioid abuse crisis which impacts many families. The State of Missouri along with many partners continues to take significant steps in fighting this epidemic.  

“We must continue our efforts to find innovative solutions to combat and curb opioid abuse,” said Governor Mike Parson. “We remain committed to fighting this drug epidemic and will work to help all families and individuals throughout Missouri to end this epidemic.”

“The opioid crisis is the number one public health issue Missouri is facing,” said Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services director Randall Williams, MD. “We are incredibly thankful to all who have helped us meet the challenge that exists both nationally and in Missouri. The declining rate of opioid deaths shows improvement statewide; however, we recognize that one loss is too many and we are committed to working as hard as we can to decrease the number of deaths.”

“The Department of Social Services is committed to making a positive difference and saving lives as our neighbors, friends, family and colleagues struggle with opioids,” said Steve Corsi, Psy.D., Missouri Department of Social Services director. “There is no group of people who are immune to opioid addiction and we are engaged with physicians and physician groups to work to refine an early detection and prevention system for opioids while reducing administrative burdens on physicians so they can remain focused on patient care. We’ve made great strides in shifting the trajectory of opioid deaths in Missouri over the past year and we want to see that progress accelerate.”

One of the most significant efforts DHSS has undertaken is trying to decrease the potential for people to become addicted to opioids. Prescriber data is now being proactively reviewed once received from a pharmacy benefit manager, which is provided to DHSS voluntarily. While no patient information is received, it allows the department to analyze data to identify activity indicating that controlled substances, including opioids, are being inappropriately prescribed, dispensed or obtained, and for DHSS to take appropriate action. DHSS has stepped up investigations of improper prescription behavior through its Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs.

DHSS is also working with Missouri’s Medicaid Program, MO HealthNet, to improve interactions with providers and to ensure MO HealthNet patients are receiving care according to best practice guidelines for opioid prescribing. These quality indicators are used for provider education and also to engage physicians.

The Missouri Department of Mental Health, in collaboration with researchers at the University of Missouri, St. Louis – Missouri Institute of Mental Health, received a grant to expand access to integrated prevention, treatment and recovery support services for individuals with opioid use disorder throughout the state. This grant, known as the Missouri Opioid State Targeted Response is implementing a “medication first” treatment model, designed to increase access to evidence-based medications for OUD.

“Early results from the STR grant efforts indicate a successful implementation of the medication first model. At agencies throughout the state, individuals were more likely to receive medication for OUD and receive the medication sooner, needed fewer psychosocial services and remained in treatment longer,” said Mark Stringer, DMH director.

In addition, the grant has supplied over 5,000 naloxone kits to at-risk individuals and their loved ones, and clinicians who work with at-risk populations.

 Other efforts to reduce opioid related deaths include:

• The passing of Senate Bill 826 that limits initial new prescriptions of opioids to a seven day supply.

• The passing of HB 2280, which extends MO HealthNet (Medicaid) coverage an additional year for mothers in need of substance use treatment.

• Establishing the St. Louis Emergency Operations Center, a command center aimed at reducing opioid overdose death and homicides.

• Creating the Missouri Overdose Rescue and Education (MORE) project through a federal grant awarded to the Bureau of Emergency Medical Services to provide naloxone to first responders and train them on administering the nasal spray to reverse an apparent opioid overdose.

 Additional information regarding the opioid epidemic in Missouri can be found on the DHSS website, health.mo.gov/data/opioids. More information about DHSS can be found at health.mo.gov or find us on Facebook and Twitter.

The Dent County Health Center is working diligently to bring the most up-to-date opioid prevention education and tools to our community. More information about the Dent County Health Center can be found at www.dentcountyhealthcenter.org or find it on Facebook (@DentCountyHealthCtr)

Sorry, there are no recent results for popular commented articles.

Jess Baldwin of Salem calls it her “mid-life crisis.” For many of us, sitting in a kayak and trying to traverse the 340 miles from Kansas City to St. Charles in 88 hours or less would definitely be a crisis. 

The U.S. Supreme Court ruled Thursday that states have the right to charge sales tax on online transactions by out-of-state companies with no physical presence in their territory. 

STATE, REGIONAL NEWS
					

						St. Louis Post Dispatch
							Springfield News-Leader

NATIONAL NEWS
					 

			
			USA Today
							
					
					  
				