PeaceHealth, based in Vancouver, Washington, is a not-for-profit Catholic health system offering care to communities in Washington, Oregon, and Alaska. PeaceHealth has approximately 16,000 caregivers, a multi-specialty medical group practice with more than 800 physicians and providers, a comprehensive laboratory system, and ten medical centers serving both urban and rural communities throughout the Northwest. In 1890, Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace founded what has become PeaceHealth. Today, PeaceHealth is the legacy of its founding Sisters and continues to serve communities when invited to do so with a spirit of collaboration and stewardship. This is The Spirit of Healing-The Spirit of PeaceHealth.


                                © 2018 Access Intelligence, LLC. All Rights Reserved.
                            


                                9211 Corporate Blvd., 4th Floor  
                                 
                                Rockville, 
                                Maryland 20850 
                                
                                
								
                                (860) 437-5700 
								
                            

Insert additional messaging here.


					We use cookies on this site to enhance your experience. By clicking any link on this page you allow us to set cookies.
				

Please enable cookies through your browser settings.


YourMembership uses cookies for your convenience and security. Cookies are text files stored on your computer. The cookies remember information that you've already typed in our web site fields, so you don't have to enter them again. They are used to make your experience on web sites more personal and less cumbersome. We do link information stored in cookies to personally identifiable information you submit while on our site. You should have the ability to change whether or not cookies are used through your web browser. Please refer to your web browser's help function for assistance on how to change your preferences.


View complete Privacy Policy