
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Denver Police


Joseph Lovato

Denver Police


Lorenzo Lesperance




Two men have been arrested as suspects in a fatal shooting earlier this month in Denver.

Lorenzo Lesperance, 26, and Joseph Lovato, 29, are being held on suspicion of first-degree murder and attempted first-degree murder.

Jeramy Montano, 29, was shot just before 6 p.m. on Jan. 14  in the 3000 block of West Center Avenue, according to an arrest affidavit. Montano had been riding in a silver sedan, with two other men, when he was shot.

A woman, who knew Montano and was with him earlier, had been following the silver sedan. The woman told investigators she heard a gunshot. She saw Montano get out of the back seat of the silver car while the driver of that car was shooting at him.

Montano staggered back to the black BMW the woman was driving and fell into the back seat. The driver of the silver sedan walked toward the front of the BMW, firing multiple rounds.

The woman driving the BMW ducked below the dashboard. She threw the car in gear and drove to a nearby 7-Eleven store, in the 800 block of South Federal Boulevard, where she called 911 for help. The name of the woman, a witness and victim in the case, was redacted in the affidavit.

Montano, who was shot multiple times, was taken to Denver Health medical center where he was pronounced dead.

Twenty-one bullet strikes hit the BMW, according to the court document. Ten .45 caliber shell casings and two 9mm shell casings were recovered at the scene. Police found a Springfield XD .45 caliber handgun, two empty magazines and two fully loaded Glock 9mm magazines in two white bags in alley just north of the shooting scene.

Crime lab analysis of the .45 caliber handgun and magazines found fingerprints, which were run through a data base and came back positive as Lovato’s prints. Investigators determined Lovato owns a 2012 silver four-door Chevrolet Cruze.


Lesperance came to the attention of investigators through a crime stoppers tip. Investigators, through warrants, traced mobile phone records, keying in on cell tower locations, placing both suspects in the area of the shooting scene at the time of the shooting, according to the affidavit.

Both suspects were arrested Thursday. The Adams County Sheriff’s Office and Westminster police assisted Denver police with the arrests.