


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Morgan Roof, the younger sister of Charleston church shooter Dylann Roof, was arrested last month for allegedly carrying weapons and drugs at school.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Deputies say the sister of church shooter Dylann Roof has been arrested for bringing drugs, pepper spray and a knife to her South Carolina school. The Richland County Sheriff's Department says 18-year-old Morgan Roof was arrested Wednesday. (March 15)
    AP

Morgan Roof, 18, was arrested March 15, 2018, for allegedly bringing drugs, pepper spray and a knife to her South Carolina school.
(Photo: Alvin S. Glenn Detention Center)

Morgan Roof, the younger sister of Charleston church shooter Dylann Roof, had a charge of marijuana possession dropped Monday in her first court appearance since being arrested last month for allegedly carrying weapons and drugs on school property. 


Roof, 18, was arrested March 14 after an administrator at A.C. Flora High School in Columbia, S.C. told a school resource officer that Roof had been found in possession of a knife, pepper spray and marijuana on school grounds. 


The administrator found the items while confronting Roof about a threating Snapchat post she made about National Walkout Day —  when students across the U.S. walked out of class to call for stricter gun control. 


"Your walking out for the allowed time of 17min, They are letting you do this, nothing is going to change what (the expletive) you think it’s gonna do?" Roof's post said, according to The Post and Courier. "I hope it’s a trap and y’all get shot we know it’s fixing to be nothing but black people walkin out anyway." 


More: 'We deserve better': Students nationwide walk out in massive protest over gun violence


Her lawyer, John Delgado, said the post was not a threat but "an 18-year-old in the middle of a difficult day," The Post and Courier reported. 


The reason prosecutors dropped the drug charge against Roof was not made public. She still faces the charge of carrying weapons on school property, a felony in South Carolina that carries a sentence of up to five years in prison. 


Roof's half-brother, Dylann, is on death row at the United States Penitentiary in Terre Haute, Ind. The self-described white supremacist was convicted and sentenced to death by a federal jury in the June 17, 2015 shooting at Charleston's Emanuel AME Church that left nine people dead. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
