Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low 66F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 40%..

Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low 66F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:15 pm

Update: The 16-year-old Bristol, Virginia, teen charged with murder has been arraigned in Tennessee.


Kingsport Police Department spokesman Tom Patton said the teen was arraigned Friday morning and was ordered to be held without bond at the juvenile detention center in Johnson City, Tennessee.


Patton confirmed the investigation continues but said new charges or arrests are not necessarily expected. That could change, however, as the investigation proceeds.


 


Original: A 16-year-old Bristol, Virginia, teenager will soon head back to Sullivan County, Tennessee, to face a first-degree murder charge.


On Thursday, William Newkirk Jr. waived extradition in Bristol Virginia Juvenile and Domestic Relations District Court, according to Sullivan County District Attorney General Barry Staubus. As a result, Newkirk, charged in connection with the death of 20-year-old Brett D. Rodgers of Kingsport, will be transported across the state line to Tennessee.


Newkirk currently faces a first-degree murder charge in Sullivan County Juvenile Court, according to court records.


“Once he gets back before our juvenile court, we will evaluate the case and make a decision,” said Staubus, responding to a question about whether he’ll charge Newkirk as an adult.


Bristol Virginia and Kingsport Police arrested Newkirk when he stepped off the school bus on March 2 outside his home. He has since been held at the Highlands Juvenile Detention Center in Bristol while awaiting extradition. In Tennessee, he’ll likely be held at the Upper East Tennessee Regional Juvenile Detention Center in Johnson City.


Early on March 2, Kingsport police responded to the Hog Wild Saloon on Stone Drive after receiving word about a possible shooting. First responders located Rodgers, who had been shot, along with another individual, and transported them both to the hospital. Rodgers later died from his injuries, and the other person, Tony Nguyen, age and address unknown, has since been released.


An investigation led police to arrest Newkirk in Bristol.


A couple hours after the Hog Wild shooting, police in Bristol, Virginia, responded to Eastridge Apartments, where someone had broken into a unit and fired multiple shots, injuring a woman. Sgt. Steve Crawford said the Bristol shooting appeared to have been in retaliation to the Kingsport shooting and remains under investigation.


A motive for the Kingsport shooting has not been released, and police continue to investigate.


Rodgers, a Dobyns-Bennett High School graduate, previously lived in Bristol and attended Virginia High School.


Families of both Rodgers and Newkirk have told the Bristol Herald Courier they want the Hog Wild Saloon to be shut down permanently. The popular bar has been closed since the shooting.


rsorrell@bristolnews.com


 


276-645-2531


Twitter: @RSorrellBHC


Facebook.com/robertsorrelltn

Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
