Scattered thunderstorms early, then becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

Scattered thunderstorms early, then becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:35 pm

KNOXVILLE (AP) — A woman is suing a Tennessee county and numerous officials over the suicide death of her husband while he was in custody.

The Knoxville News Sentinel reports attorney Troy Bowlin filed the suit in federal court on behalf of Linda Weaver. The lawsuit says 55-year-old Anthony Weaver slit his own throat in October 2016 at Roger D. Wilson Detention Facility using a razor blade given to him by a Knox County corrections officer.

Bowlin says Sheriff Jimmy “J.J.” Jones and Helen Ross McNabb Center counselor Michael Maurer were notified that Weaver was at risk for suicide. They are among defendants named in the suit.

The Sentinel said the center was not immediately available for comment. The newspaper also said the county law director’s office does not comment on pending lawsuits.

 

Man wanted in Nashville shooting turns self in

NASHVILLE — A suspect accused of robbing and fatally shooting a man during a car sale has turned himself in after being added to the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation’s Top 10 Most Wanted list.

The bureau says Ricardo Lamont Murray Jr. turned himself in Friday morning to police in Nashville. He was wanted by the Robertson County Sheriff’s Office on charges of homicide, aggravated robbery and theft.

Authorities say the 19-year-old Murray shot and killed Jonathan Outlaw, who was attempting to sell him a vehicle, on Tuesday in Cedar Hill.

The bureau says Murray turned himself in less than two days after being added to its most wanted list.

 

Tennessee man accused of shooting at cars on highway

OOLTEWAH — A Tennessee man has been accused of firing a shotgun at passing cars on an interstate overpass.

Chattanooga police said in a tweet that Hamilton County sheriff’s deputies arrested 33-year-old Matthew Derek Henry Thursday night in connection with the incident earlier in the day. WRCB-TV reports surveillance cameras captured a shirtless man in camouflage shooting at cars on Interstate 75. No one was injured.

Henry’s arrest affidavit says Henry told police he suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder and had run out of medication.

He was arrested at his home after a relative drove him there following the shooting.

Henry is charged with reckless endangerment.

 

Community college to close one campus, sell another

BLOUNTVILLE — A Tennessee community college will close one satellite campus and sell off another as part of an ongoing budget realignment.

The Kingsport Times-News reports Northeast State Community College announced on Thursday its Bristol campus will close at the end of the fall semester. The Blountville-based school has also put its Gray campus up for sale and moved offerings from it to other locations, although a deadline for bids has not been set.

Northeast State spokesman Bob Carpenter says the school is evaluating budgets and leases at all its sites, but no further changes are currently expected.

Interim college president James King says the school would like to keep its options open for a future presence in Bristol.

Students and personnel at the Bristol campus will be relocated to other sites.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription