By

Jennifer Smith For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  17:50 EDT, 12 January 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  19:44 EDT, 12 January 2018







         183

View  comments

Aaron Hernandez tormented prison guards by kicking his cell door, screaming at the top of his lungs for attention and threatening to kill their families, a new book has revealed.


The disgraced ex-Patriots star spent 10 months in Bristol County Jail in 2013 and 2014 while awaiting trial for murder. 


It was three years before he would kill himself in the maximum security prison weeks after being acquitted of two separate murders and with plans to appeal his first conviction.


In his new book All-American Murder, author James Patterson describes some of the many incidents of bad behavior Hernandez was disciplined for at Bristol County Jail. 


He also quotes Sheriff Thomas Hodgson, one of Hernandez's only allies inside the jail who said he tried to save his soul with bible study before he was moved out to a different facility. 


New details have emerged about how Aaron Hernandez tormented and threatened prison guards for months in 2013 and 2014. He is pictured in court in 2013 not long after his arrest being escorted into court 

Part of the book was published by The New York Post on Friday and reveals some of the many ways Hernandez tried to manipulate and agitate guards. 


Sheriff Thomas Hodgson told Hernandez to read the bible and often had private conversations with the star about his life and his family 

They described, in incident reports, how he would scream for them and kick his door until they came to his cell then ask them what the time was. 


On other occasions, the guards felt as though he was threatening their families. 


Hernandez would sneak food including Honey Buns into detention areas and wolf as many of the treats down as he could before they were confiscated, they said. 


He also had a tendency towards violence and once punched a fellow inmate who he thought had looked at him the wrong way. 


The inmate was a Patriots fan. 


The assault took place on February 25, 2014. According to one officer's account of it, Hernandez emerged from his unlocked cell at the time his victim, who was shackled, was being escorted by an officer down the hallway.


Hernandez approached, 'with a smile on his face', and ignored the corrections' officer's warning to go back to his cell. 


After he delivered a single blow to the inmate's face, he was restrained by two other guards. 


As he was being led away, he shouted: 'Go ahead, run your mouth now!' 


The victim later explained that Hernandez once walked past his cell and, when he realized the man was looking at him, said: 'Why you looking at me?' 


He refused however to testify against him or make an official complaint because he was a Patriots fan. 


Hernandez told the sheriff that his father had told him never to cry in front of another man so he didn't, according to a new book which shares details of his prison life 

In another petulant display, he once ate the piece of paper guards had written a report of his bad behavior on.   


It followed a tantrum he had thrown when officers were reading his mail.


When officers told him to calm down or risk being given a disciplinary report, he said: 'I don’t give a f–k about no disciplinary report. I’ll eat the motherf–ker.' 


He proceeded to eat the piece of paper.


One officer said he felt personally threatened by the sports star who, he claimed, told him he had dreams about chasing him and his family. 


At the time, Hernandez was awaiting trial for the murder of Odin Lloyd

On one occasion, he said Hernandez made a reference to his family and followed it with a machine gun noise.  


'He is constantly kicking his cell door and screaming at the top of his lungs, utilizing profanity at times when he wants something, regardless of how minuscule it is.


'It is not uncommon for Hernandez to kick his cell door constantly until an officer approaches his cell merely to ask the officer for the current time. 


'This to him is comical, causing a disruption in normal operation within the unit,' the officer wrote in one report.


Hernandez always denied threatening the guards and their families.  


Sheriff Hodgson seems to have been among the few guards Hernandez respected.


In private conversations, he told him he was 'disappointed' in him and encouraged him to read the bible. 


His effect was a positive one, he claimed, and Hernandez even credited him with his kinder treatment of his girlfriend Shayanna Jenkins who remarked during a phone call that he was suddenly being nicer to her than usual. 


According to the sheriff, Hernandez told his fiancee Shayanna Jenkins that he had been a good influence on him 

Hernandez confided in him that he used to read the bible under the encouragement of a former football coach in Florida but that he had stopped. 


Hodgson redirected him to it, he said. 


When the 28-year-old father killed himself in April 2017, a bible was found next to him open to the verse John 3:16, the title of which Hernandez had written on his forehead.


They also discussed his late father, who died when he was a child, and he tried to help him become a better person, he said.


In one conversation, Hernandez confessed that he had only visited his father's grave once. 


Hodgson encouraged him to go more, he said. 


'That’s something you’re going to have to do. You put an emotional wall up because you were so hurt by the loss of your father.


'All of the lessons he taught you are on the other side of that wall. The only way you’re going to pull the wall down is to talk to him,' he said he told him.


Hernandez died at the maximum security Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center on April 19

In another conversation, he claimed Hernandez told him that his father had told him never to cry in front of another man and that his father 'cried about everything', especially at his games.    


The new details of Hernandez's time in prison are given in the new book All-American Murder 

After the paper-eating incident, he claims he told him: 'I am so disappointed in you. I can’t believe that you acted the way you acted.'  


When Hernandez replied to say it was 'bulls**t' that officers were going through his mail, Hodgson said he told him: 'Excuse me. 


'Why are you yelling at me? Am I yelling at you? What I’m seeing right now, that’s not the Aaron Hernandez I know.' 


The football player seemed to heed his advice, he said. Hernandez trust in the sheriff imploded when he learned that he had been emailing details of their exchanges to prosecutors. 


His defense attorneys said it was proof he was working as an agent of the DA and that it was a betrayal to the star. 


He was moved to a different county jail not long afterwards.


In 2014, Hodgson was accused of capitalizing on Hernandez's incarceration to boost his own profile by giving media interviews about his life in jail. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group