




A flood of threats against central Ohio schools prompted decisions Friday to deploy extra Columbus police officers to city schools and to close schools in other area districts.     

The threats came in the wake of the Feb. 14 shooting in a high school in Parkland, Florida, where 17 people died and 14 others were wounded, some critically.

Some Columbus police officers were pulled off patrol duty Friday to ensure that the city’s high schools were safe. Columbus City Schools remained open, but some other schools in the area closed in response to reported threats. Some students now face criminal charges.

“The recent events in Florida have heightened all of our concerns about school safety,” said John Stanford, interim superintendent of Columbus City Schools. “No one should be afraid to come to school to learn, to work.”

Columbus Deputy Police Chief Michael Woods said that “because there have been some significant threats made, we have placed Columbus police officers at several schools throughout the district.” That included all the high schools and some of the middle schools.

Officials did not specify how many threats had been received in Columbus; some social-media posts generated multiple calls reporting them.

State and federal authorities are assisting Columbus police in tracing threats to their origin. If caught, those involved could face felony charges.

“Our young people need to understand the dangers of having a gun, the dangers of having a Taser, or having any other type of weapon that can harm themselves or others,” Stanford said.

“We are pleading with our families to have thoughtful conversations with their young ones about carrying weapons.”

The number of threats and rumors was unusually high this week, but it also is true that more people are reporting information to authorities, said Columbus district spokesman Scott Varner.

"In the Florida tragedy, we're learning that there may have been signs or warnings that were overlooked or never reported," Varner said. "Caring people outside our schools are now quicker to call the district or share a threatening post because they want to make sure warning signs are not missed."

The district has shared a statewide hotline number with parents — 844-SAFER-OH — to report information anonymously at any time of day by phone or text, but Varner said most people are still going straight to building administrators. And that works, too, he said.

In Hocking County's Logan-Hocking district, which was closed Friday after a social-media threat about a shooting, the number of threats is not unusual. But officials are taking threats even more seriously in the wake of the Parkland shootings, said Assistant Superintendent Christy Bosch.

District officials met the day after the Parkland shootings to discuss safety policies and procedures. They now have scheduled a community forum for Thursday at 7 p.m. at Logan-Hocking Middle School to discuss school-safety policies and procedures.

The community forum's message, Bosch said, will be: "If you see something, say something, so we can try to get ahead of all of this. Our families, our community want to know about safety, so we set this up."      

Dr. Doug Smith, a psychiatrist and medical director of the Alcohol, Drug Addiction &amp; Mental Health Board in Summit County, said people who commit copycat-style incidents "are often seeking the attention of the media."

"Often they are more socially isolated," he said. "They feel they don't belong. People are social animals, and when you don't have that, you have issues. What is not often thought about is someone seeking that connection — a child or adult — any attention is better than no attention. Even negative attention is powerful. It's still attention ... A 19-year-old suddenly becomes a household name."

Technology and social media are clearly part of the problem, said Mantua Police Chief Joe Urso, who prior to becoming chief was the resource officer at Crestwood High School in the Portage County village.

"Once in a while, you'll get copycat students," Urso said, "but now that they're prosecuting to stop that, I think the copycatting will die off a little bit. That's our goal. Kids will text and type stuff on a keyboard or cellphone they won't say in person."   

Licking Heights Central Middle School in Pataskala was among the schools closed on Friday.

Landon Lewis, 12, of Blacklick, has been charged with a delinquency count of aggravated menacing in Licking County Juvenile Court after authorities said he told other students that he planned to shoot up the middle school. The other students believed his threat, made between Tuesday and Wednesday, and reported it to school officials, according to the complaint filed in court.

The Lakewood school district in Licking County was closed Friday after administrators learned that three students had been arrested overnight. "We decided to close as a precaution, as safety is our highest priority," the district posted on Twitter.

The students, while riding a school bus on Thursday, threatened to kill the sixth-graders at Lakewood Middle School, authorities said. Other students on the bus heard the talk, believed the threat and reported it to school officials, according to criminal complaints filed in Licking County Juvenile Court.

Thomas Reaper, 14, and Jonathon Whitt, 13, both of Buckeye Lake, and Connor Patterson, 13, of Hebron, have been charged with delinquency counts of aggravated menacing and disorderly conduct in a school zone.

In Knox County, Josey Brooks, 17, is being held in juvenile detention, charged with delinquency counts of inducing panic at a school facility and aggravated menacing. Brooks is accused of making threats at Fredericktown High School on Monday by leaving scraps of notebook paper threatening classmates with bomb and gun attacks.

Also in Knox County in the Mount Vernon district, law enforcement took a student into custody Friday after the student admitted writing "inappropriate /threatening graffiti" in a bathroom stall at Mount Vernon Middle School, Superintendent William Seder Jr. said in a letter to parents, students and staff members.

The district has invited specially trained officers to the middle school and high school on Monday to better familiarize themselves with the surroundings. Law-enforcement officers will be visiting schools more often as part of the district's continued efforts to provide a safe school environment, Seder said in the letter. 

Lancaster High School was closed Friday while police looked into a threatening message that a student received Thursday night from an unknown caller. All other schools in the district held classes Friday, Superintendent Steve Wigton said in a Facebook post.

Westerville South High School was temporarily locked down Friday morning while Blendon Middle School, Pointview Elementary and the Academic Enrichment Center were all temporarily locked out, a designation that meant administrators closely monitored who entered and left the building. 

Later Friday, Westerville police arrested a 17-year-old student and charged him with inducing panic and tampering with evidence. He was being held in the Franklin County Juvenile Detention Center. Police did not release his name.

In Columbus, Stanford said principals, especially at high schools, have been told to hold town-hall sessions with students about school shootings.

There is a policy of zero tolerance for weapons on school grounds, Stanford said. If a student is caught with a weapon, expulsion is possible.

Students "have to be very careful and (are) responsible for what they put on social media," he said. "They need do understand that safety is a very serious matter. It is not a joke."

Dispatch reporters Shannon Gilchrist, Marc Kovac and Dean Narciso and GateHouse Ohio Media reporters Dave O'Brien and Briana Barker contributed to this story.

mlane@dispatch.com

@MaryBethLane1

bburger@dispatch.com

@ByBethBurger


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.