Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Heroin coalition outlines ways it's working against the opioid epidemic here.  Among plans: A place for overdose survivors to get treatment started.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Cincinnati police and fire respond to an overdose at Piatt Park in downtown Cincinnati.
(Photo: Liz Dufour)

It won't be long before medically stable overdose patients in Hamilton County will be ushered into a center where they can stay short-term, be assessed and sent into treatment. The idea: Moving the addicted population directly into treatment before they relapse again or die.


The 16-bed Hamilton County Engagement Center will launch next month at the county's Alcohol and Drug Addiction Services Center on Burnet Avenue in Corryville, said Neil Tilow, president and CEO of Talbert House.


The $1.4 million project is the most dramatic among the efforts that the Hamilton County Heroin Coalition leaders announced Tuesday in a meeting to release its report: "State of the Heroin Crisis."


"This is more than just a vision," said Newtown Police Chief Tom Synan, a lead law enforcement officer in the Hamilton County Heroin Coalition. "These are actual efforts currently being made to get these programs (and others) off the ground and running."


The plans include many anti-opioids tactics used by the city of Baltimore, widely recognized as an innovator in the fight against heroin and other allied drugs.


Here's a rundown of other changes:


Previously, the coalition has:


Denise Driehaus, Hamilton County Commissioner and chair of the Hamilton County Heroin Coalition, talk about the state of heroin and prevention strategies in the works that include additional quick response teams, more referrals from hospital emergency rooms to treatment services and a new 16-bed engagement center.  (Photo: Liz Dufour)

Hamilton County Commissioner Denise Driehaus, who chairs the coalition, talked about the coalition's comprehensive approach, which includes addiction prevention, treatment, drug interdiction and harm reduction efforts.


"We're in a battle. We are in the trenches," Driehaus said. "It's a challenge every day. But there is reason for hope."


The coalition's law enforcement task force seized 263.29 grams of the deadly synthetic opiate fentanyl in 2017, which Driehaus said equates to more than 130,000 doses that could trigger an overdose. The task force also got 293.21 grams of heroin, which she equated to about 780 deadly doses.


Hamilton County Public Health unveiled their new van to be used for the Exchange Project, which includes swapping used needles for sterile, testing for infectious diseases and providing a pathway for treatment, education and referral services.  Each client will receive a paper bag with a tourniquet, antiseptic wipes, filters and cookers, along with a clean needle. Narcan will also be available, as will training. The van will operate within Hamilton County at various locations Monday-Thursday.  (Photo: Liz Dufour, The Enquirer)

Ingram also said the health department is in touch with the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention about increased HIV cases among injection drug users.


In January, after the Northern Kentucky Health Department noted a surge in HIV cases in Kenton and Campbell counties, the Hamilton County health department reported a doubling of its HIV cases.


"We're being very vigilant," Ingram said. "We're doing a lot of work in that area right now."


HIV can be treated but not cured with drugs, which can prevent retransmission of the virus in many patients. If the virus is left untreated, people with HIV develop AIDS, resulting in a range of opportunistic infections and death. The lifetime costs for treating a person infected with HIV can reach close to $400,000, officials say.


For more on the coalition's efforts, see the report: Hamilton County Heroin Coalition "State of the Heroin Crisis"


See previous heroin and treatment stories by The Enquirer:


Why aren't more doctors prescribing this medication for heroin addiction?


ODs race ahead of 2016 totals in Hamilton County in September 2017


States curb prescribing habits of doctors


Seven days of heroin


What Baltimore can teach us about fighting heroin
