Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In the end, she had television ads and hundreds of thousands of dollars. He had an OVI.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Butler County state Rep. Wes Retherford appears in court for a preliminary hearing at Butler County Area 2 Court in Hamilton.
(Photo: The Enquirer / Meg Vogel)Buy Photo

HAMILTON - Last spring, police found him passed out and hunched over the wheel of his truck in a McDonald’s drive-thru. There was a gun under the center armrest. 


He says he hasn’t had a drink since. Tuesday was state Rep. Wes Retherford’s shot at redemption. 


It didn’t happen.


The scandal that threatened to ruin Retherford’s political career finally caught up to the three-term incumbent, who lost a Republican primary to a political newcomer with deep pockets. 


Local lawmaker: 'I haven't had a drink' since McDonald's drive-thru arrest


Report: Lawmaker swayed, smelled of alcohol


Philanthropist Sara Carruthers, who said she ran for her two children, received 46 percent of the vote, according to unofficial results in Butler County. With all precincts reporting, Retherford received 31 percent – or about 1,000 votes less.


In the end, Carruthers had television ads and hundreds of thousands of dollars. He had an OVI.


The guests are beginning to arrive for our celebration! Stay tuned as the results come in! pic.twitter.com/5yrcQsuj0l

On March 12, 2017, hours after the Butler County Republican Party’s Lincoln Day dinner, a sheriff’s deputy asked Retherford to stand on one leg. He nearly fell over, according to an incident report from the Butler County Sheriff’s Office. 


"His speech was slurred, and his eyes were bloodshot. He appeared to be confused," the deputy wrote in her report. 


Drive-thru OVI: No jail time for lawmaker


Butler Co. GOP: Retherford should resign


Hamilton resident Vera Romere voted for Carruthers Tuesday, saying Retherford’s arrest and conviction weighed heavily on her mind.


Standing outside Garfield Middle School, she couldn’t rattle off political positions or stances Carruthers had taken. She knew Butler County Sheriff Richard K. Jones had endorsed her, but not much else. 


Very thankful for my supporters. pic.twitter.com/UMpEB40tkq

For the 71-year-old Romere, her vote for Carruthers was more of a vote against Retherford and former state Rep. Greg Jolivette, the third-place finisher who also has political controversy in his past. 


When asked about Retherford, Romere’s husband, Kenny, shook his head. He started to answer before his wife told him to stop, trying to keep him from getting too negative.


“If you want my reasons they could fill an entire page of your paper,” he said.


Retherford, who also works as a mortician’s assistant, has tried to put the embarrassing incident behind him. At a Butler County GOP meeting earlier this year, Retherford didn’t ask for the party’s endorsement. 


The 34-year-old didn’t speak much at all, other than to apologize for his behavior. 


Rep. Wes Retherford, R-Hamilton (Photo: Provided)

On Tuesday, campaigning in a baseball hat and maroon T-shirt, Retherford acknowledged to reporters he made a mistake and owned up to it – something he said most politicians never do. 


On Facebook, he pointed to his conservative credentials, posting an endorsement from the NRA and voter-guide results that ranked him more conservative than his opponents. 


It wasn’t enough. 


Carruthers, who is a descendant of the Procter &amp; Gamble founders, spent more than $176,000 on advertisements and other expenses. The 55-year-old loaned her campaign $180,000.


Sara Carruthers (Photo: Provided)


    Butler County state Rep. Wes Retherford appeared in court Wednesday for a preliminary hearing. He is accused of drunken driving and improperly handling a firearm.
    The Enquirer/Meg Vogel

Retherford spent $13,000. 


He was first elected in 2012. There had been whispers about Retherford's partying in Columbus and he fought a nasty primary campaign in 2016. 


His Republican opponent at the time used the Twitter hashtags #StatehouseNotAFrathouse and #LiqourAndLies to attack him. Retherford wasn’t endorsed by his own Republican Party then, either.


But he won anyway.


It was the will of the people triumphing over the will of a few, he said at the time.


For many, though, Retherford’s OVI arrest a year later confirmed the rumors about him. It was the beginning of the end.


The storm he brought on himself was evident from his first court hearing the day after his arrest. Retherford was still in jail, and while the judge read his charges, he hid his face from the camera.


Local and state politicians immediately called for his resignation.


But he weathered the backlash, and when he was convicted of a misdemeanor there were no television cameras in the courtroom. 


He kept his job.


Since then, Retherford worked on legislation protecting crime victims from certain disclosures in public record requests. Leading up to this election, he said President Donald Trump’s victory showed voters didn’t care about who his party endorsed.


Shortly after his defeat, he said he was proud of the campaign he ran and thanked his family for supporting him "through thick and thin."


I am very proud of the very clean, honorable and issues driven campaign we ran. I took the principled approach and talked about the issues. We avoided mud slinging and attacks because it does nothing for a... https://t.co/WKDCiltQLu

Mark Estes, a 49-year-old account manager, voted for Retherford on Tuesday. The Hamilton resident told The Enquirer he was aware of Retherford’s OVI.


“It's in the back of my mind,” he said. “But we all make mistakes, don't we?”


Estes wanted to give him a second chance. But if there is to be a redemption story, Retherford will have to wait. 


Carruthers will face Democrat Susan Vaughn in November, although the seat is considered safe for Republicans. 


Ohio’s 51st House district comprises portions of Butler County, including the cities of Hamilton and Fairfield, Ross Township, and portions of Fairfield, Hanover and St. Clair townships.
