Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The sisters are seeking humane treatment and for federal lawmakers to seek alternatives to jail for immigrants awaiting legal decisions on deportation cases.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mauricio Vivar dreams of becoming an American citizen so he can improve his own community here in Cincinnati.
    Sam Greene/The Enquirer

Nuns on the Bus, The Intercommunity Justice and Peace Center (IJPC) and other community members protest against the deportation of Maribel Trujillo Diaz, a Fairfield mother of four and Catholic lay leader Monday April 10, 2017 in downtown Cincinnati. Trujillo-Diaz entered the U.S. 15 years ago without authorization but in 2016, the government issued her a year-long permit to work legally in the U.S. while her case was proceeding. The permit was in place when she was detained last week.
(Photo: The Enquirer/Cara Owsley)Buy Photo

BURLINGTON – Ohio Nuns on the Bus will rally this afternoon outside Boone County Jail against federal immigration policies.


The sisters are seeking humane treatment and for federal lawmakers to seek alternatives to jail for immigrants awaiting legal decisions on deportation cases.


“We need to liberate ourselves right now from the fear of people who are different because I think that is what is causing this loss of people,” said Sister Jean Miller of Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati.


Family members of federal inmates detained in Boone County Jail will speak at the 4 p.m. rally, said Ohio Nuns on the Bus spokesperson David Little. 


A busload of nuns left this morning from Mount St. Joseph University, Little said. The first stop will be a noon discussion about immigration rights with students and faculty at Northern Kentucky University.


The nuns will arrive at about 4 p.m. outside Boone County Jail. The nuns will make a trip Tuesday to the Butler County Jail in Ohio.


The 83-year-old Miller was one of four nuns arrested Feb. 27 in Washington, D.C. for refusing to leave the Capitol while advocating for immigration reform. Miller and others want protection for "DREAMers" who came to the U.S. as children. Young DREAMers get the nickname for having been accepted into the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program.


More: There are 3.6M 'DREAMers' — a number far greater than commonly known


Miller said the nuns wanted to get as far as House Speaker Paul Ryan's office, but they didn't get past the main lobby.


"We decided and discerned that sometimes it’s important to put your body on the line, and we’ve reached that time," Miller said of her Feb. 27 arrest.


Little said he expects no arrests or acts of civil disobedience in Boone County this afternoon.


Ohio Nuns on the Bus protested in 2016 outside Hamilton County Board of Elections against the purging of voter registration rolls.


Nuns on the Bus Cincinnati and other supporters sing "Joshua fought the battle of Jericho" as they march along the sidewalk outside of the Hamilton County Board of Election meeting on Sept. 13. (Photo: The Enquirer/Cara Owsley)

"We’ll be praying for all those inside the detention center and any center around the country," Miller said.


Immigration is an issue people in the U.S. have not dealt with in a long while, she said.


"So, instead, we’re building walls to keep people out and we’re sending out people who have been with us, worked with us, and who love our country," Miller said. 
