Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A bill from Ohio Treasurer Josh Mandel and Butler County Rep. Candice Keller to eliminate so-called sanctuary cities isn't expected to move.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What each side says in the sanctuary city debate.
    Wochit

State Rep. Candice Keller, R-Middletown
(Photo: Provided/Drew Keller)

COLUMBUS - First, Republicans wanted to throw mayors of sanctuary cities in jail. Then, they wanted to kick them out of office.


Now, it appears neither will happen. A bill from Ohio Treasurer Josh Mandel and Butler County Rep. Candice Keller to eliminate so-called sanctuary cities has received no hearings in committee and isn't expected to for several months.


The proposed legislation would penalize city officials who set up sanctuary cities – a term used to describe the police policy of not questioning people solely because they lack proper immigration documents.


Cincinnati and other cities nationwide have abstained from reporting everyone that might be in the country illegally. Earlier this year, Cincinnati's Democratic-controlled City Council officially adopted the name, sanctuary city, even though police policies have not changed and do not violate federal law. The vote was largely a show of support for immigrants in the city.


Republican President Donald Trump, who campaigned on building a wall on the country's southern border, had threatened to cut off money to sanctuary cities such as Cincinnati. Federal courts have blocked Trump from punishing those cities.


A federal judge initially blocked a Texas law that sought to eliminate sanctuary cities. The law would have prevented cities and counties from adopting rules to limit immigration enforcement and allowed police to question the immigration status of anyone they arrest. City officials who adopted sanctuary city policies could be punished, much like in Ohio's proposed law. A three-judge appeals court panel reinstated much of the law.


Under the Ohio bill, a person injured or robbed by a person here illegally could bring a legal action against any local officials who helped create a sanctuary city. Relatives of those killed by immigrants here illegally could bring a similar action.


A judge or jury could remove that official from office, according to the proposed legislation.


Mandel and Keller feared these sanctuary cities were putting the rights of immigrants here illegally over citizens. Mandel, who is running for U.S. Senate as a Republican, even held a news conference in Cincinnati to condemn its sanctuary city policy.


"Our top priority must be keeping Ohio families safe from radical Islamic terrorists and other threats," Mandel said in a statement to The Enquirer. "Sanctuary cities are an out-of-touch, misguided policy that snub their nose at our nation's laws and undermine the security of our communities."


Mandel's spokeswoman said his staff attended a meeting on the bill in early December.


But the proposal has seen little action to date. Rep. Bill Blessing, R-Colerain Township, leads the committee where Keller's bill to ban sanctuary cities was sent. 


"We are not planning on having any hearings at the moment," Blessing told The Enquirer. "There's a lot of work that (Rep. Keller) would have to do with the cities to get some momentum on that bill."


Keller's aide said the lawmaker expects hearings will occur at the beginning of the year. Most legislation is guaranteed one hearing. 


The sanctuary city ban is one of two bills Keller has sponsored in 2017, her first full year as a legislator.


For comparison, Republican Rep. Scott Lipps, of Franklin, is the primary sponsor on three bills, Rep. Catherine Ingram, D-Mount Auburn, has six bills and Rep. Brigid Kelly, D-Hyde Park, has 11. All are new lawmakers.
