Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A City of Cincinnati employee is one of 11 people indicted in a massive drug and money laundering conspiracy,

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Ricardo Campbell
(Photo: Provided/Butler County Jail)

A City of Cincinnati buildings department employee and a demolition contractor for the city are among a group of people named in an alleged money laundering and narcotics conspiracy.


The FBI arrested Shanda Green, an administrative technician at the city's permit center, at work on June 15.


An indictment unsealed Monday also named John T. Moore, who owns JTM Construction, which has a demolition contract with the city. 


Also among the 11 people from the Cincinnati-area charged in a drug and money-laundering conspiracy is a man who prosecutors say used a Green Township home to distribute drugs.


Prosecutors say the conspiracy involved the distribution of fentanyl, ketamine, cocaine and heroin. 


A federal indictment unsealed Monday says one of the defendants, 33-year-old Ricardo Campbell, used a home on Silverpointe Drive in Green Tonwship to distribute drugs.


The indictment says 16 other homes or properties were likely purchased with drug proceeds or through other illicit means. They were located throughout the city, as well as in Fairfield and West Chester.


In addition to Campbell, are Moore, 33, Green, 39 and Keiron Ashurst, 53; Teron Campbell, 26; Vernon Coffee, 51; Derwin Gadson, 22; Jeronda Kelley, 36; Timothy Mosely, 34; Patricia O'Neal, 37; and Ronnie Parrott, 33.


Vernon Coffee (Photo: Provided/Butler County Jail)

Gadson and Parrott have not yet been arrested, officials said. 


Moore, who owned and operated construction and real estate companies, bought four of the properties by allegedly defrauding mortgage lenders, according to a news release from the U.S. Attorney's Office.


He is accused of falsifying bank statements and overstating the value of other properties he claimed to own, the news release said.


Moore, Green and Kelley are accused of structuring financial transactions to evade taxes as well as money laundering. Officials say that in 2016 the trio made cash deposits of various amounts, ultimately totaling $270,000, into seven bank accounts. 


In little over a month last year, prosecutors say they deposited more than $230,000 into various accounts.


Anyone with information about the whereabouts of Gadson or Parrott is urged to call the FBI at 513-421-4310.
