Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A student at Miami University is charged with rape and several other sex crimes, according to Butler County court documents.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Nicolas Cristescu
(Photo: Butler County Jail)

OXFORD, OH (FOX19) – A student at Miami University is charged with rape and several other sex crimes, according to Butler County court documents.


A grand jury indicted Nicolas Cristescu on 11 counts of voyeurism, one count of sexual battery and rape.


Cristescu lived on Miami U’s campus, university spokesperson Claire Wagner confirmed. 


The 20-year-old engaged in sexual contact with the victim while knowing the “the other person submits because the other person is unaware that the act is being committed,” the indictment reads.


He is also accused of invading the victim’s privacy in order to take nude photos.


Shawn Puchakalta used to live next to Cristescu and said that he always enjoyed his company.


"He was a pretty quiet guy, pretty chill. He was a good guy to all of my hall mates and stuff," he said. 


The accusations stem from an alleged incident on Oct. 11 through Oct. 12. 


Court documents said the woman told police that she did not give consent and has no memory of the sexual encounter.


When police searched his dorm the next day they reportedly found obscene images of a 16-year-old on his phone.


Students said more needs to be done to stop this kind of behavior.


"Holding people accountable. You have to be responsible for your actions. I also think they need to better educate people on what sexual harassment and sexual assaults are," Puchakalta said. 


The accusations stem from an alleged incident on Oct. 11 through Oct. 12.  


Cristescu is being held in the Butler County Jail. 


Enquirer media partner Fox19 provided this report.
