Oregon Police &amp; Fire News

Below are examples of officers whose cases came before the Oregon Department of Public Safety Standards and Training after they were fired or convicted of a crime. In each case, state regulators decided against revoking the officer’s certification. In general, the department's decisions are based on the immediate reason given for termination, not an officer’s previous record. Except where noted, officers declined to comment or didn’t respond.

The Astoria-Megler Bridge in Astoria. (Beth Nakamura/The Oregonian)

Name: Steven M. Duncan Jr. Agency: Clatsop County Sheriff’s Office Date closed: April 30, 2015 What happened: Duncan chased a suspected car thief over the Astoria-Megler Bridge at 150 mph and was pulled over twice for speeding in a patrol vehicle, according to records the sheriff’s office sent to state regulators. Duncan’s supervisors described problems with driving, logging evidence promptly, filing reports on time and getting along with others. Records show the sheriff repeatedly ordered psychological fitness-for-duty exams and three times told the deputy he intended to fire him. The final time, an arbitrator found the county violated a union contract provision and ordered Duncan back to work. State regulators closed the case. Duncan is still a deputy in Clatsop County.

Enterprise, Oregon. (Rick Obst/Creative Commons https://flic.kr/p/FWQ8i4)

Name: David C. Gette Agency: Enterprise Police Department Date closed: July 30, 2014 What happened: Gette offended people with “an abrasive, arrogant, ‘badge heavy’ attitude and approach, which at times appears to have bordered on harassment,” a state investigator wrote in a memo. The police chief fired Gette after finding consensus among community members that he had “an extreme lack of knowledge of the police field,” he wrote. But state regulators found Gette’s “apparent failure to improve his performance does not seem to equate to misconduct.” Gette is now certified as a private security officer.

Cannon Beach, Oregon. (Jamie Hale/The Oregonian)

Name: Sean M. Johnson Agency: Cannon Beach Police Department Date closed: Aug. 1, 2016 What happened: Johnson’s performance reviews show rookie mistakes after three years on the job. He left a gun under the seat of a city vehicle for more than a month, stopped a car without probable cause, failed to perform sobriety tests on a clearly intoxicated driver and missed the fact that a man he was talking with had three felony warrants on weapons charges. Other officers worried about Johnson’s ability to back them up effectively in the field. He was fired for a “lack of officer safety,” according to the termination letter. A state investigator closed the case, finding “performance issues only.”

Interstate-5 by the Myrtle Creek Airport. (Michelle Alaimo/The News-Review)

Name: Adam T. Butler Agency: Myrtle Creek Police Department Date closed: Oct. 22, 2014 What happened: Butler texted constantly, even while driving 90 mph, a reserve officer who rode with him said. About 9 p.m., “he would start pulling over car after car after car trying to find somebody to arrest,” the reserve officer said, according to an internal investigator’s summary. Butler was having an affair with a woman who worked near the county jail in Roseburg, the investigator wrote. At least 12 times, Butler visited her while he was on duty, 17 miles outside his patrol district, sometimes when he was the only officer on the clock. The sergeant doing the internal investigation raised concerns about Butler’s truthfulness and emotional stability. The chief disciplined Butler, then fired him after he met with the woman again on duty, this time at a Myrtle Creek restaurant. In the termination letter, the chief cited dereliction of duty and insubordination. A state investigator found no behavior egregious enough to revoke his certification. Butler now works for Cottage Grove Police Department.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        