Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Butler County woman is charged with felonious assault and child endangering.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    911 audio from Lindsay Partin, a Hanover resident now charged with felonious assault and child endangering.
    Provided

Hannah Wesche
(Photo: Facebook screenshot)

The babysitter said Hannah asked for a doughnut, and the 3-year-old wanted to sit down on her couch.


It was 7 a.m., and Hannah’s father had just dropped her off next door.


After he left, Hannah fell forward and hit the ground, the babysitter said.


"She is not expected to survive,” her father would say on Monday.


Jason Wesche stood in front of a Butler County judge, hands in his pockets, and provided a grim update on his daughter. 


"Within the next couple of days, we are told that it's going to come to an end," Wesche said.


What happened, according to police and court documents, is every parent's worst nightmare.


The babysitter is accused of shaking and striking the child, who relatives described as bubbly and sassy, essentially leaving her brain dead.


“This situation is devastating,” Wesche said Monday.


WATCH: Hannah’s father Jason Wesche addresses the court, tells the judge she will likely not survive. @FOX19pic.twitter.com/LjvN9M9nGO

He spoke at the criminal arraignment for Lindsay Partin, the babysitter. Partin, 35, is charged with felonious assault and child endangering. 


Those charges will likely be upgraded if the child dies. 


For several weeks, Hannah occasionally complained about a headache, according to a police incident report. Her father would kiss her on the forehead and she would smile.


Then, on Thursday, Wesche dropped Hannah off at the babysitter's home before 7 a.m. He said she had been acting normal and brushed her teeth just like she does every day.


After Hannah collapsed, Wesche rushed back and spent the next 15 minutes trying to get her to breathe normally. She was gasping for air, laying on her back on the couch in the babysitter’s garage.


“Hannah, look at daddy. Look up,” he said in a soft voice, according to a 911 call. “Breathe for daddy, breathe. Hannah, look at daddy. What’s the matter?”


Partin is the one who called 911, identifying herself as someone who babysits kids.


Lindsay Partin (Photo: Provided/Butler County Sheriffs Office)

“Something is wrong,” she said frantically to a police dispatcher. “I don’t know what is wrong. Hurry please.”


Partin can be heard trying to comfort Hannah.


“I love you, buttercup. You’re OK,” she said at one point. “I can’t believe this is happening. I thought she was fine.”


One of Partin’s own children could be heard crying in the background.


Partin was arrested the next day. The Hanover Township resident pleaded not guilty to felony charges on Monday. 


Police found Hannah last week with bruises on her face. She was taken to the hospital, where she is hanging on by a thread, Butler County Sheriff Richard K. Jones said in a news release.


Hospital workers found additional bruising on the child's body, Jones said. 


Partin initially told police – and the child’s father – Hannah fell playing in the garage and hit her head on the ground.


The sheriff said she later admitted to striking the child.


"Cases like this rip your heart out," Jones said.


Partin’s bond was set at $30,000, and she is scheduled for another court hearing later this week.


Enquirer media partner Fox19 contributed to this report. 
