
            
  
    
    Connect with Facebook
  

        

or


        
            Don't have an account?
            Click here to register
        
    


      
        
          
          Connect with Facebook
        
      
    

or


    
        Already have an account?
        Login
    



      
        
          
          Connect with Facebook
        
      
    

or


    
        Don't have an account?
        Click here to register
    



            
  
    
    Connect with Facebook
  

        

or


        
            Don't have an account?
            Click here to register
        
    

Value Added Travel has just launched a sale on a fantastic, all inclusive family holiday to Dubai, staying 5 nights at the ultra-luxe, beachfront JA Palm Tree Court. 


It's now just £689 per person, based on 2 adults and 2 children sharing, including return flights.


The best bit? This includes flights with 5* Emirates and luxury private transfers to and from the airport -- we didn't choose the 5-star life, it chose us!








Holiday details:






Price breakdown for 2 adults and 2 children sharing:



Price breakdown for 2 adults sharing:



Please note -- this offer takes place during Ramadan. Disruptions for Western travellers will be minimal, however daytime service of alcohol may be limited. Scroll to the bottom of the page for further information.





About your stay



The JA Palm Tree Court has more awards than most Oscars ceremonies; just named #2 in the 'Top 25 Hotels for Families' at the 2017 Traveller's Choice Awards, it was also listed as "one of the best all inclusive hotels in Dubai" by The Daily Telegraph and is one of the Top 20 hotels in Dubai on TripAdvisor.



It's not hard to see why it has received so much praise. Located on Dubai's shore, overlooking the water, the resort is part of the larger JA Jebel Ali Golf Resort. Guests will have access to numerous restaurants during their stay, as well as four swimming pools, the spa, children's entertainment clubs and many sporting facilities.



Your room, a Garden View Junior Suite, is set in the lush tropical gardens of the resort, not far from the water of the marina, with incredible views. From your suite you can walk past streams, waterfalls and ponds - all enclosed in the lush gardens. The room features Elemis bath products, a playstation to keep the kids (or adults) occupied and you will be treated to fresh fruit and chocolate on arrival and bottled water daily.


The resort is also just 20 minutes from Dubai Parks and Resorts, which features several Dubai theme parks. Legoland, Legoland Water Park, MotionGate, Bollywood Park and Riverland are also close by.


BOOK NOW






























	



Note on travel dates:


Next year Ramadan, which is the holy month of fasting, takes place between May 13 and June 14, 2018. What does that mean for travelling Westerners? Westerners are not expected to obey by the fasting rules, however it is polite to adhere to local customs whenever possible, for example by dressing conservatively when visiting public places and not eating in public during daylight. Usually hotels and resorts however operate as usual, and malls in Dubai have extended their opening hours to about 1am, with restaurants staying open until 2am.



            Tags:
                            
                    
                     5 star
                    
                
                            
                    
                     London
                    
                
                            
                    
                     family
                    
                
                            
                    
                     manchester
                    
                
                            
                    
                     Dubai
                    
                
                            
                    
                     glasgow
                    
                
                            
                    
                     all inclusive
                    
                
                            
                    
                     may
                    
                
                            
                    
                     edinburgh
                    
                
                            
                    
                     summerholidays
                    
                
                            
                    
                     summer
                    
                
                            
                    
                     birmingham
                    
                
                            
                    
                     LUXURY
                    
                
                            
                    
                     June
                    
                
                            
                    
                     Family Holiday
                    
                
                            
                    
                     Spring Break
                    
                
                            
                    
                     Family Break
                    
                
                            
                    
                     Newcastle
                    
                
                            
                    
                     Emirates
                    
                
                            
                    
                     beachfront
                    
                
                            
                    
                     family friendly
                    
                
                            
                    
                     Spring
                    
                
                    

Hello! Just enter mail and name you'd like to use, and off we go!


                                            Subscribe to our newsletter and find the treasure in your inbox!                                    


        You get the best deals  and error fares  directly on your smartphone! Never miss the hottest    travel deals!
      


        To start please add  to your contacts and send us a message saying ‘Start’ on WhatsApp.      


                        Algarve Holiday
                        from £133
                        Holidays
                    


                        Bargain Big Apple break
                        from £397
                        Holidays
                    


                        Book Ahead to Save in the Algarve
                        from £164
                        Holidays
                    


  © 2018 HolidayPirates
