 Long summer days are here and with them are the chances to break out the picnic blanket, cheese and crackers and enjoy some of the best spots in the Bay - and we've got you covered.

 A picnic at McLaren Falls is a must-do for anyone visiting or living in the Bay. Lake McLaren offers picturesque views anytime through the year. Beautiful trees line the shores of the lake and meandering walkways mean you can explore the area from bay to bay to find the perfect spot. There are dozens of picnic tables or seats dotted throughout the park and, in some places, camping facilities. McLaren Falls also offers plenty of wildlife and it won't be long before you find yourselves with company, often in the form of ducks.

 Pilot Bay is a popular venue to sit on the grass and watch the cruise ships go by at the end of the day. Sit as the sun sets and people go past on the boardwalk and boats and kayakers come in. There is always lots to watch. Barbecue facilities mean cooking up sausages is easily done or if you prefer to avoid cooking, fish and chips and pizza are nearby. The family-friendly environment means it's great for the kids but the setting is just as special for those without kids.

 This slice of heaven in the Western Bay of Plenty is worth the drive to. Volunteers have kept this lush garden environment immaculate and there are plenty of spots to sit and unwind with a picnic, including a natural amphitheatre. Ponds, water features and beautiful walks offer an interactive journey for the senses as the multitude of flowers, plants and bushes come to life during summer. A butterfly garden and dragon is also a highlight, especially for the kids.

 Easy and central, the Bridge Marina could be one of Tauranga's most underestimated spots to spend a family day out. Located at the south end of the marine, a sandy beach gives way to a flat grassy area perfect for picnic blankets. The sheltered location gives protection to boats moored in the area, which means it's perfect for small children to cool off in without the worry of waves or strong currents.

 If the family picnic includes the dog, then Yatton Park is the perfect place to be. The dog-friendly spot offers ponds, flowers, lush flat grass and large shady trees. It is a great spot for the whole family. Located in Tauranga south, the park is not far from Greerton and Merivale shops.

 