By

Laura House For Daily Mail Australia







  Published:
  22:27 EDT, 21 January 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  14:40 EDT, 22 January 2018







           6

View  comments

As Australia Day approaches, Australians and tourists alike are busy planning their celebrations. 


And whether they are wine lovers, traditionalists in search of a humble meat pie or looking to enjoy a country getaway, there's an Aussie town to suit everybody.


To make the decision a little easier this Australia Day, Wotif looked beyond the well-known hot spots, to call out the towns that 'make Australia great'. 


The vote was put to the people to name the top towns where visitors can try some unique experiences and now six 'Uniquely Aussie Towns' have been named that each promise a true blue Down Under experience.


This Australia Day, Wotif looked beyond the well-known hot spots, to call out the towns that 'make Australia great'

1. TOP WINE REGION  


Margaret River in Western Australia has overtaken both New South Wales' Hunter Valley and the Barossa in South Australia as the top wine region in the country,   


Accounting for 20 per cent of Australia's premium wine, Margaret River is bustling with top wineries including Evans &amp; Tate, Cape Mantelle and Vasse Felix.


Travellers are encouraged to adventure beyond the cellar door and explore the vineyards with many wineries offering meet and greets with winemakers, lunches in barrel rooms and even the opportunity to blend your own. 


One of the highest rated wineries in Margaret River is the Voyager Estate where visitors can enjoy tours followed by a four course lunch, various wine experiences and customised tasting. 


For a place to rest your head after sampling some of the country's best chardonnay, head to Vintages Accommodation and Darby Park Serviced Residences.


Margaret River in Western Australia has overtaken both New South Wales' Hunter Valley and the Barossa in South Australia as the top wine region in the country

Accounting for 20 per cent of Australia's premium wine, Margaret River is bustling with top wineries including Evans &amp; Tate, Cape Mantelle and Vasse Felix


	      What is the best iconic Aussie treat?
	    


	      What is the best iconic Aussie treat?
	    

Now share your opinion

2. TOP LAMINGTON TOWN 


The lamington sits alongside Vegemite and the humble pavlova as one of the most iconic Australian treats.  


While many towns claim to have invented this spongy delight, Beechworth, Victoria has been voted as the best place to have a lamington. 


And Beechworth Bakery has been praised for their simple yet delicious lamington offerings.  


The bakery serves up a classic light and fluffy version (with or without cream) as well as the grand 'Dame Edna' - a pale pink raspberry-coated version. 


They are also famed for their week-long lamington sale in the lead up to Australia Day where they offer three free lamingtons if three are purchased. 


Other towns known for stand out lamingtons include Fremantle, Western Australia, Paddington, Queensland, Geelong, Victoria and Boorowa, New South Wales. 


Recover from your chocolatey-coconut food coma in Beechworth by bunking in at Finches of Beechworth or The Graces Beechworth. 


Beechworth Bakery has been praised for their simple yet delicious lamington offerings

They are also famed for their week-long lamington sale in the lead up to Australia Day where they offer three free lamingtons if three are purchased




3. TOP ADVENTURE TOWN 


Of all the Australian towns, it's Cairns, Queensland that has been named the best for adrenaline junkies.   


Cairns not only offers access to incredible tropical rainforests and the Great Barrier Reef, it's also home to an array of thrill seeking delights. 


From zip-lining over a four-metre live croc  to bungee jumping with the daring Aussie, AJ Hackett, who once jumped 110 meters off The Eiffel Tower, there are endless adventures to be had in the tropical north.


Visitors can also indulge their wild sides through canyoning, rapids adventures, trail biking and skydiving. 


When it's time to call it a day, stay at The Abbott Boutique Hotel, Shangri-La Hotel, The Marina or Pullman Cairns International. 


Of all the Australian towns, it's Cairns, Queensland that has been named the best for adrenaline junkies

Visitors can also indulge their wild sides through canyoning, rapids adventures, trail biking, skydiving and, of course, diving 

4. TOP PUB TOWN 


There's nothing like a true blue Australian pub to satisfy your thirst for a hearty meal, a cold beer and good music.


And while competition was fierce in this category, Ballarat, Victoria has taken out the title of Top Pub Town.  


The self-proclaimed Original Beer Capital of Australia, Ballarat (or #Beerllarat) is only an hour from Melbourne and is ideal for a quick weekend getaway. 


There's nothing like a true blue Australian pub to satisfy your thirst for a hearty meal, a cold beer and good music

And while competition was fierce in this category, Ballarat, Victoria has taken out the title of Top Pub Town

1. Ballarat – VIC (16%)


2. Port Fairy – VIC (12%)


3. Scarborough – NSW (10%)


4. Silverton, Broken Hill – NSW (10%)


5. Albany – WA (10%)


6. Goondiwindi – QLD (8%)


7. Rockhampton – QLD (8%)


8. Daly Waters – NT (8%)


9. Ross – TAS (6%)


10. Streaky Bay – SA (2%)

Home to several pubs that first opened their doors over 150 years ago during the Gold Rush, Ballarat pubs have mastered the art of classic hearty meals and craft beer. 


 Ensuring their top title isn't going anywhere anytime soon, Ballarat also hosts the annual Ballarat Beer Festival, showcasing over 150 craft beers, live music and local food trucks.   


The pub widely rated best in Ballarat is The Golden City Hotel which was built in 1856 and originally named the Adelphi Hotel.  


Overlooking the beautiful tree lined main street of Ballarat, Golden City is renowned for having one of the largest restaurants hosting around 200 tables. 





Top Ballarat accommodation to sleep off your pub visit include The Provincial Ballarat, Craig's Royal Hotel and Quest Ballarat. 


Overlooking the beautiful tree lined main street of Ballarat, Golden City is renowned for having one of the largest restaurants hosting around 200 tables

5. TOP FRUIT-PICKING TOWN


No longer just a job for travelling backpackers, fruit-picking has become a national pastime, because nothing is more fair dinkum than taste-testing fruit fresh right from an orchard. 


And the quirky title of Top Fruit-Picking Town has been awarded to Mildura, Victoria. 


Mildura is a major horticultural centre, with an oasis of orchards and market gardens supplying 75 per cent of Australia's table grapes. 


The town is also famous for other foodie delights including Murray cod, Mallee lamb and the chef's favourite Murray River Salt. If you are looking for a delicious getaway, grab yourself a fruit bucket and head to Mildura. 


After a big day of eating stay at Indulge Apartments - Ontario or Mildura Inlander Resort. 


The quirky title of Top Fruit-Picking Town has been awarded to Mildura, Victoria

6. TOP TOWN TO SEE A KANGAROO 


It's not a trip to Down Under unless you've spotted a kangaroo in the wild. 


And unsurprisingly, it is Kingscote in Kangaroo Island, South Australia that has taken out the prestigious title of Top Town to See a Kangaroo.  


As the name suggests, if you plan a trip here, you're bound to see one, bouncing in the lush wilderness or sunbaking on a secluded beach.


Kingscote is the largest town on Kangaroo Island, home to many of the island's cafés, restaurants and hotels. 


More than a third of Kangaroo Island's landmass is reserved for wildlife conservation areas and national parks, meaning it's home to over 1,500 different animals including kangaroos (of course), wombats and koalas – if you're lucky you might even spot a penguin. 


For a rest after roo-spotting, head to Villas on the Bay Kingscote or Kangaroo Island Bayview Villas. 


Unsurprisingly, it is Kingscote in Kangaroo Island, South Australia that has taken out the prestigious title of Top Town to See a Kangaroo



Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group