 Flight deals from Europe, USA, Asia and Australia | Fly4free 


5* Etihad are offering an interesting opportunity to visit two amazing destinations for the price of 1! You can fly to Amsterdam and Abu Dhabi in one trip from Hong Kong for only $459!

Don’t miss out this nice chance to visit the fascinating Amsterdam. You will be amazed with its channels, museums, bars and restaurants! Feel the spirit of this beautiful city and become a part of it even for a short time. Whatever you prefer – hunting for the best gastronomy or just walking along the streets and relaxing, you’ll find everything to your taste.Get the skip-the-line tickets for Amsterdam’s top attractions HERE &gt;&gt;


Abu Dhabi, the capital of the United Arab Emirates, sits off the mainland on an island in the Persian Gulf. This city has always been a special place. Today more and more overseas visitors are discovering this unique and captivating destination!





To find out more, visit Destination Fly4free: United Arab Emirates &gt;&gt;


Travel dates:Feburary – June 2018


Sample dates:Feb 1- Feb 12- Feb 14Feb 21 – Feb 28 – Mar 2Mar 11 – Mar 19 – Mar 21Apr 8 – Apr 18 – Apr 23May 30 – Jun 12 – Jun 14


Routing:Hong Kong – Amsterdam – Abu Dhabi – Hong Kong





How to book:CLICK HERE &gt;&gt; or just follow the links below and adjust travel dates.


Baggage policy:One cabin bag and piece of checked bag per passenger.


Sample booking:Hong Kong – Amsterdam – Abu Dhabi – Hong Kong &gt;&gt;&gt;





Accommodation:In Amsterdam you can stay in Best Western Zaan Inn with very good reviews! Well-positioned in Zaandam, Best Western Zaan Inn is the ideal point of departure for your excursions in Amsterdam. The hotel is not too far from the city center: just 0.5 km away, and it normally takes about 30 minutes to reach the airport. Also within easy reach are Zaantheater, De Zaanse Schans, Water Mill 1200 Roe.





In Abu Dhabi you can stay at 4* Ramada Abu Dhabi Corniche with very good reviews. Just a 10-minute walk from Abu Dhabi Mall this property offers accommodations with modern interiors. It includes free Wi-Fi in all areas, an outdoor pool and a fitness centre. Yas Waterworld and Ferrari World are 20 minutes away by car. All units overlook the sea or the city. Each one includes a flat-screen TV, an iPod dock and a minibar. The marble floored bathrooms come with a shower, hairdryer and a bathrobe.





Car:Find the best prices on Rentalcars.com.






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Newsletter
