Did you know that it’s simple to craft a great Belize vacation on points and miles? If you’ve been wanting to explore ancient ruins or snorkel the impressive Belize Barrier Reef (or maybe dive the Great Blue Hole?), then check out some of these tips on great points and miles redemptions. It’s never been easier to get there, stay there, and soak up some Caribbean rays.

There are a bunch of routes between major US hubs and Belize City, but two of the best ones depart from Miami (MIA) and Houston (IAH.) If you are departing from or flying through Mami, then you’ll be flying with American Airlines because they fly direct from there.

From Houston, United will fly directly to Belize City.

If you are loyal to your Delta SkyMiles, then try to fly from a major Delta hub such as Atlanta or LAX. These direct routes will save you the headache of a long layover or a confusing, backward itinerary.

In terms of how many miles you’ll pay to get to Belize, you might be better off flying with one airline over another, even if it means an extra or longer connection. American Airlines normally charges 15,000 miles to fly each way between the US and Belize in economy, but they offer an even lower off-peak price of 12,500 miles during certain times of the year. United charges slightly more at 17,500 miles each way in economy. Delta’s unofficial award chart has the same price as United.

Belize doesn’t offer a ton of points hotels options and depending on where in the country you want to visit there might not be points hotels at all. In these cases, booking Airbnbs could be a good bet or you can check out other hotels on Hotels.com or another hotel booking engine. If you’re staying in or around Belize City, the following points hotels are available to you:

Best Western Belize Biltmore Plaza

If you have some Best Western Points to spend, check out the Belize Biltmore Plaza. Costing 24,000 Best Western Points per night, this is the perfect spot to stay on the northwestern end of Belize City. Pop across the street for access to the Caribbean sea, and take a stroll down Seashore Drive for a photo op at the Belize sign. Located directly on the Northern Highway, visitors also enjoy an easy exit from the city and access to the lush, storied inland. With an ideal seaside location and a laid-back, sunny vibe, book your stay with Belize Biltmore Plaza.

Radisson Fort George Hotel and Marina

Located on the easternmost tip of the Belize City peninsula, a relaxing Caribbean getaway awaits at the Radisson Fort George Hotel and Marina. A night at this property costs 38,000 Club Carlson Points and its proximity to ferries, cruise ports, and marinas make it a great place to begin any nautical adventures you may have planned. Visit the concierge to schedule snorkeling excursions, or even hop on a ferry that goes all the way to San Pedro. For access to local parks, museums, and unforgettable marine activities, redeem your points with the Radisson Fort George Hotel and Marina.

Ramada Belize City Princess Hotel

For party-goers who are ready to explore the vibrance of Belize City, the Ramada Belize City Princess Hotel is an ideal place to stay. Costing just 15,000 Wyndham Rewards Points per night, this property is perfect for travelers who are looking to take advantage of the buzzing nightlife. This property includes a casino, two restaurants, a spa, and a nightclub on site; you may not ever want to leave the hotel! However, if you do, you may consult the hotel staff to plan an off-site adventure to the Great Blue Hole, inland Mayan ruins, or the Bliss Institute. For a fast-paced, high-energy trip to Belize, book your stay with the Ramada Belize City Princess Hotel.

How will you redeem your points and miles in Belize?

[Image Source: Satanoid/Wikimedia Commons]


I used Southwest points to go to Belize via Houston Hobby.  

As for hotels, it is true that the chain hotels where you can use your points are in Belize city.  But I would not recommend staying there.  Belize city is a big dangerous ghetto!  They Cayes are so much nicer!

We also used SW points, I am surprised that they never mentioned that option.
We stayed at the Radisson and saw the Ramada and they were both reasonably good hotels (not luxurious, but decent).  We also walked all around in the area of the Radisson and never experienced any issues or saw anything to cause us any concerns.  We were far less comfortable walking around in Miami and Chicago.
If you are uncomfortable with seeing poor people, then yes, you should avoid Belize City and just go to the Cayes.  There is certainly little to see or do in Belize City itself, but it is a fantastic base to take day trips to many archeological and natural treasures on the mainland.

I’m not trying to be argumentative, and if you were happy staying in Belize City that’s great. But for me, a few days in the Caye Caulker followed by a few days in San Ignacio was the perfect (and safer) way to experience Belize.

Exactly. Caye Caulker has very poor but very friendly people. It is not about poor, it is about safety. I have felt safe very time we have been yo Caye Caulker. But besides that, Belize City is nothing compared to the islands. They are great.

I would recommend SW. Www spend about 15000 points round trip from Houston. I have stayed at the Best Western Biltmore and paid with my Venture card, so I could “erase” the charge. It is a nice hotel. But have you been to Belize City? I would not care “stroll” anywhere around this area, especially after dark. Belize City is not much of a tourist destination. I did not walk to the ocean from the hotel  but along that highway the ocean is bordered by Mangroves. There are several cards that one can use to cover hotels and airbnbs but out on one of the islands or elsewhere in Belize. Belize City is good to overnight in, if you have to, as we did because our flight arrived after the last water taxi and plane had left but please don’t recommend people go strolling around. One wrong turn could put you in a terrible spot. Our taxi driver, tour guide, and the hotel owner on one of the islands all warned us to NOT wonder around Belize  City.  39 minutes away via the water taxi, paradise awaits. Belize City is not paradise.

Flew there on Southwest last year. Then took an additional flight to Ambergris Caye and took a ferry back a few days later. Just remember the additional steps as you don’t want to stay in Belize city.
Diving was great there. Had a good time, but not impressed by beaches as it was pretty rocky and not lush. I did not think it was as friendly as other Caribbean destinations. Got yelled at by locals just walking the beach and walking by bars. Was walking the beach looking for a sunset cruise at like 2 PM and all but one place told me they didnt have any bookings, but it was too late to get ready for one at 2pm. Eventually found a guy form the US who said sure to get a cruise for 4 hours later. Glad i went once, but wont be going back.

Use keys to browse more stories

Never miss a rewards bonus again. Add credit cards, track rewards, and earn more from your spending - for FREE!

∗ Advertiser Disclosure: Many of the credit card offers that appear on this site are from credit card companies from which FrugalTravelGuy.com receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where products appear on this site (including, for example, the order in which they appear). This site does not include all credit card offers available in the marketplace. Please view our advertising policy page for more information.

Editorial Disclaimer: The editorial content on this page is not provided by any bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and has not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities. Opinions expressed here are author's alone, not those of the bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities.