Oil tycoon T. Boone Pickens' 65,000-acre ranch, which he's been assembling piece by piece since 1971, is on the market for a whopping $250 million.

Spanning over 100 miles in the Texas Panhandle, the property known as the Mesa Vista Ranch combines homes, lodges and luxury amenities with plains, man-made lakes and what Pickens describes as "the world's best quail hunting."

A private airport complete with a runway, tarmac and two-bedroom apartment for pilots greets guests.

Four homes provide accommodation. The biggest, a 33,000-square-foot lodge, sits in a tree-covered area and features a tennis court and golf course outside.

Inside, white oak hardwood and stone floors lead through arched doorways in the living spaces.

Five bedrooms are spread across the interior, which also holds a library with a spiral staircase and a wine cellar.

The 12,000-square-foot "Lake House," finished in 2008, features a cave stone exterior. The front entrance, a metal door with stained glass inserts, was once the door to Bing Crosby's home.

Vaulted ceilings hang over the living spaces, which include a large great room and living room. Balconies across the second story give views of the tiered, manicured lawn and the lake beyond. A pool and spa sit out back.

Other residences include the 6,000-square-foot "Family House" and the 1,700-square-foot "Gate House." For pets, a kennel complete with a veterinary lab and exercise area can house 40 dogs.

The ranch also holds a two-story pub, a chapel with a garden, and nearly 20 man-made lakes.

Sam Middleton of Chas. S. Middleton and Son and Monte Lyons of Hall and Hall hold the listing.

Pickens said in a statement that "selling the ranch is the prudent thing for an 89-year-old man to do."

The businessman rose to prominence after founding Mesa Petroleum in 1956, and he developed a reputation as a corporate raider in the ​​​​​​​1980s after attempted buyouts of Gulf Oil, Phillips Petroleum and Unocal. He's currently the chairman of hedge fund BP Capital Management.

jack.flemming@latimes.com

Twitter: @jflem94

MORE FROM HOT PROPERTY:

Ellen DeGeneres and other celebrities slash home prices as the holidays approach

Adam Levine posts Bel-Air home for $18.9 million ... four months after buying

Live like a Gabor sister in Palm Springs

Sci-fi and Western star Robert Colbert ready to unhitch in Malibu