Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Joshua Rhett Miller


		
		
		
		
	


									October 24, 2017 | 3:36pm
												

A Utah woman is headed to trial to fight an attempted murder rap after she allegedly tried three times to help a friend commit suicide, a judge ruled on Monday.

Teresa Renae Clark, 36, of Millville, faces three counts of first-degree felony attempted aggravated murder after she allegedly tried to help Karma Saltern, 55, end her life on three separate occasions over the summer before the woman was ultimately found dead in September, the Salt Lake Tribune reports.

Prosecutors say Clark was motivated by financial gain, claiming that the women who met just months earlier entered a suicide pact in which Clark would receive all of Saltern’s assets — including cash, furniture and two storage units packed with various items — in exchange for providing the drugs needed to kill herself. 

An evidence hearing in the case was delayed last month because of Saltern’s death. Police in Provo found her dead on Sept. 11, along with a suicide note, the Salt Lake Tribune reported.

Clark’s attorney, Michael McGinnis, has maintained that his client had nothing to do with Saltern’s death — who killed herself as Clark sat in Cache County Jail on the attempted murder charges.

“It’s the best alibi you can get,” McGinnis said, according to KSL.com.

But investigators pieced together a timeline they say proves Clark’s involvement.

On June 17, according to court records and testimony cited by the newspaper, Clark tried to buy a gun for Saltern to kill herself but was denied after failing a background check. That same day, prosecutors said the women had three legal documents notarized, including a will leaving all of Saltern’s property to Clark.

A second attempt on June 24 involved pills and ended with Saltern unconscious in a hotel room. Clark called for help, saying she found her friend after stopping by to check on her. Saltern was rushed to a hospital and revived.

Two of Saltern’s companion dogs were also found dead at the scene, spawning animal cruelty charges against Clark.

Empty prescription containers for an unidentified sedative, as well as empty syringes, crushed white powder, canine medications and a pill crusher were also found in the hotel room, according to a search warrant affidavit.

Logan Police Department Det. Kendall Olsen said Saltern then tried to get back a vehicle and other property she gave to Clark after the second failed suicide attempt. 

Saltern called Clark from the police department and said she was sorry she didn’t die, Olsen testified. During the recorded conversation, Saltern said she wanted to succeed in killing herself and asked Clark to make a hotel reservation later that evening. Olsen said Saltern then picked up her vehicle and got more pills from Clark before another attempted suicide in July.

If convicted, Clark faces up to life in prison.


			Read Next
		


			
				Protester throws Russian flags at Trump			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Protester throws Russian flags at Trump			
		

Share Selection

81,060

57,343

53,716

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters