It seems as though things just weren’t going Christopher Sevilla’s way on Tuesday.

The 29-year-old transient from Woodland, California, stole a van in Davis, crashed it in Yolo County and then tried carjacking a student in front of Cache Creek High School, the Yolo County Sheriff’s Office told KCRA-TV.

Sevilla tried to pull the girl out of her car as she was leaving school, and he allegedly said he needed the vehicle to save his family, authorities told KOVR-TV, adding that the girl fought back and screamed for help.

With that, three male students ran over and dragged Sevilla down, KOVR reported.

“I think that either her car could have been stolen or she could have gotten hurt or run over even,” senior Daisy Jayde, who witnessed the incident, told KOVR. “I mean the possibilities are really endless.”

Teachers soon rushed over and detained Sevilla until sheriff’s deputies arrived and arrested him, KOVR reported.

“Everyone who was there, they were really shaken up,” Jayde added to KOVR.

The victim told KOVR she wasn’t ready to talk about everything just yet — and the boys who stopped her attacker told the station they don’t want any recognition.

“Now we’re really going to understand that like anyone — this person next to me— can save my life potentially,” Jayde told KOVR. “I think we will now all really appreciate each other.”

Sevilla has been charged with attempted carjacking — a felony — along with battery and obstruction of a public officer, the Monroe Detention Center told TheBlaze on Wednesday. Sevilla is being held at the jail on $100,000 bail and has a court date on Thursday, a jail official told TheBlaze.

The sheriff’s office added that Sevilla embarked on his misadventure Tuesday — ending with the attempted carjacking — less than 24 hours after being released from jail for tampering with a vehicle, KCRA reported.



Approved posts to MyVoice will be live on the site within a few hours. MyVoice is for posting intelligent, engaging, entertaining and thought-provoking commentary and stories, so following these guidelines will help get your post prioritized and noticed.

Moderators assign strikes for violations of our comment policy. Strikes will disappear automatically in 24 hours, provided you have no further violations. However, if you earn three strikes within 24 hours, your account will be temporary suspended.

Please email moderation@theblaze.com to let us know you would like it removed.

If you notice something is not working as expected, please email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

You can report offending posts by clicking on the little flag icon below every post. This will automatically inform our moderators. If you spot a troublemaker, you can also email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

Speak your mind. Please be respectful of our rules and community. No spam, abuse, obscenities, off-topic comments, racial or ethnic slurs, threats, hate, comments that incite violence or excessive use of flagging permitted.

Please be respectful of our community and spread some love. Any of the following may result in a permanent ban:

For more information, please see our Terms of Use. Now, go have fun and speak your mind!