By

Mary Kekatos For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  09:44 EDT, 11 February 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  15:59 EDT, 11 February 2018







         203

View  comments

Disgraced sports doctor Larry Nassar, convicted of sexually abusing several girls - including US Olympic gymnasts - has been transferred to a federal prison in Arizona currently housing a notorious kidnapper and a police detective turned Mafia hit man.


On Saturday, the 54-year-old was listed as an inmate at US Penitentiary Tucson, a high-security facility that houses 1,387 inmates along with a 149-inmate minimum-security satellite camp in Pima County, reported the Arizona Republic.


Nassar was sentenced last month to 175 years in prison in Michigan after pleading guilty to sexually abusing seven girls.


But first he must serve 60 years in federal prison for his child pornography conviction.


One infamous inmate surviving a life sentence at the prison is Brian David Mitchell, the former Utah street preacher who kidnapped 14-year-old Elizabeth Smart from her home in 2002 and held her captive for nine months.


Also there for a life sentence is Louis Eppolito, the New York City police detective-turned-Mafia hit man, principally for the Lucchese crime family.


Disgraced sports doctor Larry Nassar (pictured, January 2018), convicted of sexually abusing several girls - including US Olympic gymnasts - has been transferred to a federal prison in Arizona currently housing a notorious kidnapper and a police detective turned Mafia hit man

One infamous inmate surviving a life sentence at the prison is Brian David Mitchell (pictured, March 2005), the former Utah street preacher who kidnapped 14-year-old Elizabeth Smart from her home in 2002 and held her captive for nine months

Also there for a life sentence is Louis Eppolito (pictured, April 2006), the New York City police detective-turned-Mafia hit man, principally for the Lucchese crime family

There have been several other famous criminals housed there including James 'Whitey' Bulger, the south Boston crime boss who was convicted on racketeering, money laundering, extortion, and weapons charges.


He resided at the Tucson penitentiary before being transferred to a facility in Florida. 


Convicted mass shooter Jared Loughner also spent time in the prison before being transferred to the Federal Correctional Center in Rochester, Minnesota, after he went on a shooting rampage in 2011 near Tucson.


Six people were killed and 13 others were left injured, including former US Rep Gabrielle Giffords.


Former US Congressman Randy 'Duke' Cunningham, a Republican from California, was released from the prison in 2013 after serving a seven-year sentence for tax evasion and conspiracy to commit bribery and fraud.


Other famous criminals housed there included James 'Whitey' Bulger (left), who was convicted on racketeering, money laundering, extortion, and weapons charges, and mass shooter Jared Loughner (right) who killed six and injured 13 in a shooting rampage in 2011 near Tucson

Former US Congressman Randy 'Duke' Cunningham (pictured, December 2001), a Republican from California, was released from the prison in 2013 after serving a seven-year sentence for tax evasion and conspiracy to commit bribery and fraud.

The Indianapolis Star revealed in a multiple-part investigation, published in September 2016, that the former USA Gymnastics doctor has been molesting many of the girls under his care and that the organization had been covering it up.


Since then,  more than 260 women and girls have told law enforcement that Nassar sexually abused them. 


At the penitentiary, he will be given prison clothing tagged with his name and registration number, 21504-040.


At the penitentiary, Nassar (pictured, February 5) will be given prison clothing tagged with his name and registration number, 21504-040

Inmates are responsible for making their beds, sweeping and mopping their cell floors 'and ensuring (their cell) is clean and sanitary,' the inmate admission and orientation handbook (Pictured, US Penitentiary Tucson)

Wake-up for all inmates is at 6am with headcounts held at midnight, 3am, 5am, 4pm, and 10pm, according to the inmate admission and orientation handbook (pictured, US Penitentiary Tucson)

The prison is a high-security facility that houses 1,387 inmates along with a 149-inmate minimum-security satellite camp in Pima County (map view)

Wake-up for all inmates is at 6am with headcounts held at midnight, 3am, 5am, 4pm, and 10pm, according to the inmate admission and orientation handbook.


Inmates are responsible for making their beds, sweeping and mopping their cell floors 'and ensuring (their cell) is clean and sanitary,' the handbook said. 


The handbook says inmates can use computers but don't have internet access. 


It's currently unknown if Nassar will share a cell or be put into protective custody to avoid possible violence from other prisoners. 







Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group