Redmond O’Neal faces two counts of assault with a deadly weapon, one count of criminal threats, one count of brandishing a knife and one count of battery

LAPD

Redmond O’Neal, the son of Ryan O’Neal and the late Farrah Fawcett, was charged Friday with attempted murder in connection with a May crime spree that included the punching or stabbing of five men and the robbing of a 7-Eleven convenience store.

O’Neal, who has struggled with drug addiction, is accused of randomly attacking five men on May 2, in a spree that lasted through May 5 in the Venice Beach and Palms neighborhoods of Los Angeles county, according to authorities.

Two of the men were seriously injured, according to police, including one who was stabbed in the face.

Also Read: Redmond O'Neal Arrested for Heroin Possession -- Again

The Los Angeles County District Attorney also charged O’Neal with two counts of assault with a deadly weapon, one count of criminal threats, one count of brandishing a knife and one count of battery.


O’Neal has had a history of run-ins with the law. He’s already pleaded not guilty to allegedly robbing a convenience store on May 8.

In 2011, O’Neal was arrested for possession of heroin and marijuana after being stopped by Santa Monica police officers for running a red light at a left-turn arrow.


Also Read: Redmond O'Neal Sent Back to Jail

In 2009, he was arrested after being found in possession of heroin, while undergoing a security check at Pitchess Detention Center in Castaic, California, where he was serving time on drug charges.

O’Neal is in the custody of the Los Angeles Country Sheriff’s Department.

Celebrity arrests: It's like looking at a car accident. You don't want to give into the tabloids, but part of you also wants to know what they did to deserve a mug shot. Here are 17 arrests that were embarrassing -- either for the celeb or the police who booked 'em. 

Jane Fonda  

The city was Cleveland, Ohio, the year was 1970, and Fonda was fresh off filming "Klute." Customs officers at the airport confiscated her vitamins and arrested her for drug smuggling. The actress was released on bond, and months later, after the pills had been tested, officials admitted they were indeed only vitamins. 

David Bowie  

Bowie was arrested in Rochester, New York, in 1976 for pot possession after a concert. He was arrested alongside Iggy Pop and two other co-defendants. 

Shia LeBeouf  

Back in 2015, LeBeouf was arrested on an intoxication charge in Austin, Texas. He was released on bail. It's not the only time the actor has been arrested; he was arrested in January in New York during a rally against Donald Trump. 

Lindsay Lohan  

Everyone's favorite "Mean Girl" has spent many nights in jail. This mug shot was taken when she was booked into the Lynnwood Correctional Facility to serve three months after breaking her probation following two DUI arrests in 2007. 

Chace Crawford  

The former "Gossip Girl" star was arrested in 2010 for marijuana possession under 2 oz before being released. 

Michelle Rodriguez  

Rodriguez was arrested in 2006 for drunk driving in Oahu, Hawaii. Given the option between five nights in jail and community service, she chose the jail time. 

Vince Vaughn  

While working on a film in North Carolina in 2001, Vaughn was arrested for public fighting. He entered a no contest plea and the charges were dropped after six months. 

Nick Nolte  

Nolte was arrested in 2002 for drunk driving by the California Highway Patrol. 

Bill Cosby  

This shot was taken when Cosby turned himself in on a charge of aggravated indecent assault for an alleged encounter in 2004. At least 35 women have accused Cosby of assaulting them.  

Paul Reubens  

The actor best known as Pee-wee Herman was arrested in July 1991 and charged with indecent exposure at an adult movie house in Sarasota, Florida. He later pleaded no contest, and received a fine as well as order to produce an anti-drug PSA.

Robert Downey Jr.  

Downey, Jr. and arrests aren't strangers. This mug shot was taken in 2000 in Palm Springs, when the actor was found possessing drugs months after being released from prison. 

Christian Slater  

Slater was arrested in December 1994 for criminal possession of a weapon at an airport in New York. He reached a plea deal, requiring him to work with homeless children for three days. 

Fiona Apple  

The singer's mugshot looks like an album cover. She was arrested at a border stop in Texas and was found to have marijuana. 

Patty Hearst  

Granddaughter to the news publisher, Hearst was arrested in 1975 on bank robbery and gun charges. President Jimmy Carter commuted her sentence in 1979. 

Rush Limbaugh  

The conservative radio host turned himself in on a warrant that charged him with fraud to conceal information to obtain prescriptions in Florida in 2006. He reached a settlement in which he paid $30,000 and agreed to undergo addiction counseling. 

Hugh Grant  

The British actor was arrested in 1995 in Hollywood on charges for lewd conduct. He was caught with a hooker by police. 

Heather Locklear  

The former "Melrose Place" actress was arrested in Thousand Oaks, California, in February 2018 for domestic violence and battery on a police officer.

Chris Brown

Just after performing a concert in West Palm Beach, Fla., the R&amp;B singer with a long history of legal trouble was arrested in July 2018 on felony assault charges.

From drunk driving to trafficking… vitamins?

Celebrity arrests: It's like looking at a car accident. You don't want to give into the tabloids, but part of you also wants to know what they did to deserve a mug shot. Here are 17 arrests that were embarrassing -- either for the celeb or the police who booked 'em. 