











Deport ICE


Now post the poor pitiful life story of Luis Bracamontes, the illegal immigrant who murdered two people in California.


How many of the people who didn't murder those two people in California should be punished for it?


What about married to a US citizen for a decade dont you understand Donxon? When I tell people the idiocracy is alive and well everywhere in this nation built by non natives! Trump has afflicted many people with a new blind lack of logic!


@DonxonAll the ones who broke the law and came here illegally. 


Paul - any human being is capable of violence. Do you have any evidence that illegal immigrants are more violent than natives? 


https://cis.org/Camarota/NonCitizens-Committed-Disproportionate-Share-Federal-Crimes-201116


I believe the statistics clearly show they are.  Legal immigrants are statistically less likely to commit violent crimes while illegal immigrants much more likely and they make up a very high percentage of the prison population in border states.


Re: Davit T,--- illegal immigrants much more likely and they make up a very high percentage of the prison population in border states. ---Liar.


Re: Paul Hansen,You continue to parrot the "statistics" which are tortured so mercilessly by the anti-immigrant zealots at the CIS that they will say anything to make it stop. Not even their supposed "statistics" on supposed immigrant crime can be trusted when they engage in doublecounting by counting jailings (which means they count a guy jailed three times as three people) but are very circumspect when counting the native-born.But go ahead and continue peddle math-challenged numbers from math-challenged charlatans.


And there it is. Individual liberty comes down to group statistics.  Well, I know for a fact that men are statistically more violent than women---should they therefore have more limited access to firearms?  And women and other minorities are statistically more likely to embrace socialism---should they be denied the privilege of voting? 


I'm not a liar Francisco.townhall.com/columnists/scottmorefield/2018/01/16/newly-released-arizona-crime-data-shatters-key-liberal-narrative-on-immigration-and-cato-wont-be-pleased-n2435126?amp=trueAnd of course statistics matter, unknown.  The fact of the matter is that illegal immigration is a crime wether you think it should be or not.  But people who think it's okay try to minimize the negative effects and use statistics to tell people how great illegal immigrants are while using statistics about the legal ones.  Some of us are just pointing out the difference.  I think restricting immigration is consistent with the spirit of ppp society and see nothing wrong with telling people to leave the country.


Of you guys want to pay for this, go ahead, just don't make me.  In my state:Over 10% of children enrolled in public schools (K-12) have parents who are in the U.S. illegally. Illegal aliens and their children were found to be 37 percent of the uninsured population in Arizona in 2008, and the cost of uncompensated care for illegal aliens in Arizona is $320 million annually. The total education, medical, and incarceration costs in Arizona due to illegal immigration are $2.6 billion a year. 


The Arizona Department of Corrections estimates that 17% of its prison population is illegal aliens, and 22% of felony defendants in Maricopa County are illegal aliens. There is a difference between legal and illegal immigration.


@David TThat is Francisco's standard reply to anyone who hurts his feels. Being a recent border jumper himself, this issue always sets him off.


Re: David T,--- I'm not a liar Francisco. ---Yes, you are. --- The Arizona Department of Corrections estimates that 17% of its prison population is illegal aliens, ---That is exactly why I called you a liar. You said, and is above, that illegal immigrants are more likely to commit crimes and make a gigh percentage of the incarcerated population in border States - plural.Arizona, the outlier, is ONE state. An 'estimation' is not a number and, finally, being incarcerated does not translate to being a criminal. Many people go to jail only to have the charges dropped. Oh, I read the report which, by the way, was highly touted by Session's DOJ, despite the fact it had many conceptual errors in it, especially counting incarcerations as if that equates to sentenced.


Re: Paul Hansen,--- That is Francisco's standard reply to anyone who hurts his feels. ---You're making stuff up, Paul. I only reserve the epithet 'liar' to people who wilfully peddle falsegoods, like... You. Or David T. At least I would think he would prefer to be called a liar rather than being called a gullible goof too incompetent to question statistics that sound just a bit too good to be true. 


Torres is a stupid jackass. He is the kind of trash America has no need for at this time along with any open  border libertardians. The fact of the matter is that illegal immigrants on the average cause a lot of damn problems in addition to our worthless minority populations. There are some bad whites, but they don't cause the problems the stupid non whites do. Sure, call me a 'da rasis', but few of you would move to a ghetto minority neighborhood. 


@The Lab ManagerRedneck Jesus Trump seems to be causing a lot more problems than any minority.


San Francisco over here thinks anyone who is his race, whether they are criminals or not, are perfect little Angeles.  B.S. you don't like the numbers so you just call them lies.


This is the face of the policy advocated by libertarians who want state-managed borders: they are arguing for a large, growing, invasive, violent, and unaccountable national security state.  There are already local laws on the books to deal with those individuals (citizens, residents or immigrants) who commit violent crimes (of which immigration per se is not one), and such crimes are local, not national, matters.


They remind me of George W. Bush saying “we have to abandon the free market to save the free market.”


Awesome! They all need to go back. I'm sorry their countries suck.


America is broken, and symptoms of that are everywhere---including our response to immigration.  And the more broken, corrupt and totalitarian we become, the more desperate we become to fix it, and the more we mimic and ape the policies and attitudes of other, failed or failing countries.  America had no insecurities about immigration 200 years ago because she was strong and confident in her institutions and foundations, of rule of law, decentralized government/Federalism, Constitutionalism, individual liberty, non-intervention, free trade, and more; But the weaker be become and the more insecure we become, the more fearful we become about, among other core freedoms, immigration and freedom of association and travel. I'm with Carl Watner: "If one takes care of the means, the end will take care of itself."


One of the first immigration laws, the Naturalization Act of 1790, restricted citizenship to free white persons of good character. That should tell you who the founders wanted immigrating here.


Re: Paul Hansem,─ the Naturalization Act of 1790, restricted citizenship to free white persons of good character. ─That would've left out many a Trumpista out, especially those battling Stormy weather.


For anyone looking to get citizenship through marriage (legitimately) you absolutely don't do this within the US, you do it in you home country and apply at the embassy where they give you an appointment date your spouse turns up with years worth of tax documents and other junk and they shuffle through that, then put a big red stamp in your foreign passport. Takes 30 minutes.


The downside of diversityA Harvard political scientist finds that diversity hurts civic life. What happens when a liberal scholar unearths an inconvenient truth?http://archive.boston.com/news/globe/ideas/articles/2007/08/05/the_downside_of_diversity/







