




A man and woman with Columbus ties are being investigated in connection with the slayings of two men whose bodies were dumped in a remote wooded area of Somerset County, Pennsylvania, court records show.

The State of Pennsylvania is seeking to extradite Jasmine Browning, 24, of the Far West Side, who is being held in the Franklin County Jail.

Browning was arrested Monday. She is being held on a Pennsylvania State Police charge of conspiracy to commit aggravated assault to inflict injury and terror. Her bail was set at $1 million Tuesday, Franklin County Municipal Court records show.

A Pennsylvania State Police detective obtained a search warrant here in Franklin County seeking saliva or blood samples from Browning to compare with evidence connected to the deaths of Damian Staniszewski, 19, of Duncansville, Blair County, Pennsylvania, and James Smith, 32, of Portage, Cambria County, Pennsylvania.

Staniszewski and Smith were reported missing by their families last March 2017. Hunters stumbled across what turned out to be the skeletal remains of the two men last September in a wooded area of Somerset County, Pennsylvania.

An autopsy found that both men had been shot in the head and suffered blunt force trauma, court records state.

Browning's boyfriend is a Columbus native and former resident who last year resided in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, court records state. He is in jail on unrelated drug and weapons charges from a raid that occurred in December 2017 in Johnstown, state police there say. The Dispatch is not identifying him by name because he had not as of Tuesday night been charged with a crime in connection with the two Pennsylvania men.

According to the search warrant, investigators believe that Staniszewski and Smith had burglarized a "stash house" where Browning's boyfriend allegedly kept a large amount of money and narcotics. Pennsylvania State investigators through interviews discovered that the boyfriend suspected that Staniszewski and Smith had ripped him off, court records show.

Browning allegedly lured the pair to an apartment in Cambria County that she and her boyfriend shared for a purported drug transaction, the search warrant states.

It is believed that Staniszewski and Smith were held hostage and tortured before they were taken by car to the woods in Somerset County, where their dead bodies were found, court records show.

Pennsylvania State Police confirmed Tuesday that they are investigating the double homicide but declined further comment.

jwoods@dispatch.com

@Woodsnight


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.