Mostly clear. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph..

Mostly clear. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:54 pm

Pokagon Tribal Police Chief William Lux, left, presents St. Joseph County Sheriff Mike Grzegorek, center, and South Bend Police Chief Scott Ruzkowski with black ash tree baskets during a grand opening ceremony for the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation on Monday in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

Pokagon Tribal Police Chief William Lux stands at attention during a flag raising ceremony on Monday to mark the opening of the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

Pokagon Tribal Police perform a flag raising ceremony on Monday to mark the opening of the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

A flag raising ceremony is performed during a grand opening ceremony on Monday for the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

Pokagon Tribal Police Chief William Lux, left, presents St. Joseph County Sheriff Mike Grzegorek, center, and South Bend Police Chief Scott Ruzkowski with black ash tree baskets during a grand opening ceremony for the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation on Monday in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

Pokagon Tribal Police Chief William Lux stands at attention during a flag raising ceremony on Monday to mark the opening of the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

Pokagon Tribal Police perform a flag raising ceremony on Monday to mark the opening of the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

A flag raising ceremony is performed during a grand opening ceremony on Monday for the Pokagon Tribal Police Substation in South Bend. Tribune Photo/ROBERT FRANKLIN

SOUTH BEND — With its Four Winds Casino slated to open here early next year, the Pokagon Band of the Potawatomi Indians has opened a new tribal police substation to serve its sovereign land.

The tribe showed off its 4,600-square-foot building, on Prairie Avenue near the massive casino site, during a grand opening ceremony on Monday. Drumming and chanting were featured, along with a flag raising ceremony held by the tribe's honor guard.

"This goes to show that tribes and other governments can get along and do great things together," Pokagon Band Chairman John Warren said during the gathering, which was attended elected officials and members of local police agencies.

The substation — staffed by eight police officers, two sergeants, a detective and a lieutenant — will aim to ensure the tribal land and area surrounding it has a strong law enforcement presence.

Law enforcement is necessary for any sovereign nation such as the Pokagon Band, which is a federally recognized tribe responsible for maintaining order on its property.

In this case, tribal police are needed to serve the 166-acre site on the city's southwest side, which will feature a tribal village and the casino.

The casino, which could open as early as January, will feature a 55,000-square-foot gaming floor with 1,800 slot machines, along with six restaurants and three bars. And if it draws enough business, future plans could call for a hotel, event center and nightclub. The adjoining tribal village, meanwhile, will start out with a handful of houses for tribal members.

Also highlighted during the ceremony was a new partnership between tribal police and St. Joseph County Police that calls for housing people arrested on the tribal land — including non-tribal and tribal members — in the county jail.

The tribe will pay $60 per day for each inmate housed in the jail and cover medical expenses under the 10-year agreement, which was approved earlier this month by the county Board of Commissioners; it will soon be considered for final approval by the office of Indiana Attorney General Curtis Hill.

The Dowagiac-based tribe has similar agreements with county jails in Michigan's Berrien, Cass and Van Buren counties.

St. Joseph County Sheriff Mike Grzegorek said that when similar casinos have opened in other areas, such as New Buffalo, the crime rate didn't increase much. As a result, he doesn't think there will be many arrests on tribal land when the casino opens.

"I don't expect this to increase my jail population hardly at all," he said.

Tribal Police Chief William Lux said his department has built strong ties with city and county police to ensure the agencies help each other when needed.

"The true meaning of law enforcement today is helping each other," he said.

In 2015, the tribe reached a cross-deputization agreement with the county that gives tribal police the authority to enforce state and local laws when they're off tribal property; county police officers, meanwhile, can enforce tribal laws on Pokagon land.

Tribal police, meanwhile, are negotiating a mutual-aid agreement with the South Bend Police Department that will allow the agencies to assist each other. Officials hope the agreement will be finalized before the casino opens.

tbooker@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6070

@Tbooker24



SOUTH BEND — More than five years after the Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians announced plans to build a casino northern Indiana, Four Winds …


                                    
                                        Whenever Ted Booker posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Be the first to know about breaking news with email alerts sent right to your inbox.

The news you need to start your day, sent weekday mornings.

The day's top 5 news headlines, sent weekday afternoons.