Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Sunny. High near 95F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low 71F. Winds E at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:53 pm

Anak, the police dog of Officer Greg Casem of the Ferguson Police Department, has his lower canine teeth filed down after having root canals on the teeth on Monday, Sept. 19, 2016. He will soon be fitted with titanium crowns, after the teeth wore down from years of training and work. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com

St. Louis County police officers use a dog to confront a crowd they're trying to break up on Canfield Dr. in Ferguson on Saturday, Aug. 9, 2014. Earlier in the day police had shot and killed 18 year-old Michael Brown on the street. Photo By David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com

David Heine, with the Cahokia Police Department, coaches his dog, Feight, over a hurdle on Friday, June 16, 2016, during the agility portion of the United States Police Canine Association Regional Field Trials and Certifications at Fort Zumwalt North High School. Although Feight completed all of his obstacles and qualified, "we looked like we didn't wanna be out there today," said Heine. Twenty six police canine teams competed toward qualification in the agility portion. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com

Anak, the police dog of Officer Greg Casem of the Ferguson Police Department, has his lower canine teeth filed down after having root canals on the teeth on Monday, Sept. 19, 2016. He will soon be fitted with titanium crowns, after the teeth wore down from years of training and work. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com

David Heine, with the Cahokia Police Department, coaches his dog, Feight, over a hurdle on Friday, June 16, 2016, during the agility portion of the United States Police Canine Association Regional Field Trials and Certifications at Fort Zumwalt North High School. Although Feight completed all of his obstacles and qualified, "we looked like we didn't wanna be out there today," said Heine. Twenty six police canine teams competed toward qualification in the agility portion. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com

JEFFERSON CITY • Legislation that would increase penalties for those who assault law enforcement animals failed in the Missouri House on Monday — and jolted back to life broader discussions in the chamber over race and policing.

A group of African-American lawmakers derided the proposal, saying the GOP-led Legislature had continually refused to consider legislation strengthening police accountability standards.

“We don’t care about the marginalized citizens of this state,” Rep. Brandon Ellington, D-Kansas City, said on the House floor last week. “We care more about four-legged canines than we do about people that walk with two legs.”

And in a surprise move, a coalition of Republicans joined with Democrats to knock down the measure. Only 73 lawmakers voted in favor of the proposal; it takes 82 votes to advance legislation.

Argo, a 3-year-old German shepherd, jumped over a wall and fell four stories during a hail storm. 

The defeat on the House floor was a blow to Gov. Eric Greitens, a Republican, who said in January that penalties for those who assault police dogs are not strong enough.

In December, a 17-year-old suspected of stealing allegedly stabbed a Cass County sheriff’s dog named Champ as the dog apprehended the suspect. The dog survived and reportedly returned to duty on Jan. 8.

“These K-9s do incredible work on behalf of our people,” Greitens said, using the Cass County example. “They are trained, tough dogs, and they help keep Missourians safe.”

Under current law, someone convicted of assault on a law enforcement animal could receive up to 15 days in jail and a $700 fine. Under the proposal by Rep. Robert Cornejo, R-St. Peters, the maximum punishment would be a year behind bars and a $2,000 fine.

If the dog dies or is disabled, the person could receive a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison, up from the current maximum of four years.

Cornejo said his only motivation was ensuring those who assault the dogs received a just punishment.

“I’m just trying to increase the penalties,” he said.

St. Louis County police officers use a dog to confront a crowd they're trying to break up on Canfield Dr. in Ferguson on Saturday, Aug. 9, 2014. Earlier in the day police had shot and killed 18 year-old Michael Brown on the street. Photo By David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com

Opponents wondered about racial disparities in the use of police dogs, and who might be affected most under any revisions to the law.

In a 2015 report on the Ferguson Police Department, the U.S. Department of Justice found that “in every canine bite incident for which racial information is available, the subject was African-American.” Investigators concluded that dogs were often used “not to counter a physical threat but to inflict punishment.”

In one case, officers in 2011 were dispatched to an abandoned Ferguson home. Though police characterized the situation as a likely burglary, Justice Department investigators characterized the scene as a trespassing by teenagers.

An officer said a 14-year-old boy was hiding in a crawl space, curled up in a ball. The teenager did not show his hands, according to the officer, and refused to leave the crawl space despite warnings that the dog could be used. The boy told investigators he never heard any warnings, never hid in a crawl space, and was bitten as he tried to run away from the dog upon seeing it.

“Even if the officer’s version of the force used were accurate, the use of the dog to bite the boy was unreasonable,” according to the Ferguson report.

In 2015, St. Louis County police banned dogs from being used in crowd control situations, a practice the federal government criticized.

Last year, in St. Paul, Minn., a woman sued the police department after she was mistakenly attacked by a police dog as she took out the trash.

Opponents also wondered whether someone could be prosecuted if they act in self defense when a dog bites them.

Don Cook, a Los Angeles attorney who has sued police departments over use of dogs, said it is natural to defend oneself when a dog is attacking.

“What are you going to do when you have a large, aggressive dog coming up to you — like it’s going to attack and bite you?” Cook asked. “What’s the natural reaction in most people? Try to defend themselves.”

Rep. Shamed Dogan, R-Ballwin, was one of the Republicans who did not back the measure, calling the penalties “too harsh.”

Dogan resented the implication that opponents of the legislation were anti-law enforcement.

“At a time when we need to be exploring ways to reduce prison rates and incarceration rates,” Dogan said in an interview, “this bill takes us in the wrong direction.”

The legislation is House Bill 1649.

Jack Suntrup is a reporter at the Post-Dispatch


                                    
                                        Whenever Jack Suntrup posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Be informed. Get our free political newsletter featuring local and national updates and analysis.