


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Ducey said he has long fought immigration policies that separate families. As evidence, he cited his opposition to an Obama-era policy that never was.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey
(Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

Gov. Doug Ducey said this week that he has long been opposed to separating immigrant children from their families, citing his criticism of an Obama-era policy.


One problem: Such a policy never existed.


Ducey, in a phone interview with The Arizona Republic on Wednesday, was asked about the policy instituted by President Donald Trump that resulted in children being separated from their immigrant parents.


Ducey said, "I think we can keep kids with their families."


He then said he made this same criticism in 2014 when President Barack Obama undertook a similar policy.


"I would ask you to search your archives," he said. "We said in 2014 that we didn't think it was a good strategy, then."


A search of The Republic archives does not show Ducey criticizing any such policy. Nor does a search of available news clippings show any such Obama-era policy.


On Friday, Ducey's spokesman, Daniel Scarpinato, said the governor was referring to an Obama program that dumped immigrant families at a bus station in Phoenix. 


That program, though, did not result in mass separations of families.


MORE: Separated from his mother, 7-year-old boy becomes one of first to be reunited


In the summer of 2014, a surge of families and unaccompanied children crossed the border, fleeing violence ravaging their Central American countries.


In response, the Obama administration flew some children who crossed the border by themselves to Arizona where they were housed in detention facilities before either being placed with family members or moved into shelters.


Mothers and children were kept together and placed in secure detention centers in Texas. But overcrowding led officials to fly some of those families to Arizona and release them at Phoenix or Tucson bus stations.



    Edmilson Aguilar Punay, a 15-year-old from Guatemala, says the detention center where he was held was so crowded, some people had to sleep standing.
    USA TODAY

Photos of those practices, particularly children huddled under Mylar blankets in detention centers, brought political pressure on the Obama administration.


But neither policy involved the intentional separation of children from their parents.


Ducey, during his campaign for governor in 2014, was a vocal opponent of immigration authorities dropping off immigrant families at the Greyhound bus station in Phoenix.


MORE: Family separations have stopped, but how will families be reunited?


"It's hard to know which is worse — the incompetence of the Obama administration in dealing with it; the inhumanity of dropping off women and children at bus stations in 100-plus-degree temperatures; or the sheer illegality of it," he wrote in a letter to editor in June 2014.


Ducey, in a telephone town hall that month, suggested that federal officials be charged with child abuse if it was discovered that they left any unaccompanied minors at the bus stations.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

There was no evidence at the time, nor since, that this had occurred.


Ducey said he wanted to end the practice of immigrant families and children being flown into Arizona, calling it one of the reasons he sought the state's highest office.


"This is what I'm talking about when I talk about Arizona taking charge of its own destiny," he said "What I'm doing to fight this frustrating action is to run for governor."


The family detention practice ended the next year when, in July 2015, a federal judge ruled that authorities violated rules about holding immigrant children in custody. Those rules were set out in the settlement of a class action lawsuit, known as the "Flores" settlement.


The Trump administration wishes to revisit those policies.


The executive order Trump signed Wednesday mandates that children and parents be detained together. The order also asks the Attorney General to seek a modification to the "Flores" rules that restrict how long families may be detained.



    President Donald Trump says he "didn’t like the sight or the feeling of families being separated."
    USA TODAY

Trump, when signing the executive order, also suggested that other administrations had separated families.


"It's been going on for 60 years," he said. "Sixty years. Nobody has taken care of it. No one has had the political courage to take care of it."


Trump also referenced the images of the Obama-era detention facilities.


"If you look at some of those horrible scenes from a few years ago — to me, they were horrible scenes," he said. "And that was during the Obama administration. Other administrations have had the same thing. We're keeping the family together. And so this is it."


The Trump Administration, under its detention policies, has been sending immigrant children to shelters in Arizona.


Ducey, in Tucson on Wednesday, did not answer reporters' questions at a campaign event about whether he would visit those facilities.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
