


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The U.S. government is distributing a flier to help parents find their kids after they have been separated at the border.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Flier from federal government for families who have been separated.
(Photo: U.S. government)

President Donald Trump's administration has started distributing a flier instructing migrant parents how to locate their children after being separated at the border under a new zero-tolerance policy aimed at deterring a wave of families arriving at the southern border asking for asylum.


The flier comes amid fierce criticism that the policy has created a nightmare for parents and children unable to locate or communicate with each other after they have been separated.


Critics say the policy inflicts new trauma on the migrant families, mostly from Central America, already fleeing violence in their home countries.


The flier appears to mark the first time the Trump administration has established a clear process for informing parents for locating and communicating with their children more than two months after the zero-tolerance policy was announced in April.


READ MORE: 5 things to know about family-separation policy


"I’m glad to see that there is a flier, but based on what I know of the challenges that parents are facing in detention, I think the process is a bit hollow because it’s still entirely too difficult to find their children and to reunify with them," said Emily Butera, senior policy adviser for migrant rights and justice at the Women's Refugee Commission, an advocacy group.


Under the zero-tolerance policy, the Border Patrol has been directed to refer every person caught entering the country illegally for criminal prosecution, even parents arriving with children asking for asylum in the U.S.


As a result, nearly 2,000 children have been taken from their parents at the border and then turned over to government care and placed in contract shelters while their parents are prosecuted, the Associated Press reported Friday. 


READ MORE: Citing Bible, Trump administration defends immigration policy


Butera said there is a "huge black hole" after parents and children have been separated, with parents being held in the custody of the Department of Justice while being prosecuted, and their children held in the custody of a completely separate agency, the Department of Health and Human Services' Office of Refugee Resettlement. 


After completing the prosecution process, parents are then transferred to the custody of yet another agency, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and placed in detention centers while remaining separated from their children, she said.


"First and foremost, every time you separate a parent from a child, you are creating incredible logistical challenges to family unification," Butera said, "never mind the trauma that is being caused to the parent and child who have already been traumatized by everything they have had to survive to make it to that point."



    United Nations Asks U.S. To Stop Separating Migrant Children From Their Families
    Time

The flier includes phone numbers for parents both inside and outside ICE detention centers to call the ICE Call Center to locate their children, according to a copy obtained by The Arizona Republic.


The first number listed did not seem very useful. When a reporter dialed the number, the reporter was placed on hold for more than 21 minutes and given a recorded message: “All of our operators are still assisting other callers. Please continue to hold for the next available operator.”


When a live operator finally answered, he said the line was only set up to "annotate" information provided by parents trying to locate their children, not to provide information to locate them. The operator then provided a phone number for the Office of Refugee Resettlement. That number turned out to be the same as a second number published on the flier.


READ MORE: Migrant separations a moral issue, churches say


Butera said it is not clear whether parents have the ability to call the numbers provided on the flier while in Department of Justice custody during the prosecution process.


"They do not have access to a phone-call platform that would allow them to call the ICE hotline or the ORR hotline for free, and even if there were a way for them to make a phone call, most of them have no money to buy a calling card to make a charge call," she said.


While undocumented immigrants have the ability to make  phone calls while being held in detention facilities in ICE custody, they often face similar bureaucratic challenges as those encountered by the reporter, she said. 


ICE officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

On Friday, U.S. Rep. Raúl Grijalva, an Arizona Democrat, sent a letter to Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen, U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar II that implores them to stop the "barbaric" practice of prosecuting parents and separating them from their children at the border.


READ MORE: Are migrant parents being deported without kids?


Grijalva told the officials he also wants to know how many children have been separated from parents at the  Arizona border, whether DHS plans to hold children separated from parents at temporary shelters in Arizona, and whether any children separated from parents at the Arizona border have been sent to shelters in other states.


He also wants to know if any children remain in HHS care after their parents were deported.


In an interview, Grijalva said he was also opposed to the Trump administration’s proposal to  house separated children in tent  cities on military bases.
“It’s wrong,” he said. “To say they are such a threat to our nation that they have to be housed on a military base for security reasons, implied or not implied, that is the message that is sent out.”


Outside the Phoenix offices of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, immigrant advocates on Friday decried the separation of children from parents as well as proposals by the Department of Homeland Security to house separated children in tent cities in Texas.


“This attack on families is an attack on who we are as human beings,” said Ken Heintzelman, senior minister at Shadow Rock United Church of Christ in north Phoenix.


READ MORE: Military bases eyed as temporary shelter for migrant children


Advocates announced they plan to hold a rally Sunday — Father's Day — to protest the separation of children from parents. The rally is set to begin at 6 p.m. at the Central United Methodist Church on Central Avenue and then proceed to the nearby offices of ICE, said Petra Falcon, executive director of Promise Arizona.


“Families are the foundation of our society, yet this country has declared a war separating them,” Falcon said outside the ICE offices.


Republic reporter Angela Forburger contributed to this article.


READ MORE: Did the government lose 1,500 migrant children?



    Attorney General Jeff Sessions is citing the Bible in defending the Trump administration's policy of separating immigrant parents from their children after they enter the U.S. illegally. (June 14)
    AP

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.