Home / Barack Obama / 


 Comments are Disabled





Barack Obama has repeatedly claimed that his administration was “scandal free.”


It was one of the biggest lies in American political history.


Now there is one lawsuit surrounding a massive Obama scandal that could ruin him for good.


Obama’s administration was awash in controversy.


The NSA illegally spied on every American’s phone calls and emails.


Obama’s Department of Justice ran guns to Mexico in Operation Fast and Furious in order to create chaos to push gun control.


IRS agents targeted Tea Party groups for political intimidation.


Hillary Clinton mishandled classified information on an illegal private email server.


The FBI spied on Donald Trump’s Presidential campaign.


And this is just scratching the surface of the misdeeds during the Obama administration.


One of the biggest scandals to take place during the end of the Obama administration was the flood of tens of thousands of unaccompanied illegal alien children across the Southern border.


The Obama administration pushed for amnesty, and illegal aliens from Central America responded to the incentive by swarming America’s border.


Americans were shocked by images of children in dog cages and wrapped in foil.


Despite the fake news media trying to claim President Trump was mistreating illegal alien children on a historic scale, this scandal was of Obama’s own making.


And now one lawsuit seeks to hold the government accountable for Obama’s misdeeds.


The American Immigrant Council is suing on behalf of the illegal alien children who claim they were mistreated in Obama’s holding facilities.


Illegal alien children claim they were beaten, freezing, and denied food.


The American Immigrant council wrote about the lawsuit:


“The American Immigration Council, the National Immigration Law Center, the ACLU of Arizona, the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights of the San Francisco Bay Area, and Morrison &amp; Foerster LLP have filed a class-action lawsuit challenging detention conditions in U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) detention facilities. The complaint alleges that Tucson Sector Border Patrol holds men, women, and children in freezing, overcrowded, and filthy cells for days at a time in violation of the U.S. Constitution and CBP’s own policies. Detained individuals are stripped of outer layers of clothing and forced to suffer in brutally cold temperatures; deprived of beds, bedding, and sleep; denied adequate food, water, medicine and medical care, and basic sanitation and hygiene items such as soap, sufficient toilet paper, sanitary napkins, diapers, and showers; and held virtually incommunicado in these conditions for days.”

But even more unbelievable, the media reported on this lawsuit and its allegations from 2016 because they wanted to mislead the American people into thinking it was Donald Trump who ordered these atrocities.


In fact, the Associate Press story about the lawsuit did not mention Obama’s name once, but found a way to use Donald Trump’s name five times.


This story is the latest example of how the media uses fake news to smear Trump and cover for Obama.


This scandal took place on Obama’s watch.


But the media used misinformation to try and fool the American people into thinking Donald Trump was personally ordering guards at holding facilities to abuse children.


Tucker Carlson recently said you should not believe anything you see or read in liberal media outlets like CNN, ABC, CBS, NBC, the Washington Post and the New York Times.


This latest fake news smear is proof he is right.




Share This

Recent


  

  

  

  

  

Join Our Newsletter!


Other News


  

  

  

  

  