Morgan Roof, sister of the infamous Charleston church shooter Dylann Roof, was arrested Wednesday for bringing weapons and drugs to her South Carolina high school, according to multiple reports.

Authorities detained Roof after a school resource officer at A.C. Flora High School in Columbia, S.C., was informed she was in possession of marijuana, pepper spray, and a knife, the Richland County Sheriff’s Department announced. Her arrest was preceded by an alarming post on social media criticizing the students participating in National Walkout Day following the Feb. 14 mass shooting at a high school in Parkland, Fla., ended the lives of 17 people.

#BREAKING: Sister of Charleston Church Shooter Dylann Roof, Morgan, given a $5,000 cash bond by a judge tonight. She’s facing charges for possessing weapons at @acflorahigh. Judge said she can’t return to school while on bond. Read more: https://t.co/FoJezKJ2oz #sctweets @wis10 pic.twitter.com/LSVDeZTWQQ

— Chad K. Mills (@ChadKMills) March 15, 2018



“Nothing is gonna change,” a social media post from a Snapchat account associated with Morgan Roof read, according to the Post and Courier, “I hope it’s a trap and y’all get shot.”

“we know it’s fixing to be nothing but black people walkin out anyway,” the post also read.

This is Morgan Roof, Dylann Roofs little sister, her snapchats there and all do your thang twitter pic.twitter.com/MttSF875is

— tatianna (@theonlytyy) March 14, 2018



Roof was sent to a local detention center with bail set at $5,000. She will not be allowed to return to school.

Morgan’s brother Dylann, a white nationalist who murdered nine people at a Bible study at Mother Emanuel AME Church in Charleston back in 2015. Dylann has been sentenced to death and is awaiting execution.

“Tragedy has struck this family again,” a neighbor of the Roofs told a local media outlet.

Follow Ryan on Twitter

Send tips to ryan@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.

CORPORATE

COLUMNS

SECTIONS