This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2018 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20 minutes.


                                    Andrea Nicole Baber was booked Friday on charges including sodomy, rape and contributing to the sexual delinquency of a minor, authorities said.
                                    
                                         (Douglas County Sheriff's Office)
                                    
                                

A former Oregon Christian school teacher was arrested after being accused of having an affair with a 15-year-old student that lasted for more than a year, authorities said Monday.

Andrea Nicole Baber, 29, was arrested at her home in Cottage Grove on Friday, the Register-Guard reported. The arrest came days after Baber’s husband allegedly walked in on her and the teen in bed, according to the News-Review.

The student’s father reported the relationship to police Dec. 12 after he and his wife received an anonymous email asking if they knew the boy and the Logos Christian Academy teacher were in a sexual relationship, authorities said.

The message was attached with photos of the teacher and the boy, according to the Register-Guard, citing an affidavit filed in Douglas County Circuit Court.

The teen told deputies that he and Baber had been in a relationship since 2017, when the boy was 15, according to the newspaper. Deputies said the teen provided him with alcohol and weed.

Baber was booked Friday at a Douglas County Jail on several charges, including sodomy, rape and contributing to the delinquency of a minor, according to the New York Post.

The sheriff’s office said Baber no longer works at Logos Christian Academy. Her profile was still featured Monday, but was taken down as of Tuesday.

“Andrea has always felt called to work with youth and is very excited that God opened the door for her to be part of the Logos team,” her biography said, according to the Post. “She lives with her husband, dog and cat just south of Eugene.”

This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2018 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20 minutes.