Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy with afternoon showers or thunderstorms. High 89F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:54 am

Daniel Andrew Crimmins

Daniel Andrew Crimmins

An Elliston man is accused in last week’s killing of Christian Javier Santana of Roanoke, the Montgomery County Sheriff’s Office announced Monday.

Daniel Andrew Crimmins, 48, of Elliston is charged with second-degree murder and using a gun to commit a felony, a news release said.

According to the release, officers were called to Boggs Mountain Loop in the Elliston community on Friday. Told there had been a shooting, officers found Santana, 37, with a gunshot wound to his chest.

Santana was taken by helicopter to Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital. He was pronounced dead there, the news release said.

Crimmins was on the scene and confessed to Santana’s shooting, the news release said.

No other details of the incident were given in the news release.

Crimmins is being held in the Western Virginia Regional Jail, according to online jail records.

Daniel Andrew Crimmins

Mike Gangloff covers crime, breaking news and courts in the New River Valley. 



                                    
                                        Whenever Mike Gangloff posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
