


Croatia has shocked England with a 2-1 win that places them in the running for the World Cup final.




Major police operation is underway after a body riddled with stab wounds was found in the middle of a Brisbane road.




Two teenagers have been caught on camera racially abusing an Asian man aboard a Melbourne tram.



Titleholder and eight-times champion Roger Federer has blown a match point and been knocked out of Wimbledon by inspired South African Kevin Anderson.




The Duke and Duchess of Sussex are on their first overseas trip as a married couple.

US President Donald Trump has unleashed on Germany for its reliance on Russia in a multi-billion dollar gas deal.

The condition of Charlie Rowley, who touched an item contaminated with deadly toxin Novichok, has improved in hospital.




Dr Richard Harris, who found out his father had died soon after the rescue, has heaped praise on the Thai boys and downplayed his own role.

Two Brisbane tradies have come up with a bright idea to help raise awareness of mental illness in the construction industry.

Ray and Jeni Bonell are one of Australia's biggest families and when they've welcomed a new addition our cameras have been there to celebrate.

A chef has been forced to close his restaurant and is battling more than half a million dollars of debt after he claimed his financial situation was embellished on a credit application.




While married to one of Australia’s most notorious underworld figures, Roberta Williams lived a flashy and lavish lifestyle.




In a 60 Minutes exclusive interview, the daughter of Underbelly king Carl Williams revealed she has written to the former Victoria Police Deputy Commissioner, Sir Ken Jones, demanding answers surrounding her father’s death.

In its 40th year of television broadcast, leading current affairs program 60 Minutes Australia has been inducted into the TV Week Logie Hall of Fame.

Schoolgirl killer Sean Price gave a Melbourne judge the finger before being ordered to serve an extra three years' jail for breaching a supervision order by raping a woman days after the homicide.


The sentence takes his total jail term to 41 years, and means the 33-year-old will be eligible for parole only once he's served 39 years and nine months.


Price appeared in the County Court of Victoria on Thursday via video link to hear his sentence, but Judge Meryl Sexton cut him off when he began playing up and making rude gestures.


She earlier refused his request to personally make a "commentary" to the court, given he already had legal representation.


Price pleaded guilty to breaching a 10-year supervision order when he raped a woman in a Christian bookshop, shortly after killing schoolgirl Masa Vukotic by stabbing her 49 times in March 2015.


He admitted committing the rape purely for his own gratification because he knew he would be locked up for a long time for killing Ms Vukotic, Judge Sexton said.


Price was jailed for life in 2016 for the rape and murder. He was on bail and subject to the supervision order - because he was already a registered sex offender - when he committed the rape.


Judge Sexton jailed him for four years and 11 months for the breach, which attracts a maximum five-year jail term. She also set a new non-parole period of 39 years and five months, when Price will be aged in his 70s.


"I find there is no remorse," she said.


"You are now and will remain a significant danger to the community for the immediate future."


Judge Sexton said society was paying for Price's disturbing childhood, including a head trauma at birth, family violence between his mother and her partners and sexual abuse from an early age at the hands of his carers.


He had learning difficulties and was bullied at school and as a teen, began using amphetamines and marijuana. He showed psychotic symptoms but was not treated.


He was jailed at 19, and since then has spent only 15 months in the community.


During his hearings, Price showed an array of poor behaviour, gesturing wildly, laughing, interrupting and giving rude finger gestures.


Before the killing Price's mental state was deteriorating rapidly and he was reported to have paranoid schizophrenia and borderline personality disorder, the court was told.


© AAP 2018

Auto news: VW Golf, Tiguan and Amarok are selling up a storm - caradvice.com.au

Today's deals on Amazon

Top 5 Utes!

Compare More. Find Better!

Watch Power Now!

Deposit $20 Bet With $100!

Search properties in AUS

© 2018 Nine Digital Pty Ltd

© 2018 Nine Digital Pty Ltd