The beleaguered company redeveloping the Statler Hotel in downtown Dallas has just purchased another local landmark: the former Cabana Motor Hotel on Stemmons Freeway, best known as the place where the Beatles stayed in September 1964.

Late Friday the Dallas County Commissioners Court agreed to sell the 399,000-square-foot property, which sits on 3.275 acres near the Design District, to Centurion American Acquisition, LLC. The sale price, according to county records, is $8.1 million.

The county has owned the property since the mid-1980s, when it converted the hotel into the minimum-security Bill Decker Detention Center. And it has been trying to offload the property for years, with two previously announced sales having fallen through. Lincoln Property  was going to buy it in 2014 and replace the hotel with a data center; last year, Circa Capital Corp. said it was interested in buying and preserving the original structure.


Centurion American, whose financing for the Statler redo is being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, has until Nov. 15 to close the deal.


The Dallas Morning News has agreed to lease the former Dallas Public Library that is part of the Statler complex for its new headquarters.

Mehrdad Moayedi, Centurion American's chief executive, said in a statement sent to The News on Friday he intends to preserve the old Cabana, which was built in 1962 by a development team that included Jay Sarno, who also developed Caesar's Palace and Circus Circus in Las Vegas, and partially owned by Doris Day. 


"We have learned so much from restoring the Statler, and I really enjoy bringing historically significant properties back to life," Moayedi said. "With the Cabana, there is enough land to protect the historical integrity of the building, while also adding additional development to the site."

Three Dallas County Commissioners — Elba Garcia, Theresa Daniel and John Wiley Price — approved the sale in a special called meeting Friday afternoon that lasted but a few minutes.

Price said late Friday that commissioners were aware of the federal investigation involving Centurion, as well as two lawsuits recently filed against the developer. He said CBRE, which was handling the sale on behalf of the county, and the county's lawyers signed off on the deal. 


"And as far as we're concerned," Price said, "it was the best deal on the table for the taxpayers of Dallas County."


Price, acquitted in April on federal bribery and fraud charges, said the ongoing federal investigation into Centurion's dealings doesn't concern him.


"You know how I feel about that," he said.

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, who wasn't able to attend the meeting, said he "didn't want to comment on the person who bought" the former hotel, only that he was pleased a developer was willing to buy it and restore it.

"The key thing we were looking at in selling that building, first and foremost, was getting the taxpayers the maximum amount of money for the asset," he said. "And secondarily, to the extent it's plausible, it should remain a hotel."


Preservation Dallas put the Cabana on its Most Endangered Historic Places list in 2015, insisting that despite its recent past as a jail and, after that, a privately operated halfway house for sex offenders, it still looks much as it did when Raquel Welch worked there as a cocktail waitress and the Beatles, Led Zeppelin, The Who, Jimi Hendrix and Richard Nixon were guests.

"Much of the original features are intact," said Preservation Dallas, "including extensive tile-work, terrazzo, concrete screen-walls, curved signature walls, and unique concrete umbrellas on the terrace."


It's far from clear whether Centurion will ask the city for incentives to help redo the Cabana — or whether the city will have any interest in doing so, given the ongoing investigation into the financing behind the redo of the downtown Statler Hotel.


Officials from the Securities and Exchange Commission are focusing on Centurion’s sale of municipal bonds that were backed by city of Dallas tax incentives.

Centurion had said those who bought the bonds would get a tax break, but the  Internal Revenue Service has ruled the bonds have to be taxed.


Centurion, Moayedi and United Development Funding, a lender on other Centurion projects, were also named in a class-action lawsuit filed last year; investors said the parties were involved in a fraudulent effort to prop up bad loans.


And most recently, the minority investors in the Statler redevelopment sued other lenders on the Statler project, accusing them and Moayedi of artificially inflating construction costs to increase their profits.


Throughout, Moayedi has denied wrongdoing.


Staff writer Miles Moffeit contributed to this story.

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.