Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Three years after Chelsea Bruck disappeared from a Halloween party, "Dateline" and "Snapped" are putting a spotlight on the Michigan woman's murder.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Three years after Chelsea Bruck disappeared from a Halloween party, two TV shows are putting a national spotlight on the Maybee, Mich. woman's murder case.
    Detroit Free Press

Chelsea Bruck went missing on Oct. 26, 2014 after last being seen at a Halloween party in Frenchtown Twp.
(Photo: Monroe County Sheriff)

Three years after Chelsea Bruck disappeared from a Halloween party, two TV shows are putting a national spotlight on the Maybee, Mich. woman's murder case.


NBC's "Dateline" will air an episode called "The Halloween Party" at 9 p.m. Friday. And Oxygen Network's "Snapped" will examine the case at 6 p.m. and 9 p.m. Sunday. 


 


Bruck, 22, was last seen around 3 a.m. Oct. 26, 2014, walking with an unidentified man outside a Halloween party in Frenchtown Township, Mich. About 800 people attended the party.


Read more:


Daniel Clay sentenced to life in Chelsea Bruck's death after Halloween party


Chelsea Bruck murder: A time line of events


After a six-month search that included the distribution of more than 1 million leaflets, Bruck's remains were found in April 2015 in a wooded lot in Ash Township, Mich., about 12 miles from the party site. 


Parts of Bruck's party costume, that of Poison Ivy, a villain in the Batman superhero series, were found in an abandoned industrial site in Flat Rock, about 15 miles away.  


That September, Bruck's red shoe and green leggings were found near the scene where her body was discovered. Crime-scene investigators found enough DNA on the leggings to eventually identify a suspect: 27-year-old Daniel Clay.


Daniel Clay enters the courtroom for his trial  in the death of Chelsea Bruck at the Monroe County Courthouse on May 9, 2017, in Monroe. (Photo: Tom Hawley/The Monroe News via Associated Press)

In July 2016, authorities arrested Clay at a home in Newport, Mich. His girlfriend, Kelli Richter, told the Free Press at the time that he confessed to the crime in a phone call to her from Monroe County Jail.


Clay claimed Bruck was accidentally asphyxiated in his car during aggressive sex after a night of booze and drugs at the Halloween party. But prosecutor Michael Roehrig said Bruck's facial injuries showed Clay beat her.


In May 2017, Clay was convicted of first-degree murder. The crime carries a mandatory penalty of life in prison without parole. 


The "Snapped" episode features two Free Press reporters — Robert Allen and Katrease Stafford — talking about the case. 


Contact staff writer Ann Zaniewski at 313-222-6594 or azaniewski@freepress.com. Follow her on Twitter: @AnnZaniewski. 
