By

Snejana Farberov For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  16:50 EDT, 9 April 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  19:07 EDT, 9 April 2018







          18

View  comments

A married middle school teacher from Oklahoma has been charged with rape after she allegedly admitted to repeatedly having sex with her 15-year-old student.


On Saturday, 36-year-old Keri Hoffman and her husband drove to the Clinton Police Department where the Clinton Middle School teacher confessed to carrying on an inappropriate relationship with one of her students, according to a statement from the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation.


Under questioning, Hoffman told agents she used Facebook Messenger to communicate with the victim and to arrange their encounters. She reportedly admitted to having sex with the 15-year-old ‘numerous’ times since March 30, including in her car in Washita County and inside her father’s detached garage in Custer County.


Keri Hoffman, 36, a middle school algebra teacher from Oklahoma (pictured left and right in her mugshot), is accused of having sex with her 15-year-old student on 'numerous' occasions 

Hoffman was a teacher at Clinton Middle School (pictured), where the victim was a student 

Hoffman, who taught algebra at Clinton Middle School, went on to say that last week she took a group of students to the state Capitol to participate in a teacher walkout. The victim was part of that group.


Hoffman picked up the boy first and dropped him off last, having sex with him each time, according to the OSBI press release.


After an agent interviewed the victim, Hoffman was arrested in Clinton and booked into the Custer County Jail on two counts of second-degree rape and one count each of facilitating sexual conduct or communication with minor by use of technology and pattern of criminal offenses.


Hoffman said she took a group of students to the state Capitol to participate in a teacher walkout (picture from April 3 walkout) and had sex with the boy twice 

If convicted of all the charges against her, the woman could face up to 42 years in prison and fines.


Hoffman is currently being held on $30,000 bond. As of Monday afternoon, her name no longer appeared on Clinton Middle School's website. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group