Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Tamar Lapin


		
		
		
		
	


									April 11, 2018 | 11:34am
											| Updated April 11, 2018 | 12:26pm
												

A disgraced former Michigan judge — nicknamed “the Bill Clinton of Macomb County ” because of lurid sex scandals that hounded him on the bench — was slain by his son, police said.

The body of James “Skip” Scandirito, 74, was discovered on the abandoned Ocean Breeze Golf Club course, less than two miles from his home in Boca Raton Fla., on April 4, the Sun Sentinel reported.

Palm Beach police said they found inconsistencies in information provided by the late judge’s only child, Jimmy Scandirito, 49, who had declared his dad missing on April 1.

Cops did not say how the shamed judge died or what led to his death.

The late Scandirito earned his presidential nickname while working as a commissioner and district judge in Macomb County, Mich., in the 1990s and early 2000s, the Macomb Daily reported.

While in office, several women accused him of offering up lenient court decisions in exchange for sexual favors. He denied the allegations.

“He was known as the Bill Clinton of Macomb County,” said Stuart Rosenthal, a lawyer and friend of Scandirito’s since they rushed fraternities together at Michigan State University over 50 years ago.

Scandirito resigned the day before the Judicial Tenure Commission planned to hold a hearing on the sexual favors charges.

After the scandals, Scandirito, his wife, Terri Scandirito, and their son moved to the Sunshine State, where the disgraced judge worked as a lawyer for the Florida Department of Children and Families. He was disbarred in January 2003, according to the Sentinel.

His pal said Scandirito was disbarred for signing a false affidavit.

“He sort of skated out of bounds a little bit in his life, and he did it when we’d go skiing too,” Rosenthal said, recalling many rowdy group trips they took in the ’60s.

Scandirito worked at the golf club where his remains were found — after retiring and when it was still open, Rosenthal said. His wife died last year after a long illness.

“He was just one of the funniest guys you’d ever meet. I’m absolutely destroyed. I just adored him,” Rosenthal said. “He was a very social guy and could talk to anybody about anything … he was so much fun.”

Still, there were tensions between the father and son, the pal said.

“He was a very tough kid,” Rosenthal said. “There was always a lot of yelling and screaming between father and son. But I don’t recall any violence.”

The son, who is a real estate broker, was nabbed 300 miles away from home by Alachua County sheriff’s deputies Monday over a traffic violation. Deputies found that he had a warrant out for his arrest in Palm Beach.

The younger Scandirito is facing a murder charge and will eventually be brought back to jail in South Florida, said Art Forgey, a spokesman for the sheriff’s office.


			Read Next
		


			
				Streets of Cancun run red with 14 murders in 36 hours			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Streets of Cancun run red with 14 murders in 36 hours			
		

Share Selection

72,581

50,091

49,346

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters