By BOB BENNETT | The Press-Republican (Tribune News Service) | Published: February 24, 2018


	PLATTSBURGH, N.Y. — Tina Cummings has been sentenced to probation and community service for stealing thousands of dollars in benefits from her dead father’s account as his body lay decomposing in his home.


	The Morrisonville woman was also ordered to pay $15,000 in restitution to the two agencies she defrauded, but they have refused to accept the money, according to Clinton County District Attorney Andrew Wylie.


	Cummings, who was 55 when she committed the crime, appeared Thursday in Clinton County Court before Judge William Favreau.


	She had pleaded guilty in September 2017 to two counts of third-degree grand larceny, a felony, and admitted taking the money, which was meant for her father, 91-year-old Ralph Tefft, for several months after he died.


	The plea agreement she accepted called for a 120-day jail sentence, five years of probation, restitution for the money taken and a mental-health evaluation and treatment.


	Her jail sentence was reduced to 80 days for good behavior. She was released on Oct. 1.


	She was also ordered to perform 200 hours of community service, provide a DNA sample to the court and pay $2,375 in court fees.


	The Social Security Administration and Defense Finance and Accounting Services declined all restitution because Tefft’s death certificate indicates that he died May 11, 2017, Wylie said in a news release.


	Therefore, the two agencies deemed all payments made until that date proper, even though Cummings admitted that her father died in February, the release said.


	In light of that, Wylie insisted that, since the money was obtained illegally, it should instead be split between North Country Honor Flight and Disabled American Veterans Post 179.


	“These are two local charities which honor and serve local veterans,” he said in the release.


	“The prosecutors of the Clinton County District Attorney’s Office and the District Attorney have no affiliation with either of these organizations (which were chosen simply upon their community service to local veterans).”


	Tefft was a decorated veteran who served in the U.S. Army, U.S. Army Air Corps, U.S. Navy and U.S. Air Force.


	He enlisted near the end of World War II, served in the Korean War and Vietnam War and then retired as an Air Force master sergeant in 1976.


	He belonged to American Legion posts 20 and 1619 and Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 309.


	Cummings lived with Tefft in Morrisonville and was serving as his caregiver.


	She failed to report his death, which was estimated to have occurred around Feb. 1, 2017.


	Checks from Social Security and Defense Finance continued to be directly deposited into a bank account that Cummings shared with her father.


	She withdrew the money while her father lay dead under blankets on a daybed in the home.


	His remains were discovered during a welfare check by Clinton County Audit Protective Services on May 11, 2017.


	The investigation revealed that Cummings stole $4,647 in Social Security benefits and $15,065 in veterans benefits.


	Tefft's death was ruled natural by Clinton County Coroner David Donah, and an autopsy performed at University Health Network, Champlain Valley Physicians Hospital by Dr. Eric Gorman confirmed the ruling, determining the cause to be age-related infirmity.


	Cummings was arrested after a two-month investigation into the case.
	———
	©2018 the Press-Republican (Plattsburgh, N.Y.)
	Visit the Press-Republican (Plattsburgh, N.Y.) at pressrepublican.com
	Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

article continues below 