Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Tamar Lapin


		
		
		
		
	


									October 5, 2017 | 5:59pm
											| Updated October 6, 2017 | 8:38am
												

A female prison worker was busted for having a sexual relationship with an inmate at the same upstate New York prison where a lovesick “Shawskank” supervisor helped two murderers escape.

Denise Prell, a civilian worker at Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora, was arrested Wednesday for sexual abuse, promoting prison contraband and misconduct after a multi-agency investigation, launched when a corrections officer spotted her with an inmate.

“Despite this staff person’s attempt to conceal an inappropriate relationship with an inmate, the vigilant awareness of DOCCS and subsequent investigation by both DOCCS Office of Special Investigation and the State Police prevented what could have otherwise been a security breach,” said Department of Corrections and Community Supervision spokesman Thomas Mailey.

“This case illustrates the cultural shift that has occurred at the Clinton Correctional Facility due in large measure to the changes in policy, procedures and training programs implemented following the Inspector General’s report,” he added.

New York State Police said the investigation was ongoing and that Prell, 38, could face additional charges.

She is being held in Clinton County Jail and is due back in court Oct. 18.

Former Clinton Correctional seamstress Joyce “Tillie” Mitchell pleaded guilty to helping two convicted murderers break out in 2015.

She is serving a 2 1/3 to seven years behind bars at Bedford Hills Correctional Facility and was denied parole first in February and then last month.

The notorious prison break was turned into a 90-minute flick that premiered on Lifetime in April.


			Read Next
		


			
				‘Womb raider’ found guilty of murder, faces life in pr...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				‘Womb raider’ found guilty of murder, faces life in pr...			
		

Share Selection

74,356

51,608

51,305

37,862

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters