
    
        
            By Community Bulletin

Calling on County officials and staff to be creative in seeking more tax saving shared services opportunities in Hunterdon County, Freeholder Matthew Holt was elected director of the board at the annual reorganization meeting on Jan. 2 at the Historic Courthouse in Flemington.

Freeholder Suzanne Lagay, who served as director in 2016, was elected by her colleagues as deputy director for 2018.

Also at the reorganization meeting, Shaun C. Van Doren, who recently completed 21 years as a member of the Tewksbury Township Committee, was sworn-in as the newest Freeholder.

Holt, Lagay and Van Doren join Freeholders John Lanza and John King, both former Freeholder Directors, on the five member Board.

"I have learned from my years on the Tewksbury Committee that the key to public service is people, not politics," Van Doren said. "The public expects their elected officials to operate government in the most efficient manner possible. The people hold us to a high standard and it is a standard I have always strived to meet."

In remarks after his swearing in, Holt stated, "Hunterdon County has lead the way when it comes to sharing services that accrue to the benefit of taxpayers. The recent county jail consolidation with Somerset County that has saved millions in tax dollars is a prime example of shared services that work. And I believe more can be done.

"One of our major goals for 2018 will be for the board members, the constitutional officers, and the county staff to identify, carefully examine, and implement more potential shared services opportunities that can benefit the taxpayers."

Holt, first elected to the Hunterdon Freeholder Board in 2006, previously served as director in 2014 and 2011. A long time Hunterdon resident, Holt previously served as a Clinton School Board Member, as a Town of Clinton Council member from 1995 to 2003, and as mayor in 2004-05.

"When I first joined the freeholder board in 2007, the budget was $100 million and the county held $37 million in debt," Holt said. "Today, through the hard work of the freeholders and the county staff, the budget is $88 million and the County has zero debt. Many said it could not be done. But it was accomplished through dedicated effort and putting the taxpayers' interests first."

Holt has served for many years as Hunterdon County's representative to the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority. The 13-county northern New Jersey regional group has responsibility for over $2 billion annually in transportation improvement project funding and is vital to supporting Hunterdon County infrastructure projects.

The Hunterdon County Freeholder Board meets the first and third Tuesday of the month at 5:30 p.m. at the Freeholders' Meeting Room, second floor, County Administration Building, 71 Main St., Flemington.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        