Judge also gives Blackwell 55 years to life for attempted 2nd killing, gun rap

FILE PHOTO; ILLUSTRATION BY JAN SCHULMAN




The man who murdered NYPD Det. Brian Moore in 2015 has been sentenced to life in prison with no hope of ever being paroled. Queens Supreme Court Justice Gregory Lasak told Demetrius Blackwell, “You are going to die in prison.”

FILE PHOTO




A Queens Village man has been sentenced to life in prison with no hope of parole for killing NYPD Det. Brian Moore.


        Posted: Thursday, December 21, 2017 10:30 am
        
    



    Life with no parole for Moore’s murder

        
                
                    by Michael Gannon, Editor
                
                    
                        Queens Chronicle
                    
             | 
                        0 comments
                    
            
    

Demetrius Blackwell will die in prison for the 2015 murder of NYPD Det. Brian Moore.

Queens Supreme Court Justice Gregory Lasak on Tuesday sentenced Blackwell to life without the possibility of parole, the maximum sentence allowed under New York State law for murder of a police officer in the first degree for what the judge called a calculated, cold-blooded crime. The Chronicle viewed the sentencing as it was streamed live on the website of WPIX Channel 11.

Blackwell, whose defense strategy was made up mostly of mental and psychological deficiencies that compromised his ability to be held responsible for the May 2, 2015 shooting, also received 40 years to life for the attempted murder of Moore’s partner, Officer Erik Jansen, and 15 years for second-degree criminal possession of a weapon.

Lasak ordered the sentences to be served consecutively.

“Let me make this easy for your compromised brain, Mr. Blackwell — you are going to die in prison,” Lasak said. “You will never again breathe air outside the concrete and steel confines of a state prison.”

Blackwell was convicted last month after a jury deliberated for just two hours, a point Lasak referred to in dismissing outright pleas for leniency from defense attorney David Bart. On Tuesday Bart argued once again that medical problems and Blackwell’s challenged background prevented him from being held fully accountable for the decorated cop’s death.

“Don’t clutter the record with this,” Lasak said at one point during Bart’s argument. The judge went through Blackwell’s criminal history, including a conviction in 2001 for firing shots at two people sitting in car.

“Sound familiar, Mr. Blackwell?” he asked.

Jansen, who now works for the Suffolk County Police Department, and Moore were members of the 105th Precinct’s elite Anti-Crime Unit, on patrol in street clothes in an unmarked car.

The officers were driving up behind Blackwell when he appeared to be attempting to conceal something in the waistband of his pants. He turned and fired three times as Moore called out to him. Moore was struck twice in the head. Jansen was not hit.

“Det. Moore knew you had that gun,” Lasak said.

Moore, the son of a retired NYPD sergeant, died on May 4 at Jamaica Hospital Medical Center. He was posthumously promoted to the rank of detective by then-NYPD Commissioner Bill Bratton.

Blackwell was arrested a few hours after the shooting, after first changing into stolen clothes and twice giving detectives at the scene of the shooting a false name, something Lasak said were not the actions of a compromised brain, but those of a cunning coward.

He said Blackwell made conscious, thought-out decisions to acquire the handgun, load it — “Your DNA was on two shell casings that were recovered; you put the bullets in that gun” — and to be carrying it the day Moore and Jansen encountered him on a Queens Village street.

The murder weapon, with his DNA on it, was found two days later.

Lasak also restated evidence where Blackwell, in an argument with a neighbor, said he would “pop” a police officer.

Published reports said more than 100 police officers were present at the Kew Gardens courthouse.

Lasak said there is a reason the Legislature chose to expose those who murder police officers to the highest penalty available in the state.

“They are our guardians,” Lasak said. “They protect us from people like you.”

Lasak also had words of thanks and consolation for Moore’s mother, Irene, who spoke to the court. She called her son’s death “my life sentence without the chance of parole.”

“I don’t know how you managed to get up on May 3, and the days afterward,” Lasak said.

Lasak also quoted a pre-sentence report in which Moore’s father, Raymond, a retired NYPD sergeant, expressed regret for his son following him into the department. Lasak instead said Sgt. Moore set a shining example for his son.

“The greatest tribute a son can pay his father is to follow in his footsteps,” Lasak said. Patrick Lynch, president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, told ABC Channel 7 that families keep officers going.

“We’re paid to do this job; our families are not,” Lynch said. “Their courage is overwhelming and gives us all the strength we need to do this difficult job.”

Queens District Attorney Richard Brown called the sentence appropriate.

“The evidence of the defendant’s guilt presented at trial was truly overwhelming,” Brown said, echoing a statement make by Lasak. “It is also fitting that the defendant will serve the maximum sentence allowed under the law — life in prison without the possibility of parole — as a message that we, as a society, will never forget his heinous and cowardly act.

“While today’s sentencing cannot heal the prolonged pain endured by Officer Brian Moore’s family, friends and colleagues for their needless loss or erase the emotional wounds suffered by Officer Erik Jansen and his family, I hope, however, that it will bring some degree of closure and comfort to those individuals whose lives were forever changed on that horrific day.”

While he has no say over where Blackwell will live out his sentence, Lasak expressed hope that it will be at the Clinton Correctional Facility, a maximum-security lockup in Dannemora, a cold, desolate place in the northeast corner of the state 20 miles from the Canadian border.

“On May 2, 2015, you were 35 years old and Brian Moore was 25,” Lasak said. “On April 29, 2016, you turned 36, and Brian Moore was still 25. On April 29 of this year, you turned 37, and Brian Moore was still 25. On April 29 next year, you will turn 38, but Brian Moore will always be 25.

“If your family chooses to come and visit you, they can talk to you. All Brian Moore’s family can do is visit a cemetery, and talk to a headstone.”

Lasak’s instructions to court personnel at the end of the proceedings were brief and direct.

“Advise the defendant of his right to appeal, and take his smirking face out of this courtroom.”


        Posted in
        Queenswide,
        South Queens News,
        Eastern/Southeast Queens News,
        Central/Mid Queens News,
        North/Northeast Queens News,
        Western Queens News
        
        on
        
            Thursday, December 21, 2017 10:30 am.
            
        
         | Tags: 
                    
                        
                        Crime
                    
            
        
    


               Log In
              


               
                Sign Up 
               
              

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!

Submit news

Yankees surprise former FDNY firefighter


		


Howard Beach native Sal Reale has been rooting for his beloved Yankees since the days of Joe…

An awesome day on Austin Street


		


It was a bit cool and cloudy on Sunday, but that didn’t stop scores of families from descend…

Sunnyside colors on parade


		


The Kiwanis Club of Sunnyside welcomed patriotic revelers of all stripes last Saturday to it…

Would you like to receive our weekly news email? Signup today!

Queens Chronicle
            	Phone: 718-205-8000
		Fax: 718-205-1957
            	E-mail: mailbox@qchron.com
            	Address: Shops at Atlas Park
                71-19 80th Street, Suite 8-201
		Glendale, NY 11385


                    
                    -->
                    
                    
                    
                    
                

Search in:


© Copyright 2018, Queens Chronicle, Glendale, NY. Powered by BLOX Content Management System from TownNews.com. [Terms of Use | Privacy Policy]
