Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Jackie Salo


		
		
		
		
	


									July 5, 2018 | 8:36pm
												

A Pennsylvania couple allegedly high on bath salts was arrested after one of them shot a gun into the sky at fireflies they thought were aliens, according to authorities.

Jesse Shields, 30, and Katherine McCloskey, 22, took the drugs Saturday before terrorizing their neighbors in Lamar Township, Penn Live reported.

Shields and McCloskey told police they believed fireflies in the sky were green lasers coming from extra-terrestrials.

Shields reportedly fired a gun into the air to scare them away and then ran to a nearby house, according to Penn Live.

He asked the homeowner to call authorities because something was after him, state police said. The neighbor told police that Shields broke the screen door with his pistol before fleeing.

The couple then allegedly broke into another home, where the neighbors were awakened by the couple. Shields was screaming and McCloskey was crying in the living room, authorities said.

Shields asked them to call 911 and wanted to take a shower to get rid of the “goo” that was burning his skin, Penn Live reported.

Police responded to the scene and arrested the couple on burglary and drug charges.

Both are being held at the Clinton County Correctional Facility.


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump: I would have waited for Statue of Liberty protester...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump: I would have waited for Statue of Liberty protester...			
		

Share Selection

81,800

58,326

53,559

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters