Holden’s win, calamitous Calamus and more made waves in ’17

FILE PHOTO




Councilman-elect Bob Holden smiles after defeating his longtime rival, Councilwoman Elizabeth Crowley, by 137 votes in November’s general election. The race, which got downright nasty at times, was arguably the biggest story of 2017 in southwest Queens.

FILE PHOTO




Thousands of demonstrators descended on Kennedy International Airport in late January to protest President Trump’s executive order banning travel from seven Muslim-majority nations and the subsequent detaining of travelers inside the terminal.

FILE PHOTO




Firefighter William Tolley’s widow, Marie, looks to the heavens as she clutches the couple’s only child, 8-year-old Isabella, at a memorial service for the Ladder Co. 135 member.

FILE PHOTO




The new Kosciuszko Bridge shines bright on its first night of operation. The original span, in the foreground, was later dismantled while the approaches were imploded.file photo


        Posted: Thursday, December 28, 2017 10:30 am
        
    



    School snafus and one giant upset

        
                
                    by Christopher Barca, Editor
                
                    
                        Queens Chronicle
                    
             | 
                        1 comment
                    
            
    

The year began with Queens at the center of the American political landscape, as borough native Donald Trump was sworn in as the 45th President of the United States a mere 11 months and eight days ago.

How did the bombastic Republican candidate find himself on the steps of the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 20? By upsetting one of the biggest names in Democratic politics in arguably the nastiest election in recent memory, thanks to razor thin vote margins in a handful of states.

Sound familiar? It should, because Council District 30 got its own version of Trump-Clinton in 2017.

From neighborhood political upheaval to school controversies, tragic deaths to sewer fights, this year had it all.

Let’s recap what made headlines in the Queens Chronicle over the last 12 months.

January

While much of America braced for Trump’s impending inauguration, city politics was on the mind of Brooklyn educator Tommy Torres.

He told the Chronicle early in the month he was seriously considering a primary challenge against Councilman Antonio Reynoso (D-Brooklyn, Ridgewood).

Torres eventually made his candidacy official, but the incumbent lawmaker coasted to victory in September’s primary, garnering 64 percent of the vote.

Just days before the millions of women around the world took to the streets on Jan. 21 to protest President Trump, Councilwoman Elizabeth Crowley (D-Glendale) announced her new “21 in ’21” joint initiative in Maspeth alongside Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito (D-Manhattan, Bronx) and others — an effort to elect at least 21 women to the City Council by 2021.

Crowley’s district, however, delivered a major blow to that effort later in the year.

A trio of infrastructure projects made waves toward the end of the month, beginning with work on the new, state-of-the-art Kosciuszko Bridge over Newtown Creek.

Community Board 5 Chairman Vincent Arcuri told the paper that the project would be finished ahead of schedule — somewhat of a rarity for work of that magnitude.

Keep reading to find out if that was true.

In Glendale, the construction of a new pedestrian plaza at Myrtle and Cooper avenues led to a downturn in area business, as customers were unable to access a number of shops and restaurants.

And on the Middle Village-Ridgewood border, officials let out a sigh of relief at the announcement of bridge deck replacement work finally beginning at the intersection of Fresh Pond Road and Metropolitan Avenue.

Just a week after the Women’s Marches, New Yorkers once again took to the streets, this time outside Kennedy International Airport in protest of a Trump executive order banning travel from seven Muslim-majority nations.

Thousands of demonstrators descended on the airport on Jan. 28 while lawmakers, such as Rep. Nydia Velazquez (D-Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens) and lawyers worked feverishly inside the terminals to free travelers who had been detained.

February

The month was a relatively quiet one in southwest Queens, but it was an expensive one for a number of auto body shops on Flushing Avenue in Maspeth.

After receiving numerous complaints from area residents, the 104th Precinct towed over a dozen derelict cars the repair businesses had stored on neighborhood streets, freeing up much-needed parking.

For the third straight year, CB 5 voted against a permit for a four-day street festival hosted on Fresh Pond Road by the Federazione Italo-Americana di Brooklyn and Queens. The event would go on in the fall as planned, as it has for years.

The early weeks of Trump’s presidency saw dozens of Jewish community centers throughout the nation receive threats of violence, terrifying faith leaders in Queens.

While no borough center was directly threatened, someone drew a large swastika in the snow in Juniper Valley Park.

The frustration over a $25 million sewer project on Calamus Avenue in Maspeth began to boil over toward the end of the month, as area residents blasted contractor CAC Industries for what many called shoddy work at a Crowley-hosted town hall.

It would not be the last time in 2017 that CAC, or Crowley, would receive a verbal beating from Calamus Avenue residents over the disruptive project.

March

The city’s housing of homeless individuals at the Maspeth Holiday Inn Express was arguably the biggest story in the area in 2016.

And in early March, Mayor de Blasio unveiled the city’s “Turn the Tide” plan, with one of its centerpieces being the phasing out its use of hotels.

A number of state lawmakers introduced their own homeless hotel bill later in the month, with the goal being more advanced notice and the chance for community boards to hold public hearings before a single undomiciled person is moved in.

State Department of Transportation officials announced the approaches to the old Kosciuszko Bridge would be imploded after the new span opened, causing some in the area to worry about potential environmental impacts.

Ahead of the summer’s planned shutdown of the M train, community leaders were taken aback by numerous weekend closures in the months leading up to the main project.

CB 5’s Public Transit Committee Co-chairman John Maier said the MTA gave only one week’s notice before the M was taken out of service for 10 weekends between early March and late June.

The community board also voted unanimously in favor of adding the Ridgewood Reservoir to the state and federal registers of Historic Places.

But by far the month’s biggest story was the revelation that no area parochial school students were selected in the admissions lottery for Maspeth High School.

The Department of Education blamed the students’ omissions on a “clerical error.” A second lottery was conducted, but that draw saw parochial school pupils prioritized over public school kids.

The frustration over the process culiminated in a testy town hall in which a number of angry parents blasted the DOE, Crowley and Maspeth High School officials for what they called a “debacle” that can never be allowed to happen again.

April

The first full month of spring was a big one in the district in terms of fire and criminal justice services.

In early April, the city unveiled its controversial plan to close the Rikers Island correctional complex within a decade, replacing it with borough-based jails near courthouses.

There was, and still is, much crosstalk over the feasibility of the plan and where the new jails would be — the Queens House of Detention in Kew Gardens is the borough’s top contender.

Most city lawmakers quickly came out in favor of the idea, but numerous civic groups slammed the decision, citing their opposition to having jails in their communities.

The Rikers Island debate ended up being one of the biggest issues in Crowley’s re-election campaign. She staunchly supported closing the facility while her opponent vehemently opposed it.

A five-alarm fire inside a 94th Street apartment building in Elmhurst gutted numerous units, displacing 175 residents.

Many were forced to spend the next few days at PS 13, which was converted into a temporary shelter.

A Yonkers contractor was arrested a week later and charged with allegedly starting the blaze by improperly using a blowtorch while working on the building’s roof.

Luckily, no lives were lost in that inferno. But the same couldn’t be said about a blaze that broke out in a Ridgewood apartment on April 20.

Firefighter William Tolley, a beloved 14-year member of Glendale’s Ladder Co. 135 and the drummer of a popular area heavy metal band, died after falling five stories off the Ridgewood building’s roof, leaving behind his heartbroken wife and their 8-year-old daughter.

A powerful remembrance ceremony was held in his honor outside the firehouse the day after his death, while the Tunnel to Towers Foundation announced the next Monday that it would pay the mortgage on the Tolley family’s Long Island home.

Tolley’s tragic death somewhat overshadowed a major political announcement, as Juniper Park Civic Association President Bob Holden exclusively told the Chronicle on April 18 that he would run for City Council against Crowley, his longtime bitter rival.

“We’re at a point where we simply can’t have Elizabeth Crowley for four more years,” Holden said at the time. “I know I’m going against the party machine and it’s going to get nasty.”

He couldn’t have been more right.

In other news, the Coca-Cola bottling plant on Borden Avenue in Maspeth was put up for sale in mid-April, generating “unprecedented interest,” according to the broker handling the piece of real estate.

May

Gov. Cuomo became the first person to drive across the new Kosciuszko Bridge, taking President Franklin Roosevelt’s 1932 Packard for a spin from one side of the span to the other.

Construction began in December 2014 and wrapped up in April. A second bridge, which will carry Brooklyn-bound traffic, is in the design process. Once that opens, the span that opened in 2017 will go from carrying traffic in both directions to hosting Queens-bound vehicles only.

Speaking of Cuomo, his administration announced plans to conduct an environmental impact study on the years-old Cross Harbor Freight Initiative — a much maligned project in southwest Queens.

Area lawmakers and civic leaders ripped the study, saying the potential use of the Fresh Pond Rail Yard in Glendale as an intermodal terminal — where freight transported from New Jersey to Brooklyn by train through a proposed rail tunnel below New York Harbor — makes the pricey project a nonstarter.

A month after the Maspeth High School fiasco, the future of Middle Village Preparatory Charter School became much more uncertain thanks to a Queens Supreme Court ruling.

The Diocese of Brooklyn filed a lawsuit against Christ the King High School in 2013, claiming its housing of MVP on its grounds violated a decades-old agreement between the two entities. That deal gave Christ the King financial independence from the diocese in return for the property being used solely as a Catholic school.

A Queens Supreme Court judge ordered that MVP be evicted from the space, prompting school officials to appeal the decision and parents to band together to protest, something they did a number of times over the summer.

June

Ridgewood residents joined people from Woodhaven, Jamaica and elsewhere to protest a proposed raise in the annual lawful monthly cost of rent-stabilized apartments — the first increase in three years.

They descended on the Rent Guidelines Board’s June 6 public hearing in Jamaica, waving signs and chanting, but their effort was for naught, as the RGB voted a few weeks later to raise the cost of rent by 1.25 percent for one-year leasees and 2 percent for two-year tenants.

On a beautiful early summer day, lawmakers and borough veterans gathered in Elmhurst Park to unveil the design for a new Vietnam War memorial, something late Vietnam Veterans of America Chapter 32 President Pat Toro always dreamed of.

The $2.85 million project will feature a pair of semicircular granite walls, the first bearing the words, “Queens Vietnam Veterans Memorial,” the crests of all five military branches, the Vietnam Service Medal and an etching of bamboo. The second wall will contain the names of the more than 300 Queens servicemembers who were killed in action during the war.

NYPD Commissioner James O’Neill paid a visit to the 104th Precinct Community Council’s June 20 meeting in Glendale, where he applauded the command’s crime-fighting efforts and talked department policy with about 100 area residents.

Eleven firefighthers were hurt when a five-alarm blaze broke out in a Metropolitan Avenue market on June 24 and quickly spread to a neighboring business and two apartments, displacing the families who lived there.

Hundreds of Glendale residents pitched in to help the relief effort, donating thousands of dollars, clothes and other items to help the families get back on their feet

July

The two-month M train shutdown began on the first of the month, allowing the MTA to rebuild a bridge that carries the line over the Fresh Pond Rail Yard.

Three shuttle bus routes were put in place to transport southwest Queens residents to nearby subway lines in Brooklyn, but CB 5 officials said commuters were seeing a number of issues — long waits for buses, unclear signage as to the location of the shuttle stops and drivers veering off their routes.

A war zone. That’s how city Comptroller Scott Stringer described Calamus Avenue when he visited the Maspeth sewer project site on July 12, echoing what area residents like Ben Geremia had been saying for months.

Geremia toured a Chronicle reporter around his block a week later, pointing out the dozens of instances of damage — both on the sidewalks and on private property — he said were caused by CAC’s careless work in the area. He and his neighbors even said hoses not designed to carry drinking water into area homes were initially installed, before being removed at their request.

The original Kosciuszko Bridge, which was closed to traffic once the new span opened, was dismantled on July 25 after 78 years.

The 300-foot-long structure was lowered onto a barge and shipped to a steel recycling plant, all while a few fun-loving fans of the bridge showed up in classical war garb to, unsuccessfully, “defend” it from being taken down.

August

Summer’s final full month got off to a cat-astrophic start, as dozens of starving and sick felines were found abandoned in a vacant Ridgewood apartment complex awaiting renovation — a former building resident left most of her 40 pet cats behind when she moved earlier in the year.

A handful of animal rights activists spent about a week carefully extracting the animals, many of whom suffered from severe ailments consistent with being poisoned. Multiple residents posted pictures to Facebook of bleach and ammonia bottles strewn about the building, accusing the construction company of trying to gas the cats.

Some of the sick felines had to be put down, but most of the others were put up for adoption.

The Crowley-Holden race began to heat up in August, a month before the primary, as the former landed an endorsement from Cuomo while the latter posted impressive fundraising figures for a first-time candidate.

Assemblyman Brian Barnwell (D-Maspeth) made waves when he endorsed Crowley over his friend Holden after previously vowing to remain neutral in the race. The civic leader — who was one of Barnwell’s biggest supporters in his successful 2016 primary campaign against Marge Markey — blasted the first-year lawmaker for the move, creating a temporary rift between the two men.

The two candidates themselves sparred at the end of the month after Holden received a violent threat scribbled on a Crowley mailer and left in his mailbox.

He said the kind of negative campaign she was running was bringing out the worst in people, adding that a mailer comparing him to Abe Simpson — the senile father of Homer in the animated TV series “The Simpsons” — was ageist and hurtful. Crowley responded by saying his claims were “the height of absurdity.”

The Environmental Protection Agency announced it would spend $39 million to rehabilitate a Ridgewood Superfund site, the location of a former factory that produced radioactive materials for the Manhattan Project.

The EPA’s plan involved permanently relocating five area businesses, tearing down the old factory buildings where they resided and excavating 24,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil.

It seemed like the whole country stopped what it was doing on Aug. 21 to look up in the sky, all in the hope of catching a glimpse at the much-hyped solar eclipse.

The Queens Library system hosted a number of watch parties for the celestial spectacle, including the Glendale branch, where dozens of area families came to watch the moon partially block out the sun — with those special glasses, of course.

September

Crowley crushed Holden in their first of two faceoffs, winning the Sept. 12 primary by more than 25 percentage points. But the biggest political development of the month gave a massive boost to the civic leader’s electoral hopes.

After two weeks of rumors, the Queens County Republican Party officially gave Holden, a registered Democrat, the GOP line in November’s general election. The ticket freed up when original candidate Joseph Kasper — who had no active campaign and did not live in the district — dropped his bid to run for a judgeship.

Crowley slammed her opponent for orchestrating a “despicable bait and switch” behind closed doors, while Holden said he would have been “foolish” not to accept a major party’s line on the ballot.

Students at Middle Village Prep started school as they normally would have, even though a Queens Supreme Court judge reaffirmed her original ruling in favor of the Diocese of Brooklyn. Christ the King’s board of directors quickly filed an appeal and a state appellate judge granted a temporary stay on Sept. 14.

The 282-year-old St. James Episcopal Church building in Elmhurst was granted landmark status on Sept. 19, much to the delight of borough historians.

One of the most scandalous and sad sagas in recent Queens political history came to an end on Sept. 25, when former Democratic Rep. Anthony Weiner was sentenced to 21 months in prison for maintaining a sexual online relationship with a 15-year-old North Carolina girl. The ex-lawmaker, who represented much of southwest Queens in Congress, had pleaded guilty to his crime in May.

The group of Maspeth citizens who banded together to sue the city over its housing of homeless men at the Maspeth Holiday Inn Express received good news.

A Queens Supreme Court judge ruled on Sept. 27 the city had to turn over documents related to the hotel’s conversion to Citizens for a Better Maspeth, something the group said could bolster the property owner’s lawsuit against the hotelier.

October

The month got off to an actual bang, when on Oct. 1, the approaches to the Kosciuszko Bridge were imploded, sending the road decks tumbling to the ground below.

The next day, Crowley — in her role as the Fire and Criminal Justice Services Committee chairperson — penned a letter to Mayor de Blasio officially asking him to consider the Queens House of Detention as Queens’ borough-based jail upon the future closure of Rikers Island.

The letter, which was signed by a number of other lawmakers, was poorly received in Kew Gardens, where area civic associations said they were united in their “strong opposition” to Crowley’s idea.

Spending time at Rikers Island in October were two men busted for allegedly shooting 10 unsuspecting Middle Village and Glendale residents with a paintball gun. They were apprehended, but not before spreading fears of a mass shooting in the area.

The city announced plans to expand Select Bus Service at the end of the month, encompassing 11 existing routes that either run entirely in Queens or through a portion of it.

The notoriously slow Q58, which runs between Ridgewood and Flushing, was included in the proposal. However, some said it would be infeasible to convert it to an SBS route considering the narrow width of the streets it runs along for most of its trek.

With the general election a month away, all eyes were on Crowley and Holden. And what would a contentious election be without an October surprise or two?

The challenger was the first one on the receiving end, as former Republican Councilman Anthony Como lambasted his party and the “despicable” civic leader for the “disgusting scam” to get Holden on the GOP line in an Oct. 12 letter.

Not only did Como say Republican voters were denied a chance at voting for a member of their own party, he went so far as to endorse Crowley, whom he beat for the Council seat in a June 2008 special election before losing to her that November.

It was Crowley’s turn on Oct. 16, when Councilman Eric Ulrich (R-Ozone Park) accused her of abusing her powers as a lawmaker to retaliate against a Broad Channel restaurant after her son, an eatery employee, was brutally assaulted after an altercation there the year before.

The two stories added even more fuel to the already raging fire of a campaign, as the race’s final weeks featured as much name-calling as policy debate.

November

Of course, one of the most contentious and expensive City Council races in recent history wasn’t going to be decided in one night.

Election Day turned into Election Week for Crowley and Holden, as Holden led by just 133 votes once all that day’s ballots had been tallied. It wasn’t until all the 700 absentee, affidavit and military ballots were counted on Nov. 16 — nine days after the polls opened — that Holden was officially declared the winner.

The final margin? Holden captured 10,563 votes to Crowley’s 10,426 — a minute 137-ballot difference.

Some of the councilman-elect’s future colleagues weren’t necessarily enamored with his win, however. Councilman Rory Lancman (D-Fresh Meadows) told the Chronicle Holden needed to start showing some class if he wanted to earn respect in the chamber.

But it was Councilman Danny Dromm (D-Jackson Heights) who said Holden wouldn’t be welcome in the Democratic caucus, comparing the former civic leader’s abrasive style to that of President Trump and adding that his views “border on racist and homophobic.”

Just two weeks after Veterans Day, an American flag mural painted by Greater Ridgewood Youth Council students was vandalized in Glendale. Meanwhile, at Maspeth Town Hall, officials announced speed bumps will finally be installed on 72nd Street, where close calls between motorists, seniors and kids are common.

Select Bus Service along Woodhaven Boulevard was finally implemented after well over a year of planning, leaving countless drivers scratching their heads in confusion over the new rules of the road.

November ended on a sad note in Middle Village, as beloved Juniper Park Civic Asssociation Vice President and lifelong neighborhood resident Lorraine Sciulli died on Nov. 29 at the age of 82.

December

Fresh off her electoral defeat, an unrestrained Crowley slammed the city for not moving fast enough to close Rikers Island at a Fire and Criminal Justice Services Committee meeting on Dec. 4, her final meeting as the group’s chairperson.

A week later, she, Holden and other Middle Village leaders broke ground on a badly needed 440-seat addition at PS/IS 128.

Meanwhile, an unidentified person posted on the social media website Instagram a violent threat against three area schools — Middle Village Prep, PS 58 and St. Adalbert Catholic Academy — frightening parents.

Police, however, said there was no danger to any school.

PS/IS 113 played host to Mayor de Blasio’s final Queens town hall of 2017 on Dec. 18. He spent two hours at the school, talking transit, homelessness and politics with District 30 residents.

The last Juniper Park Civic Association meeting of the year was also Holden’s final one as group president. The councilman-elect resigned from the post he’s held for nearly 30 years, with the civic electing Maspeth’s Tony Nunziato as its interim president.


        Posted in
        Central/Mid Queens News,
        Eastern/Southeast Queens News,
        North/Northeast Queens News,
        Queenswide,
        South Queens News,
        Western Queens News
        
        on
        
            Thursday, December 28, 2017 10:30 am.
            
        
         | Tags: 
                    
                        
                        2017 Year In Review,
                    
            
                    
                        
                        Government,
                    
            
                    
                        
                        Politics,
                    
            
                    
                        
                        Transportation,
                    
            
                    
                        
                        Crime
                    
            
        
    


               Log In
              


               
                Sign Up 
               
              

The MTA, not going our the Queens way since 1965. [sleeping]

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!

Submit news

Yankees surprise former FDNY firefighter


		


Howard Beach native Sal Reale has been rooting for his beloved Yankees since the days of Joe…

An awesome day on Austin Street


		


It was a bit cool and cloudy on Sunday, but that didn’t stop scores of families from descend…

Sunnyside colors on parade


		


The Kiwanis Club of Sunnyside welcomed patriotic revelers of all stripes last Saturday to it…

Would you like to receive our weekly news email? Signup today!

Queens Chronicle
            	Phone: 718-205-8000
		Fax: 718-205-1957
            	E-mail: mailbox@qchron.com
            	Address: Shops at Atlas Park
                71-19 80th Street, Suite 8-201
		Glendale, NY 11385


                    
                    -->
                    
                    
                    
                    
                

Search in:


© Copyright 2018, Queens Chronicle, Glendale, NY. Powered by BLOX Content Management System from TownNews.com. [Terms of Use | Privacy Policy]
