
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

01/09/2018 07:20 AM EST

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

Here’s something counter-intuitive: the just-passed federal tax bill is a dagger through the economic heart of New York but a political boon for Democratic politicians. Sure, the people they represent could see their federal taxes rise because of new limits on deducting state and local taxes. But fighting it, explains Hofstra’s Larry Levy in an article running this morning, is a boon.


Story Continued Below

“In a funny way, Cuomo’s been handed a political gift here,” Levy, a former political columnist for Newsday, told Jimmy and our colleagues David Siders and Ryan Hutchins. “If Cuomo does his job well as governor and as a candidate for re-election, and does it on behalf of suburban swing voters who have been hurt hardest by federal tax reform, then he is in a position to strengthen his appeal in any run for higher office.”

“Putting the state on war footing, invoking the language of conflict, is a brilliant political strategy. If you can sell your constituents on the notion that they are at war — that the tax reform was a Pearl Harbor or 9/11-like attack on them and their ability to live the way they would like … then the governor can do things that he otherwise could do in peacetime,” He continued.

We’ll see what Cuomo cooks up. He said during last week’s State of the State speech that the budget address next week will have information on several workaround strategies to avoid the new SALT cap. On Monday an administration official says New York is looking at shifting to a payroll tax, setting up a new charitable fund for which New Yorkers could get a tax credit for donating or offsetting state funding — and individual tax liability — when donors send money to places like schools and hospitals that rely on government money. The legality here is untested, and Washington may push back. But isn’t that the point?

IT’S TUESDAY In Albany, the temperature will rise above freezing for the first time in weeks. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? In New York City with no announced public schedule.

WHERE’S BlLL? De Blasio will sign a bill relating to diaper changing stations

The Tabloids: — New York Post: ”NOPRAH! Do we really need another celebrity president?”—  New York Daily News: “Oprah stirs buzz of Prez run, and pols say YES SHE CAN!”— See Them

More tabs: — El Diario:  “No se rinden”— TRANSLATION: ”They do not give up”— Newsday: “REPORT FAULTS HEMPSTEAD SCHOOL LEADERS”— See Them 

The Free Papers: — amNewYork: “STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION”— Metro New York: ”COULD SHE WIN?” — See Them 

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 1 col., above the fold: “U.S. ELIMINATES A PROTECTED VISA FOR SALVADORANS: TEMPORARY STATUS ENDS”— 4 col., above the fold: ‘“Hobbled by a Storm, Then Deluged by a Tide of Incoming Flights”— 4 col., below the fold: “In Merciless Cold, the Subway Becomes a Haven for the Homeless” — Wall Street Journal: — 4 col, above the fold: “Threats Remain Amid Korean Thaw”— See Them 

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “I should be at one of the highlights of New York — Times Square or wherever — just enjoying the city. Instead, I’m at the airport looking for my luggage.”— Dutch tourist whose bag is lost at JFK Airport, after this week’s delays. 

PHOTOS: The Times puts names and faces to the city’s homeless sleeping on the subways. 

** POLITICO is accepting applications for its fifth session of the POLITICO Journalism Institute (PJI), an educational initiative focused on newsroom diversity. The intensive program, which is designed for college students, will be held May 29 to June 9, 2018. It features hands-on training for up to 12 recent grads and university students interested in covering government and politics. Students also will have an opportunity to have their work published by POLITICO. All expenses are paid for the program, reflecting POLITICO's ongoing support of journalism education, newsroom diversity and recruitment of top-notch talent. Admissions are made on a rolling basis, so APPLY TODAY but no later than Jan. 15, 2018.  https://www.politico.com/pji **

IT’S OFFICIAL: POLITICO is teaming up with Smart Cities New York (SCNY) for their second annual conference on May 8-10. Recognized as North America’s leading global conference to address and highlight issues that cities face today and in the future, SCNY will bring Mayors, CEO’s, and other prominent thought leaders together to explore how cities around the globe are “Powered by the People” and preparing to meet the critical challenges of the future. POLITICO journalists will moderate discussions centered around physical and digital infrastructure, health, education, sustainability, security, mobility, workforce development and much much more. MARK YOUR CALENDAR and join us!

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— COX PROMISES STRONG CANDIDATES IN NOVEMBER — POLITICO’s Bill Mahoney: State GOP chairman Ed Cox said Monday that his party is well positioned to win this year’s gubernatorial contest, even though two promising potential candidates, businessman Harry Wilson and Dutchess County Executive Marc Molinaro, have chosen not to run against two-term incumbent Gov. Andrew Cuomo. Republican leaders met on Monday with several potential candidates interested in challenging Cuomo or Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand. “We are going to have a good candidate for governor and a good candidate for Senate,” Cox said after the meeting in Albany. “The excitement in the room was palpable.” On the gubernatorial front, party officials heard presentations from Assembly Minority Leader Brian Kolb, Senate Deputy Leader John DeFrancisco, and lobbyist and former Erie County Executive Joel Giambra. “Either them is capable of being governor, and that’s the important thing,” Cox said of Kolb and DeFrancisco. Read more here 

— We spoke to two people who were at the Fort Orange Club for the meeting. They said it felt “uninspiring” and “like a funeral.” Giambra was met with skepticism over his past donations to Democrats — including Hillary Clinton. DeFrancisco, too, ran into criticism over previous votes that the Senate GOP has taken to affirm Cuomo priorities such as raising the minimum wage and instituting a new scholarship for public colleges. Kolb seemed to draw the warmest reaction, they said, as did potential Gillibrand challenger Chele Chiavacci Farley, a private equity executive and regional GOP fund-raiser.

— “‘I don’t think there’s a panic,’ DeFrancisco said. ‘I’d be foolish to say if there was a panic if I’m one of the people placing my name out there for consideration. It’s no secret that people were thinking Harry Wilson was going to carry on and be the candidate.’” Read more here 

— Flashback to Jimmy’s Monday story: “New York GOP close to ‘panic’ as leaders face a blank slate for 2018”

— CUOMO BANS BOOKS — ThinkProgress’ Addy Baird: “A new program in New York is cutting people in prison off from all books except five romance novels, 14 religious texts, 24 drawing or coloring books, 21 puzzle books, 11 how-to books, one dictionary, and one thesaurus. Directive 4911A, which was issued last month, currently applies to three prisons in the state and could be expanded to every facility in New York. The plan limits packages that incarcerated people in New York state prisons can receive to items purchased from five vendors, a move the state’s Department of Corrections and Community Supervision claims will ‘enhance the safety and security of correctional facilities through a more controlled inmate package program.’ Read more here 

— More, from BuzzFeed News’s Mike Hayes: “The system has also banned families from sending fresh fruit and vegetables to inmates at the facilities....Caroline Hsu, staff attorney for New York Legal Aid Society’s Prisoners' Rights Project, said the limits on fresh food in particular are concerning to her. “People who have certain dietary needs because of medical conditions have to rely on fresh fruit and veggies [from packages] for health,” Hsu said. Hsu said that Legal Aid was looking into a number of challenges to the new rules. “Nothing is off the table,” she said.Requests for comment from the New York State DOCCS and Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s office were not immediately answered.” Read it here. 

TRUMP’S NEW YORK:

NEW YORK’S SALVADORAN COMMUNITY SEETHES — AM New York’s Ivan Pereira: “President Donald Trump’s plan to end protections for thousands of Salvadorans who have been living in the country for the last 17 years has enraged immigrants and immigration advocates in New York. The United States will end the Salvadorans’ temporary protected status (TPS) on Sept. 9, 2019, giving them 20 months to leave or seek lawful residency. El Salvador will have the same amount of time to prepare for their return, officials said. The status was granted in the wake of two devastating 2001 earthquakes in El Salvador that left hundreds of thousands in the country homeless. Anu Joshi, director of immigration policy for the New York Immigration Coalition, said there are over 16,000 Salvadoran TPS recipients in the city who have nowhere else to go, if they can’t find another legal option once their protections expire. She added it would be more devastating for the 15,000 city children whose parents have the TPS. ‘What the administration has done has thrown this community into chaos,’ she said.” Read more here. 

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

WHO PULLS THE STRINGS— Democratic Party Leaders Jockey for Influence on New York City Council — The Wall Street Journal's Mara Gay: "New York City's Democratic Party leaders, less than a week after helping ensure the election of new Council Speaker Corey Johnson, are wielding sway over the appointment of powerful committee chairs. U.S. Rep. Joe Crowley, the head of the powerful Queens County Democrats, who played a starring role in Mr. Johnson's election as speaker, is involved in the decision-making on committee chairmanships, according to observers. So too is Marcos Crespo, an assemblyman and the leader of the Bronx Democrats. U.S. Reps. Hakeem Jeffries, Nydia Velázquez and Gregory Meeks also are playing roles, according to people familiar with the negotiations. Several party leaders have met twice in recent weeks to discuss which members should lead the council's committees, according to a person familiar with the matter. Mr. Jeffries served as de facto leader of the Brooklyn Democrats during the speaker's race, according to more than half a dozen people familiar with the matter." Read more here.

— ANATOMY OF A JFK AIRPORT NIGHTMARE— New York Times’s Michael Wilson and Patrick McGeehan: ”A rolling cascade of emergencies brought about by human error and winter weather led to the nightmarish long weekend, as thousands of travelers from around the world found themselves trapped. And that was before frigid water from a burst pipe began raining from a ceiling in Terminal 4, pooling amid the luggage of the stranded...The Port Authority said an investigation was underway to determine what went wrong. The truth could be weeks away, or more, as the various entities inside Kennedy — the landlord of the airport itself, the companies that move bags and direct air traffic and sell seats on airplanes — are scrutinized. For now, no one has taken full responsibility for the debacle, with the Port Authority pointing at airlines and terminal operators who have said little so far.” Read more here. 

— WHY NYCHA’S FREEZING? — Daily News’s Greg Smith: “The wave of heating system breakdowns that’s left public housing tenants shivering in recent days followed a drastic reduction in the number of NYCHA staff fixing boilers, records show. Over the last four years during Mayor de Blasio’s first term, the number of in-house boiler technicians dropped from 345 in 2013 to the current number of 250, according to Teamsters Local 237, which represents 8,000 NYCHA staff. That means nearly one in three heat management staff is no longer at NYCHA servicing its aging boilers — a steady attrition Local 237 President Greg Floyd flatly blames for last week’s heating disaster during a record cold snap.” Read more here. 

— RIVINGTON REPLACEMENT — POLITICO's Sally Goldenberg: The de Blasio administration has picked a new location to fund the senior citizen housing it promised in exchange for botching the transfer of a nursing home on the Lower East Side. The property City Hall selected in September of 2016 to house 100 seniors — a site at 30 Pike St. owned by the Department of Environmental Protection — turned out to be unsuitable for the development, according to multiple sources involved in the deal. It was chosen for its proximity to Rivington House — the former nursing home that was sold to a luxury condo developer after the city lifted a deed restriction requiring the site to remain a nonprofit health care facility. The administration now plans to subsidize apartments for the same number of tenants near the site of the Beth Hamedrash Hagadol Synagogue, a landmarked property on Norfolk Street that was demolished after being destroyed in a fire last year, sources said. Read more here 

— VISION ZERO IS WORKING — Reuters’ Peter Szekely: “Led by a sharp drop in pedestrian deaths, overall traffic fatalities in New York City fell for the fourth consecutive year in 2017 to their lowest on record, thanks at least in part to an ongoing safety improvement program, city officials said on Monday. The number of pedestrians, motorists and cyclists killed in accidents on New York City streets last year fell by 7 percent to 214 and by 28 percent from 2013 when officials began implementing a safety program known as Vision Zero.” Read more here 

— NYPD SHAKES UP TOP BRASS — New York Post’s Tina Moore and Shawn Cohen: ”The NYPD is undergoing a major shake-up at the highest levels, police sources said Monday.Some sources said the moves are being made partly to get more racial diversity among the brass. Other sources said Police Commissioner James O’Neill “just wants a change.”...’Chief Rodney Harrison, executive officer of the Patrol Services Bureau, is expected to become Chief of Patrol — making him the top African American uniformed member of the NYPD, officials confirmed.” Read more here. 

— Related: THE CURIOUS CASE OF THE DELAYED NYPD PROMOTION — AM New York’s Len Levitt: “Who or what is holding up Chief of Patrol Terence Monahan’s promotion to chief of department? Was it something he said? Something he did? Or perhaps more likely, is Mayor Bill de Blasio, fresh from re-election, flexing his muscle by delaying the appointment of the NYPD’s highest-ranking uniformed officer to provide, to use one of his favorite words, “diversity.” Monahan is, of course, Irish. So is Commissioner James O’Neill. So are crime statistics guru Dermot Shea and Chief of Detectives Robert Boyce. These four guys run the joint.

Odd man out was Chief of Department Carlos Gomez, the highest-ranking Hispanic officer until he retired abruptly last month, foregoing the traditional “walkout,” when officers and commanders line up in formation to bid him farewell. His departure left the NYPD without a Hispanic among the highest-ranking chiefs despite the department’s rank and file being nearly 30 percent Hispanic. Police sources say he felt he was treated as a figurehead and was miffed that City Hall made him go with de Blasio to Hispanic events.” Read more here 

— COREY JOHNSON, RED SOX FAN — Daily News’s Erin Durkin: “New City Council Speaker Corey Johnson has vowed to take on Mayor de Blasio when necessary — but on one controversial topic, they’re in perfect agreement. With Johnson’s ascension to the speaker’s post, the city’s two top elected officials are now fans of the Boston Red Sox. Johnson, who grew up in Middleton, Mass., told the Daily News he’s sticking by his teams. ‘I am honest about the fact that I grew up going to Fenway Park and the Boston Garden and Foxboro Stadium as a child,’ he said. ‘I support the Red Sox and Celtics and Bruins and Patriots.’” Read more here. 

— 2018 — UPSTART DEM RAISES TO CHALLENGE YVETTE CLARKE — Daily News’s Jillian Jorgensen: “A 30-year-old Harvard grad looking to unseat Congresswoman Yvette Clarke in the June Democratic primary, has raised more than $120,000 since launching his campaign in October, he told the Daily News. “I think there’s great enthusiasm for not only my campaign but wanting to make a difference in this community,” Adem Bunkeddeko said in a telephone interview. The candidate — a Crown Heights resident and member of Community Board 8 who until recently created job-training programs at Brooklyn Community Services — said he’d raised $120, 949 for the fourth quarter of 2017. Those filings will be made public next month.” Read more here 

IN MEMORIAM: Erica Garner — New York Times’s Jeffery C. Mays: “The word 'warrior,' or some variation on that theme, was used over and over again Monday at the funeral service for Erica Garner. Ms. Garner, who was 27 when she died on Dec. 30, built a reputation as a relentless fighter when she started a campaign against police brutality that gained nationwide attention after the death of her father, Eric Garner, in July 2014. Mr. Garner, who suffered from asthma, was killed when a New York City police officer, Daniel Pantaleo, placed him in a prohibited chokehold after a confrontation on Staten Island.” Read more here 

PIC DU JOUR -- FROM CENTRAL PARK: @SusanSball4: “Trump tower on fire!” http://bit.ly/2miWa72

SOCIAL DATA

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Linda Greenhouse is 71 (hat tip: Jewish Insider) … Colin Campbell, managing editor at Yahoo News … Josiah Ryan, CNN senior producer (h/t Oliver Darcy) ... Lauren Fritts, WeWork’s head of public affairs for the East region (h/t the WeWork team) … WSJ’s Charles Passy is 54 … Erica Flint, manager of global communications at Marriott international luxury brands (h/t Blair Holmes) … Nicola Peltz is 23 … Former Washington County GOP chair John Patterson … Lou Gordon of the Business and Labor Coalition of New York … David Stonehill of the Democratic Lawyers Council.

ON THE MOVE —  Jane Meyer, who formerly served as press advance associate for Mayor Bill de Blasio has been hired as deputy press secretary in the Mayor’s press office. She starts on Monday. Meyer, who started working in the advance shop in March of 2017 is a native of Long Island. Prior to her work at City Hall, Meyer did advance work for the Hillary Clinton campaign. 

… Damien LaVera will become communications director for NYSUT. Dawn Skeete-Walker joined SUNY Downstate Medical Center as associate vice president of communications and marketing, according to a news release. Skeete-Walker most recently served as assistant vice president of communications and marketing at CUNY Kingsborough Community College. Susan Zimet is now in charge of the Women’s Equality Party.

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

REPUBLICAN CONTENDERS LAST PRESIDENTIAL CYCLE complained, justifiably so, about being pushed to the margins by a larger-than-life celebrity entering the race and immediately commanding the news media’s attention. 2020 Democratic hopefuls should understandably be concerned, too, about how they’d ever compete for oxygen if running in a primary against Oprah Winfrey, whose stirring Golden Globes speech drove the political news cycle still 1,028 days from the next presidential election. 

— CNN launched an “Oprah 2020” liveblog, and Winfrey’s image could be found at one point Monday afternoon atop the homepages of the New York Times, the Washington Post, the Drudge Report, HuffPost, and POLITICO. On this site, Republican and Democratic pundits batted around the question “Should Oprah run?”

— Of course, the question remains: Will Oprah run? “It's up to the people. She would absolutely do it," longtime partner Stedman Graham told the Los Angeles Times Sunday night, only accelerating the post-speech speculation. Sources close to Winfrey told CNN she is “actively thinking” about running. Richard Sher, a friend who spoke with Winfrey Monday, toldthe Washington Post that “she’s overwhelmed by the groundswell of support.” Yet NBC News threw cold water on the frenzy by reporting that a source close to Winfrey said “she has no intention of running.”

— Regardless, the Oprah boomlet has already reached Air Force One. Reporters asked deputy press secretary Hogan Gidley en route to Nashville whether Trump had watched her speech. Gidley said he hadn’t talked to Trump about the speech but that they “welcome the challenge, whether it be Oprah Winfrey or anybody else.” 

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

— Public review of plans for massive development in Harlem getting underway, by POLITICO New York's Sally Goldenberg: A large development that would reshape a section of Harlem with 1.4 million square feet of housing and accompanying retail and open space is set to undergo a public review process next month. The Olnick Organization is seeking permission to rezone the site so it could expand housing at the six-building Lenox Terrace complex, which is bound by 132nd and 135th streets and Lenox and Fifth avenues...The new construction, which would be completed in two phases by 2027, would add an estimated 1,642 new residential units to the neighborhood, with up to 493 being set aside for income-restricted housing, according to public documents. Read the story here.

— “London Beats New York Among Foreign Investors in Real Estate” by Bloomberg’s Peter Jeffrey: “New York City took a double hit in an annual survey of real estate investors, which saw London overtake it in first place globally and Los Angeles tie it for top U.S. city. The annual survey of the Association of Foreign Investors in Real Estate asks its members, who are estimated to have more than $2 trillion in real estate assets under management, to rank markets by various measures, such as stability and opportunity for capital appreciation. This year’s poll, the 26th, also saw pricey San Francisco, which had been one of the top five global cities since 2011, fall to 11th place, and Washington, D.C., skid to 25th from 15th place last year, part of a long slide.” Read more here

— “Manhattan office rents saw first annual decline since Great Recession” by The Real Deal’s Rich Bockmann: “Manhattan’s office market saw average asking rents fall in 2017 for the first time in seven years, as landlords lowered prices and more expensive spaces left the market. Average asking rents declined slightly by 0.7 percent to $72.74 per square foot compared to 2016, according to Colliers International, marking the first annual decline since the Great Recession." Read the story here

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— “I’ll get a f–king knife and stab you right in your f–king c–k,” Eliot Spitzer allegedly told a man eating dinner at a Manhattan restaurant. The man trolls Spitzer by praising Ken Langone within earshot of the former gov.

— Alan Sanger, former Port Authority chair, 97. 

— There are already cracks in the cement floor of the new concourse at Penn Station.

— A New York City Department of Transportation supervisor steered a firm whose contract he managed to donate to the church where he was president. 

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

Raptors 114, Nets 113: Another inspired Nets performance against an elite East team. Spencer Dinwiddie scored 31, but the Raptors prevailed late. Soon, the Nets will add enough talent to win these.

The day ahead: Patrick Ewing returns to The Garden in his rightful place as head coach of the Georgetown Hoyas. He’ll face Chris Mullin and St. John’s. Here’s hoping we also see John Thompson, Louie Carnesecca and the ugliest of sweaters.

#UpstateAmerica: Sports Illustrated filed this dispatch on the Bills game from the Big Tree Inn in Orchard Park, right near Ralph Wilson Stadium.

#ZooYork: City and State’s guide to New York “political slang.”

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC