UPDATE:

The Atlanta Police Department has confirmed to XXL that Trippie Redd was arrested on June 12 after a woman claimed he hit her in the back of the head with a gun.

Trippie is currently on probation, so he isn't allowed to possess any guns. The unnamed victim told police that the incident took place when she was told to leave the scene of the alleged crime and as she was leaving, Trippie hit her in the head.

Police saw a bump on the woman's head so arrested Trippie. According to his booking information, he's still incarcerated at Fulton County Jail.

ORIGINAL STORY:

Trippie Redd was arrested on Tuesday (June 12) for an alleged assault in Atlanta, for which he's currently being held in Fulton County Jail. According to his booking information, law enforcement picked up the "Love Scars" rapper on one count of aggravated assault and one count of battery causing substantial physical harm, though few other details are known at this time, TMZ reports.

The arrest is Trippie's second in as many months. Two weeks ago, the rapper was arrested following an alleged fight at rapper FDM Grady's house in Cobb County, Georgia. In that case, police charged Redd and frequent collaborator Lil Wop with misdemeanor counts of fighting and criminal trespass. Trippie was also hit with one count of simple battery.

In footage posted online, Grady claimed the altercation in May started after Trippie Redd disrespected his girlfriend. "The situation between me, Wop and Trippie was, them niggas came to the crib, Trippie was being disrespectful to my lady and I wasn't going for that shit," Grady said.

Grady later released video of the incident that shows four people allegedly jumping him in a parking lot. He also released a diss track, recorded over 2Pac's "Hit 'Em Up" beat, aimed at Redd and Wop.

Trippie Redd's latest arrest comes on the same day that the rising rapper was revealed to be a member of the 2018 XXL Freshman Class. Check back with us for updates as the story develops.

See 33 Rappers With Wild Neck Tattoos

Get our Newsletter
