Sunny. High 96F. Winds S at 10 to 15 mph..

A clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 8:52 am

Ashley Alberts-Roach 

Ashley Alberts-Roach 

A Bellevue woman who left two dogs in a hot car for hours will spend a year in jail after being found guilty of two counts of animal cruelty resulting in death.


Ashley Alberts-Roach, 38, could have been sentenced to up to two years on each count. Sarpy County Judge Stefanie Martinez instead sentenced her to a year in jail on each, saying she could serve the sentences at the same time. Alberts-Roach also was ordered not to own a dog for 30 years.


Paco, a 4-year-old black-and-white pit bull-Labrador mix, and Rosie, a 3-year-old brown pit bull mix, belonged to Alberts-Roach’s boyfriend, police said.

Alberts-Roach put the dogs inside a car around 10 a.m. on Aug. 5, 2016, because she didn’t want them in her house, prosecutor Gage Cobb said. Her 11-year-old daughter later told her the dogs were in distress, Cobb said, but Alberts-Roach left them there.


Alberts-Roach checked on the dogs at 2:15 p.m., police said, and realized that the dogs were not moving. She moved the dogs to the garage to try to cool them with water, police said, but she could not revive them.


Bellevue police were called to the family home about 3:15 p.m. that day and found the two dogs dead inside the garage.


“We’re pleased with the sentence,” said Mark Langan of the Nebraska Humane Society. “It wasn’t the maximum, but it was something for her to think about while she sits in jail. It’s a tragic situation based on the stupid actions of the defendant.”


A group of more than a dozen people, most of whom were wearing Humane Society T-shirts, attended the hearing.




The Humane Society has never seen anything quite like it before.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Kevin Cole covers Omaha crime and public safety news. Follow him on Twitter @KevinColeOmaha. Phone: 402-444-1272.


                                    
                                        Whenever Kevin Cole posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

That woman is truly evil. She should have also been charged with child abuse as she did this horrible act in front of her child, who begged her to stop. The worst monsters are real.

I only wish that we had the same respect for unborn children.

Lock her in a hot car for a day and see how she likes it.

At least we are down two pit bulls.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


