Three Kenyans living in the United States are among five suspects charged in connection with the shooting of a 25-year-old father of three in Cobb County, Georgia two weeks ago.

Daniel Perez, 25, was in the passenger seat of a pick-up truck on March 23 when two men approached the truck and one shot him in the head, according to local police.

On Sunday, police arrested 20-year-old Devin Thomas and 18-year-old Maria Mungai. Another suspect Charlton Kariuki had been arrested earlier.

Police have also arrested an unidentified 15-year-old.

MURDER WEAPON

According to the arrest warrants, Kariuki is accused of buying the murder weapon, a .38-caliber handgun and then selling it to the shooting suspect, a 15-year-old who was not named for being a juvenile.

Kariuki also allegedly drove the other suspects to the scene of the crime.

Maria is charged with helping the suspects escape and hide after the shooting.

After the shooting, Perez was rushed to the WellStar Kennestone Hospital, where he was declared brain dead.

"It's just sad because he was just taking his brother to a job interview literally that morning," his sister-in-law, Lucia Gonzalez, told a local news channel.

Perez had recently purchased the truck to start his landscaping business.

LIFE SUPPORT

He was taken off life support and died on March 27, Acworth police confirmed.

His family added that the week before his shooting they were at Perez's 1-year-old son's baptism. He has two other children, the oldest a 4-year-old girl.

Why someone would shoot Perez is a mystery to his family.

"They're cowards for doing this, especially the way they did it."

The suspects are being held without bail, according to Cobb county jail records.

NTV's Namukabo Werungah, Doreen Magak, Antony Wabwoba and former station head Pamela Asigi were among the big winners at… Read more »

Read the original article on Nairobi News.


  Copyright © 2018 Nairobi News. All rights reserved. Distributed by AllAfrica Global Media (allAfrica.com).
  To contact the copyright holder directly for corrections — or for permission to republish or make other authorized use of this material, click here.


AllAfrica publishes around 800 reports a day from more than 140 news organizations and over 500 other institutions and individuals, representing a diversity of positions on every topic. We publish news and views ranging from vigorous opponents of governments to government publications and spokespersons. Publishers named above each report are responsible for their own content, which AllAfrica does not have the legal right to edit or correct.

Articles and commentaries that identify allAfrica.com as the publisher are produced or commissioned by AllAfrica. To address comments or complaints, please Contact us.
































        AllAfrica is a voice of, by and about Africa - aggregating, producing and distributing 800 news and information items daily from over 140 African news organizations and our own reporters to an African and global public. We operate from Cape Town, Dakar, Abuja, Monrovia, Nairobi and Washington DC.
      


        © 2018 AllAfrica
        Privacy
        Contact
      