


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Lawyers for Georgia Tech basketball coach Josh Pastner have cited jailhouse conversations in an attempt to dismiss a countersuit.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Lindsay Schnell provides her thoughts on the results of recommendations made for NCAA basketball by Condoleezza Rice's commission.
    USA TODAY Sports

Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets head coach Josh Pastner reacts to a play during the second half against the Wake Forest Demon Deacons at McCamish Pavilion.
(Photo: Jason Getz, USA TODAY Sports)

Georgia Tech basketball coach Josh Pastner had already been cleared by an independent investigation and, now, his lawyers are seeking to get a countersuit against Pastner tossed. 


Jailhouse conversations between former friend Ronald Bell and Bell’s girlfriend, Jennifer Pendley, show that the sexual misconduct allegations against Pastner were part of an extortion scheme, according to a filing by Pastner’s lawyers in Pima County (Ariz.) Superior Court. The supplemental filing asked the judge overseeing the case to drop the couple’s counterclaim that came after Pastner sued the two for defamation earlier this year. 


“These jail communications show – through Bell’s and Pendley’s own words – that Pendley’s allegations of sexual assault are false and maliciously concocted,” Scott Tompsett, one of Pastner’s lawyers, wrote in the filing obtained by USA TODAY Sports. 


Bell was arrested in March for a probation violation in Arizona and was eventually extradited to Georgia, where the warrant for his arrest was issued. During his little more than a month incarcerated, Pendley and Bell communicated nearly 300 times, according to the filing. 


Bell lashed out at Pendley, who alleged Pastner of misconduct, numerous times and appeared to threaten to expose the scheme by talking to the news media. 


“How you behave is going to determine what I tell the press,” Bell said in one of the recorded conversations in April from Cobb County (Ga.) Adult Detention Center. “The press is going to come here tomorrow. Yeah, tomorrow. What I tell them will – how I talk to them will determine how you behave. So if you act like a fool the next day, I’m going to go back and tell the press more. If you act cool, I’m done with them and I’ll walk away. But either way, you’re going to be a laughingstock.”


Pastner’s lawsuit against the couple alleged Bell sent messages to him and his wife for many months seeking money to prevent alleged NCAA violations from being made public. When Pastner didn’t pay, Bell told CBS Sports in November that he had provided impermissible benefits to two Georgia Tech players.


Bell then continued to demand money from Pastner, and when no payment was made, the accusation of sexual misconduct surfaced. 


"Unequivocally, there is zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero truth to any of those disgusting, bogus allegations," Pastner said in February. "It's disgusting."


Fisher &amp; Phillips, the firm tapped for independent investigation, concluded in a 29-page report obtained by USA TODAY Sports in June that “Bell and Pendley’s allegations that Pastner sexually assaulted Pendley are baseless.”


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 


 
