© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Sunny skies. High around 95F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low 71F. Winds E at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 11:53 pm

COLUMBIA, ILL. • Wesclin found itself in its usual predicament on Friday against Columbia.

But this time, the Warriors got up off the mat.

Wesclin scored 21 answered points to stun perennial Cahokia Conference power Columbia 21-16 in a battle of rivals in Columbia.

It was Wesclin's first victory over Columbia since Sept. 17, 2010 when the host Warriors won 12-7.

The loss ended Columbia's 31-game conference winning streak, dating back to 2011.

"We came in and wanted a chance to win," Wesclin coach Ric Johns said after the Warriors improved to 4-0 overall,, 2-0 in league play. "We wanted to put ourselves into a position to win. We did and we took care of it. It's a huge win for the program. It's something we can build on. We kept digging and kept grinding."

Columbia (2-2, 0-1) saw its six-game winning streak over Wesclin end. During the winning streak, Columbia outscored the Warriors 247-68.

"We were marching the ball on offense and we were shooting ourselves in the foot in the red zone," Wesclin senior quarterback Josh DeMuge said, referring to two scoring opportunities. "We just had to clean up our mistakes and we can win this game. We were marching up and down the field and they were not stopping us. We just made mistakes. We came out and said we can't be beat. We had confidence that we could do the job."

Johns said the key to the comeback was the play of the offensive line - center Noah Marlar, right tackle Christian Bair, left guard Grant Heier and left tackle Kolden Rapien, all juniors.

"They do it every game," DeMuge said. "They come out and blow them off the ball. That's how we run our offense."

The play that baffled Columbia was a reverse.

Wesclin's first points came when junior linebacker Trevor Andrescavage tackled the Columbia runner in the end zone with seven minutes, 24 seconds left in regulation. On the ensuing kickoff, junior running back Gavin Billbruck scored the first of two touchdowns on a 2-yard plunge with 2:58 remaining in the third quarter. The other touchdown came from senior running back RJ Kattenbraker, who ran a reverse for a 10-yard scamper with 7:02 remaining in regulation.

Billbruck scored the game-winning touchdown on an 8-yard run with 1:32 left in regulation.

Columbia's final drive deep in Wesclin territory ended when senior linebacker Tyler Harbison's interception secured the victory.

"We have confidence we can go through the season and do anything," DeMage said.

"This is a great group of guys," Kattenbraker said. "Going into the off season, there was an awful lot of hard work. Everybody was working hard and this is what happens when the team works together."

Columbia held a 9-0 halftime lead and went up 16-0 midway through the third quarter before Wesclin staged a comeback.

"Wesclin beat us in every aspect of the game," Columbia Coach Scott Horner said. "They're more physical than we are. They're tougher than we are. They wanted it more than we wanted it. How did we score our touchdowns - two big plays. We didn't establish anything all night. We saw it coming. I knew they were meaner than we were upfront. Ric has a good football team. They deserved the win."




                     athletes of the week • statistical leaders • 
                        the latest headlines • prep sports talk • 
                    scoreboard • news organized by school

1234FinalWesclin0091221Columbia097016 