UT Southwestern Medical Center has been ranked the No. 1 health care institution by the British scientific journal Nature for its output of published research.

Every year, Nature updates an index that offers a ranking of research output at the institutional, national and regional level. UT Southwestern consistently occupies the top spot in the list specific to health care institutions. The institution topped the Nature Index in 2016 and 2017.


The other schools rounding out the top five spots of the Nature Index are Columbia University Medical Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and UC San Diego Health Sciences.


There are six more Texas institutions on the list, including M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (No. 7); UT Health Science Center at Houston (No. 22); UT Health Science Center at San Antonio (No. 46); UT Medical Branch Health at Galveston (No. 70); Texas Children’s Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine (No. 79) and Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center (No. 88).


“What it means to institutions like UT Southwestern is that it gives us a relative grade report, if you will, on how well we're doing as a research institution,” said Dr. David Russell, vice provost and dean of research.  


The ranking is compiled using research articles published in a group of 82 journals selected by an expert panel that is independent of Nature.  Russell credits UT Southwestern’s position on the list to the school’s mantra of “quality over quantity.”


“A lot of institutions prefer to grow their sizes and their research operations at the expense of quality, so they tend to emphasize quantity,” he said. “We don’t do that, and because the Nature Index isn’t normalized to size, that benefits us.”

He points to a couple of high-profile projects within the medical center that are boosting its profile, such as the investment in a method called cryo-electron microscopy. “It’s a method used to look at the atomic structure of proteins that are very important in cancer biology, hypertension and psychiatric diseases,” Russell said.


He said the school has also invested in the development of a drug for treating kidney cancer. The drug, which was initially developed on UT Southwestern’s campus, is currently in the second phase of clinical trials.


You can find the entire Nature Index list here.

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.