Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Prosecutors to Florida judge: Don't release the surveillance video from Parkland high school where 17 people were shot to death.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A rainbow appears over Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on Monday, Feb. 26, 2018, the morning all staff return for planning days to prepare for the students' return Wednesday.
(Photo: Olivia Vanni/Naples Daily News)Buy Photo

Prosecutors asked a Florida judge Monday to deny media outlets the surveillance videos showing how deputies responded to a Broward County high school shooting that killed 17.


The media organizations — including the USA TODAY NETWORK – FLORIDA, The New York Times, The Miami Herald, CNN and the Sun-Sentinel — argued in a petition last week that the footage should be released because of overwhelming public interest.


The USA TODAY NETWORK – FLORIDA includes the Naples Daily News, the (Fort Myers) News-Press, the Pensacola News Journal, Florida Today, the Tallahassee Democrat, and Treasure Coast Newspapers.


The video will allow people to consider "whether a different course of action may have lessened or averted the tragic outcome,” the news organizations argued in a petition filed by lawyer Dana J. McElroy, of Thomas &amp; LoCicero in Tampa.


Broward County Circuit Court Judge Jeffrey R. Levenson is expected this week to schedule a hearing in the case.


Reiterating recent responses to media public records requests, the Broward Sheriff's Office denied in a court filing Monday that the media had a strong enough reason to compel the video's release because "it is active criminal investigative information that is part of active criminal investigations."


The Sheriff’s Office also argued the videos may reveal safety information in the school district's security system.


That position was underscored Monday by State Attorney Michael J. Satz, the Broward County prosecutor whose office is overseeing the criminal case against Nikolas Cruz, the 19-year-old former student charged in the case. 


“The release of such information would be detrimental to the fair presentation of evidence to the grand jury, and jury hearing this matter at trial, and potentially the due process rights of Nikolas Cruz,” Assistant State Attorney Joel Silvershein said in a court filing for Satz's office.


The Florida Department of Law Enforcement and prosecutors "are adamant that BSO must not produce the school security system video sought," David L. Ferguson, a lawyer for the Sheriff's Office, said in a filing Monday.


More: A timeline of Nikolas Cruz's activities leading up to the mass school shooting in Parkland, Florida


Authorities say Nikolas Cruz, a former student, opened fire at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., Wednesday, Feb. 14, 2018, killing more than a dozen people and injuring several. (Photo: Broward County Jail)

The legal battle comes after criticism over local authorities’ response before and after last month's shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland.


Media outlets have relied mostly on leaked records and sporadic releases of other public records to piece together a timeline of events leading up to the shooting.


"Disclosing this video footage from exterior cameras (not the interior where the shooting occurred) lies at the core of understanding exactly how events unfolded and will provide critical insight into the propriety of the government’s response," McElroy wrote in the petition.


The outlets argued that Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel’s public comments detailing the footage, especially the inaction of one of his deputies on the scene, Scot Peterson, qualifies for its full release.


“We’re not going to disclose the video at this time,” Israel said during a news conference after Peterson’s retirement. “We may never disclose the video.”  


The school district has declined to release almost all school records, including incident reports and disciplinary files, citing student privacy exemptions. School officials said they handed over the surveillance video and server to police, which the media outlets argued violates public records laws.


The Sheriff's Office has been selective in what documents it has released to the public.


For example, almost 600 pages of Peterson’s personnel file were available immediately after Israel announced the deputy's retirement. Officials also released summaries of calls to Cruz’s home, including internal affairs’ post-shooting response and interviews with deputies and callers. But they have not released the actual incident reports.


More: Suspect in Florida shooting took Uber to school, carried additional ammunition, arrest report says


More: Sheriff: School officer never went inside to confront gunman


“I’ve never heard of that,” said Barbara Petersen, a First Amendment lawyer and Florida public records expert with the First Amendment Foundation, which has joined the media organizations' lawsuit. “They created new documents but they didn’t have time to produce the original documents? It doesn’t make any sense.


"Maybe they’re trying to show that they were doing their job or what’s expected of them.”


A Sheriff's Office spokeswoman said the delay in releasing the incident records is for processing, which has been weighed down by the flood of records requests since the shooting. They did not respond to a list of questions about the holdup for records that normally take days or even hours to produce.


Lawyers for the media outlets will meet this week to discuss what litigation steps to take for the other pending records besides the surveillance video. 


Last month a judge ordered the release of a Florida Department of Children and Families investigation into allegations of abuse and neglect against Cruz’s mother. The report detailed what state social workers knew about Cruz in late 2016.


“If there were shortcomings,” Broward Circuit Court Judge Charles Greene said in court, “the public has the right to know.”


That report would normally be kept confidential, but Greene said Cruz by "his own actions” waived that right to privacy. Satz's office did not object to the records’ release.


“This case has been publicized not just throughout the state or throughout the country,” Greene said of the massive public interest, "but throughout the world.”


More: Florida school shooting: Judge orders social service records for Nikolas Cruz released


More: Broward sheriff says only 1 deputy was on scene during shooting


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 


 


 
