Partly cloudy. High 79F. Winds NE at 10 to 15 mph..

A clear sky. Low 58F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:56 pm

Worcester Superior Court

Steven Bankert

Steven Bankert

Worcester Superior Court

NORTH ATTLEBORO — A local man convicted last month of stealing more than $200,000 from gas companies by tampering with meters at his former laundromats received a jail sentence Friday.

However, Steven R. Bankert, 60, of 42 Pratt Lane, is free pending appeal.

Worcester County Superior Court Judge Richard T. Tucker sentenced Bankert to one year in jail followed by four years of probation. However, the judge agreed to stay the imposition of the sentence while Bankert pursues his appeal, according to a spokeswoman for Attorney General Maura Healey.

A restitution hearing is scheduled for Nov. 9.

A 12-member jury found Bankert guilty of six counts of larceny and 10 counts of interference with a gas meter on Sept. 20 following an 11-day trial, according to the attorney general’s office.

Bankert is the former owner of a half-dozen laundromats in Attleboro, Brockton, Lawrence and Worcester.

The charges were filed after the attorney general’s office began an investigation in August 2011 when Columbia Gas made a complaint.

Columbia Gas suspected Bankert, who used to be a licensed electrician, of tampering with the gas meters after the company detected low and erratic consumption patterns at his businesses from 2008 to 2012.

The cases were consolidated because the laundromats were in different county jurisdictions.

The case was prosecuted by Assistant Attorneys General Kristy Lavigne and Gabriel Thornton, who are assigned to Healey’s White Collar and Public Integrity Division.

Bankert has an appeal pending in a civil case involving his “pirate ship” on Falls Pond in front of his home.

Last year, a judge ordered Bankert to pay a $675 fine and to remove the structure. The case was the result of a regulatory dispute with the town’s conservation commission.

Bankert lost an appeal earlier this year on another dispute with the commission in an unrelated case.

David Linton may be reached at 508-236-0338.

Steven Bankert

NORTH ATTLEBORO — A local man has been ordered to pay $195,241 in restitution for stealing from natural gas companies by tampering with meters…


                                    
                                        Whenever DAVE LINTON posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.
