Mirrored glass and sliced logs form the facades of these prefabricated guest suites designed by MAPA, which are dotted across a vast vineyard in Maldonado, Uruguay.

The hotel suites stand on the 101-hectare Sacromonte vineyard, which is set within a valley of of dense grassland crossed by streams.

MAPA, which has offices in Uruguay and Brazil, became involved in the design of The Sacromonte Landscape Hotel after it was approached by a local land owner wanting to create a project that "combined hospitality, productive land, architecture, and landscape".


The hotel comprises 13 cabins placed at various points throughout the site so that guests can enjoy unique perspectives of the verdant surroundings. Four of these are already in situ, while another nine are currently in production.

"[The hotel] substitutes the concept of contiguous rooms with exclusive cabins scattered through the landscape," explained the practice in a statement.

Each steel-frame cabin was assembled over a period of 10 weeks in a factory in the country's capital, Montevideo, before being transported 200 kilometres to the site.




				
					
						
						
Related story MAPA designs prefabricated house then ships it 200 kilometres to Uruguayan olive grove
						
						
					
				



"In order to achieve high comfort levels in remote areas, prefabrication appears as an ideal answer, as factory processes generate more control and precision," the practice told Dezeen.

This is not the first instance MAPA has made use of prefabrication building methods – the practice previously placed a pair of factory-made guesthouses on a historic coffee plantation in Brazil, and has erected a prefab dwelling on a Uruguayan olive grove.

While the cabin's front elevation has been crafted from mirrored glass, its rear facade is built from stacked logs meant to emulate the appearance of woodpiles typically found in rural settings. The stone bases that support the structures are erected on site, shaped to suit each cabin's specific plot of land.

Roofs have also been covered with camouflaging greenery, and peripheral walls feature slatted timber screens that can be slid back to make more of the vistas.

Internally the 60-square-metre suites will be completed with a cosy reading nook, fireplace, and a living area that faces directly onto the landscape. The site will also play host to a restaurant, hilltop wine tasting terrace and a pitched, open-air chapel.

Photography is by Leonardo Finotti.

Project credits:

Partners: Luciano Andrades, Matías Carballal, Andrés Gobba, Mauricio López, Silvio MachadoProject team: Pablo Courreges, Diego Morera, Emiliano Lago, Fabián Sarubbi, Sandra Rodríguez, Rafael Solano, Agustín Dieste, Alba Álvarez, Marcos Gómara, Victoria ReibakasAssembly and installation: MTA IngenieríaEngineering: Lagomarsino &amp; AsocWindows: Alushop+Alumex (Sapa)Woodwork: Cosia y PomboFurniture: Estudio Claro, Estudio Diario, BoConcept, Don BaezLighting: Trios Lighting (Marset)Automation: LutronMarbles: Anibal AbbateSolar panels: ChromagemGreen roof: EcotelhadoWood: Maguinor Maderas

MAPA assembles "simple and austere" Sacromonte Chapel in ...

Prefab metal structures form True North housing complex in ...

Haptic completes contemporary apartment block in Chelsea ...

High Horse Ranch by Kieran Timberlake overlooks forested ...

Cabin on the Border is an off-grid shelter with walls that ...

Buckhorn Place's light-filled interiors complement Whistler ...

BIG designs prototype tiny cabin in Upstate New York

Adjaye and Toogood design affordable prefabricated houses ...

Visit our comments page | Read our
                            comments policy
                    

Subscribe to our newsletters

Dezeen Daily is sent every day and contains all the latest stories from Dezeen.

Dezeen Weekly is a curated newsletter that is sent every Thursday, containing highlights from Dezeen. Dezeen Weekly subscribers will also receive occasional updates about events, competitions and breaking news.

We will only use your email address to send you the newsletters you have requested. We will never give your details to anyone else without your consent. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email, or by emailing us at privacy@dezeen.com.

For more details, please see our privacy notice.

You will shortly receive a welcome email so please check your inbox.

You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of every newsletter.