Welcome! 

News Feed Item




Frontier Communications Corporation (NASDAQ: FTR) today announced it has
been named a Qualified Vendor with Choice Hotels International, Inc.
(NYSE: CHH) - one of the world's largest hotel companies. Choice Hotels
franchises approximately 6,500 hotels, representing more than 500,000
rooms worldwide across 11 brands, including the Ascend Hotel Collection,
Cambria, Comfort Inn, Comfort Suites, Sleep Inn, Quality, Clarion,
MainStay Suites, Suburban Extended Stay Hotel, Econo Lodge and Rodeway
Inn. This agreement enables Choice branded properties access to
Frontier’s turnkey hospitality communication solutions. Available
services include phone systems, network connectivity service and
nationwide support.




“We are excited to provide our products and services to Choice Hotels,”
said Frontier Executive Vice President Ken Arndt. “Frontier
Communications will help Choice franchises deploy connectivity solutions
that improve customer satisfaction and play a role in driving increased
average daily rates for their properties,” Arndt said.




Selection by Choice as a qualified vendor highlights Frontier’s
increased focus on Commercial business development as well as the
breadth and capacity of the network and the unique, industry-specific
services it is implementing across the country. Frontier Communications
provides solutions that meet Choice’s brand standards and surpass the
expectations of guests to ensure positive guest experiences and prevent
system downtime. As a qualified vendor, Frontier will focus on new
builds, conversions, and refresh hotels.




About Choice Hotels



Choice
Hotels International, Inc. (NYSE: CHH) is one of the world's largest
hotel companies. With approximately 6,500 hotels franchised in more than
40 countries and territories, Choice Hotels International represents
more than 500,000 rooms around the globe. As of June 30, 2017, 791
hotels were in their development pipeline. The company's Ascend Hotel
Collection®, Cambria® Hotels, Comfort Inn®, Comfort Suites®, Sleep Inn®,
Quality®, Clarion®, MainStay Suites®, Suburban Extended Stay Hotel®,
Econo Lodge®, Rodeway Inn®, and Vacation Rentals by Choice Hotels®
brands provide a spectrum of lodging choices to meet guests' needs. All
hotels and vacation rentals are independently owned and operated.
Additional corporate information may be found on the Choice Hotels
International, Inc. website, which may be accessed at http://www.choicehotels.com.




About Frontier Communications




Frontier Communications Corporation (NASDAQ: FTR) is a leader in
providing communications services to urban, suburban, and rural
communities in 29 states. Frontier offers a variety of services to
residential customers over its fiber-optic and copper networks,
including video, high-speed internet, advanced voice, and Frontier Secure®
digital protection solutions. Frontier Business™ offers
communications solutions to small, medium, and enterprise businesses.
More information about Frontier is available at www.frontier.com










View source version on businesswire.com: http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20171019006535/en/


Published October 19, 2017 
Copyright © 2017 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





