By

Associated Press


and 
Mary Kekatos For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  07:25 EDT, 26 November 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  17:31 EDT, 27 November 2017







          37

View  comments

Four members of one family were killed on Saturday night after a repeat DUI offender from California, who was allegedly driving drunk in his Mercedes, slammed into their car.


The crash, which took place around 8.11pm on Highway 80 at the San Pablo Dam Road off-ramp, killed Napa residents Daryl Horn, 50, and his 14-year-old son Joseph, reported the Contra Costa County Coroner’s Office.


Also killed were 52-year-old Troy Biddle and his 12-year-old son Baden, from Bainbridge Island, Washington, who were related to the Horns by marriage, according to the Napa Valley Register.


The fifth person in the Horns' vehicle – and the only survivor – was Jared Horn, 19, Daryl's son and Joseph's older brother, who was at the wheel when the wreck occurred.


Four members of one family were killed on Saturday night after a repeat DUI offender from California, who was allegedly driving drunk in his Mercedes, slammed into their car

The crash, which took place around 8.11pm on Highway 80 at the San Pablo Dam Road off-ramp, killed Napa residents Daryl Horn, 50 (left), and his 14-year-old son Joseph (right)

Also killed were 52-year-old Troy Biddle (pictured) and his 12-year-old son Baden, from Bainbridge Island, Washington, who were related to the Horns by marriage

Authorities arrested Fred Lowe of Sacramento on suspicion of felony vehicular manslaughter, felony hit-and-run, and felony DUI

Authorities arrested Fred Lowe of Sacramento on suspicion of felony vehicular manslaughter, felony hit-and-run, and felony DUI.


Lowe, 47, remains at the Contra Costa County Jail on $1.15million bail after California Highway Patrol officers say he caused the deadly five-car pileup while allegedly driving drunk.


The blue Mercedes that Lowe is suspected of driving collided with the Horns' white Nissan sedan Saturday night, reported the Sacramento Bee.


The Nissan flipped over the median and crashed into three vehicles - a Honda, a Mazda SUV and a Lincoln SUV - traveling in the opposite direction.


Five people from the three westbound vehicles, including one child, suffered minor injuries.


The fifth person in the Horns' vehicle – and the only survivor – was Jared Horn, 19 (left and right), Daryl's son and Joseph's older brother, who was at the wheel when the wreck occurred. He survived with minor injuries and has returned home

Lowe kept driving and exited the freeway before hitting a parked car, California Highway Patrol-Oakland Officer Matthew Hamer told the Bee. A witness saw him get out of the Mercedes and attempt to flee on foot.


Lowe's license was suspended five times in connection with three DUI convictions between 1999 and 2012, according to the Department of Motor Vehicles.


At the time of the deadly car crash, he was driving with a suspended license.


The eldest Horn son, Jared, survived with minor injuries and was treated at John Muir Medical Center. 


Lowe's blue Mercedes collided with the Horns' white Nissan sedan (pictured) Saturday night. The Nissan flipped over the median and crashed into three vehicles - a Honda, a Mazda SUV and a Lincoln SUV - traveling in the opposite direction

Five people from the three westbound vehicles, including one child, suffered minor injuries. Lowe kept driving and exited the freeway before hitting a parked car, said California Highway Patrol-Oakland Officer Matthew Hamer

Lowe, 47, remains at the Contra Costa County Jail on $1.15million bail after CHP officers say he caused the deadly five-car pileup while allegedly driving drunk

According to Cal Athletics, Horn is a pitcher on UC Berkeley's baseball team and has returned to his home in Napa following his release from the hospital, according to Cal Athletics.


'We cannot imagine what Jared is going through right now, and the thoughts and prayers of our entire Cal baseball community are with Jared and his family as they go through this time,' UC Berkeley head coach Mike Neu wrote in a statement. 


'Jared is a respected and beloved member of our team as well as an incredible student-athlete, teammate and friend. We will give him any and all support that we can as he goes through this unthinkably difficult time.' 




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group