Nov. 29 (UPI) -- Rep. Mark DeSaulnier, D-Calif., called for a federal inquiry Wednesday after reports of women in an immigration detention center being locked up for 23 hours a day and forced to use plastic bags for toilets.

DeSaulnier toured the West County Detention Facility in Contra Costa County, Calif. after a San Francisco Chronicle report in which several inmates described the conditions. In that report, women said they are kept in cells with one ort wo other women for 23 hours per day and given red, biodegradable bags - the kind given to opioid addicts going through withdrawals to vomit into - instead of toilets.


"Following recent reports of ICE detainees being mistreated at the West County Detention Facility, I toured the jail earlier this week," DeSaulnier said on Facebook. "Leaving with more questions than answers, I called on Attorney General Sessions to immediately investigate the claims and will be asking the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Inspector General to look into the allegations."

The Contra Costa County Sheriff's Department said a "comprehensive investigation is already well underway," but also said critics might be attempting to politicize a controversial issue.

"Congressman DeSaulnier can now publicly call for any additional investigation he wants," said Contra Costa County Sheriff David Livingston. "However, as the political rhetoric from some around this issue continues to boil, we remain undeterred in providing professional and diligent custody services for our county inmates and federal detainees."

Immigrant detainees at the West County Detention Facility have been complaining of mistreatment since at least September, when 27 women being held at the jail signed a letter released by CIVIC, a San Francisco-based group working for the rights of people in immigrant detention centers.

"When we are on lockdown and a county inmate needs to use the restroom, she is unlocked so that she can use it," the letter states. "When an ICE inmate asks, we are always told to either hold it, or to use a 'red bag...' This is unacceptable."

United Press International is a leading provider of news, photos and information to millions of readers around the globe via UPI.com and its licensing services.
						


With a history of reliable reporting dating back to 1907, today's UPI is a credible source for the most important stories of the day, continually updated  - a one-stop site for U.S. and world news, as well as entertainment, trends, science, health and stunning photography. UPI also provides insightful reports on key topics of geopolitical importance, including energy and security.
					