Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.

Thank you for reading 5 free articles. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 5 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.

A subscription is required to continue reading.

Thank you for reading 5 free articles. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 5 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.

Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Generally clear. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Generally clear. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 9:53 pm

Virginia State Police are investigating the mysterious Thursday death of a woman on a Buckingham County road, the department said Friday evening.

Just before 6 p.m. Thursday, state police received a call about a crash in the 2300 block of Gravel Hill Road. When Trooper G.T. Lee arrived at the scene, there was no crashed vehicle. Instead, he found a woman lying in the roadway and a man standing over her.

The woman was declared dead at the scene. Her body was taken to the chief medical examiner’s office in Richmond for examination, autopsy and positive identification, according to police.

The man, identified as Neal E. Fore, 29, of Cumberland, was arrested and charged with DUI, driving without a valid license and improper use of a “farm tag” license plate. He is being held without bond at the Piedmont Regional Jail.

Fore was driving a light-brown late 1990s or 2000 Jeep Grand Cherokee, with “farm use” tags and a missing front bumper. Fore did not stop his vehicle at the scene. Police said Fore and the woman were traveling in the Jeep together prior to her death.

Police are investigating the circumstances surrounding her death.

Anyone with information about the woman’s death or who recalls seeing the Cherokee in the vicinity of Gravel Hill Road is asked to call the Virginia State Police at (434) 352-7128 or dial #77 on a cellphone, or email questions@vsp.virginia.gov.

Send news tips to news@dailyprogress.com, call (434) 978-7264, tweet us @DailyProgress or send us a Facebook message here.


                                    
                                        Whenever The Daily Progress staff posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Stay in the know:

Breaking news emails | iOS app | Android app