
              In this Tuesday, April 10, 2018 photo, from left, Gerald Hege and his lawyer, Katie Hall, sit at an election challenge hearing by Davidson County Board of Elections, in Lexington, N.C. At far right is challenger Angela Anderson. The Davidson County Board of Elections held the hearing on a challenge to sheriff candidate Hege's bid for office. They voted 3-1 Tuesday to grant Hege, a former North Carolina sheriff famous for painting his jail cells pink and hosting a cable television show before he pleaded guilty to felony charges, permission to run for his old office.  (Laura Greene/The High Point Enterprise via AP)
            


              In this Tuesday, April 10, 2018 photo, supporters of Gerald Hege congratulate him after the Davidson County Board of Elections rejected a challenge to his candidacy for sheriff based on his previous felony convictions, in Lexington, N.C. The board voted 3-1 Tuesday to grant Hege, a former North Carolina sheriff famous for painting his jail cells pink and hosting a cable television show before he pleaded guilty to felony charges, permission to run for his old office.  (Laura Greene/The High Point Enterprise via AP)
            


              In this Tuesday, April 10, 2018 photo a supporter of Gerald Hege holds up a sticker at the Davidson County Board of Election's hearing to vote on whether Hege can run for sheriff, in Lexington, N.C. The board voted 3-1 Tuesday to grant Hege, a former North Carolina sheriff famous for painting his jail cells pink and hosting a cable television show before he pleaded guilty to felony charges, permission to run for his old office.  (Laura Greene/The High Point Enterprise via AP)
            


              About 200 people fill a meeting room Tuesday, April 10, 2018, at the Governmental Building in Lexington, N.C., during a Davidson County Board of Election's hearing to rule on sheriff candidate Gerald Hege's bid for office. Davidson County Board of Elections voted 3-1 Tuesday to grant Gerald Hege permission to run for sheriff. Hege pleaded guilty in 2004 to two counts of felony obstruction of justice after authorities accused him of racial profiling, taking county money and driving his souped up car at high speeds when there was no apparent emergency. Hege had been ineligible to run, but a law that went into effect last December reduced from 15 to 10 years the time those convicted of non-violent felonies must wait to request to have the crimes wiped from their records.  (Laura Greene/The High Point Enterprise via AP)
            

LEXINGTON, N.C. (AP) — A former sheriff who gained fame for painting his jail cells pink and hosting a cable television show before he pleaded guilty to felony obstruction charges can run for his old office, a North Carolina elections board says.

The Davidson County Board of Elections voted 3-1 on Tuesday to grant Gerald Hege permission to run for sheriff.

Hege pleaded guilty in 2004 after authorities accused him of racial profiling, taking county money and driving his car at high speeds when there was no apparent emergency.


Hege had been ineligible to run, but a law that went into effect last December reduced from 15 to 10 years the time those convicted of non-violent felonies must wait to request to have the crimes wiped from their records.

"I've been fighting for this for 14 years," Hege said. "I'm just going to go campaign."

Hege said he plans to run a "military" office again if he's elected.

Last month, Angela Anderson filed a challenge to Hege's candidacy, saying his expungement doesn't make him qualified to run for sheriff, according to the 2010 N.C. constitutional amendment that states a convicted felon cannot run for sheriff "whether or not that person has been restored to the rights of citizenship in the manner prescribed by law."

Anderson said she has not decided yet whether she will appeal because she wants to read the board's written decision.