Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Two people fight in school hallway during Friday night basketball game; after officials bring them outside, car pulls up, shots fired

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Police lights.
(Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Someone fired shots from a car Friday night in the Dearborn High School parking lot during a basketball game, but nobody was injured, according to the school district. 


Shortly after 8 p.m., two people — who appear to have been students from another school district — had a fight in a hallway at the high school on 19501 West Outer Drive in Dearborn. School officials contained the situation and moved the two outside, where, a short time later, the car pulled up and shots were fired at one of them, according to a Facebook post by the verified Dearborn Public Schools account, signed by Superintendent Glenn Maleyko. 


The car was quickly driven away, and no injuries or damage were reported. Police arrived and began an investigation. 


"Fortunately, everyone attending the basketball game at Dearborn High was safe and secure in the building during the incident," according to the post. "Although the event that occurred on Friday evening was an isolated incident and did not involve any Dearborn students, it is still very troubling as this type of behavior is not typical for our schools, our community, or our city." 


Dearborn Police Department on Saturday morning did not immediately release details of the incident or suspect descriptions. 


Read more: 


Franchisee sues Roasting Plant coffee for $9.5M, alleging fraud


Michigan's flu season is yet to peak - and the vaccine isn't helping much


Contact Robert Allen on Twitter @rallenMI or rallen@freepress.com. 
