

By Michelle Robertson, SFGATE

Caption


Close

Click through the slideshow to see the racial incidents that have made national headlines recently.

Click through the slideshow to see the racial incidents that have made national headlines recently.

San Jose State University student Esra Altun, 19, said a man yanked her by her hijab, causing it to tighten around her neck and choke her. The incident happened the day after the presidential election, in a university parking garage.


San Jose State University student Esra Altun, 19, said a man yanked her by her hijab, causing it to tighten around her neck and choke her. The incident happened the day after the presidential election, in a


One W.Va. official resigned after writing a racist post on Facebook about First lady Michelle Obama. In the post, the woman wrote, "It will be refreshing to have a classy, beautiful, dignified First Lady in the White House. I'm tired of seeing a Ape in heels." A mayor who commented on the post, was at the center of an online petition to resign for her remarks.


One W.Va. official resigned after writing a racist post on Facebook about First lady Michelle Obama. In the post, the woman wrote, "It will be refreshing to have a classy, beautiful, dignified First Lady in the


Students involved in a tasteless video with a young woman in blackface have been expelled from Abilene Christian University after causing outrage across the Internet.

Photo: Snapchat Screen Shot from Daily Mail


Students involved in a tasteless video with a young woman in blackface have been expelled from Abilene Christian University after causing outrage across the Internet.

Photo: Snapchat Screen Shot from Daily


appeared at an elementary school in Alameda, Calif. the weekend following Donald Trump's election to the presidency. To combat the hateful messages, parents and students held "mass welcome committees" at several schools in the district.


appeared at an elementary school in Alameda, Calif. the weekend following Donald Trump's election to the presidency. To combat the hateful messages, parents and students held "mass welcome


A video taken on a BART train shows a woman who verbally accosted another passenger, calling her a "stalker from the Middle East" and saying, "Trump might deport you."

A video taken on a BART train shows a woman who verbally accosted another passenger, calling her a "stalker from the Middle East" and saying, "Trump might deport you."

were seen at a Veterans Day parade in Petaluma, Calif. and two were reportedly wearing Donald Trump shirts. The display stunned locals, including Rep. Jared Huffman, who tweeted a photo of the men and condemned their message.


were seen at a Veterans Day parade in Petaluma, Calif. and two were reportedly wearing Donald Trump shirts. The display stunned locals, including Rep. Jared Huffman, who


Columbia University suspended its wrestling season due to derogatory text messages sent between team members.

Columbia University suspended its wrestling season due to derogatory text messages sent between team members.

A video of a confrontation over a charcoal barbecue at Lake Merritt in Oakland, Calif. attracted national attention after being shared and viewed thousands of times since its initial posting. An event titled BBQ'N While Black was held in response to incident. The flyer, designed by Jhamel Robinson, one of the organizers, looks like one of the dozens of memes that have been shared on social media.


A video of a confrontation over a charcoal barbecue at Lake Merritt in Oakland, Calif. attracted national attention after being shared and viewed thousands of times since its initial posting. An event titled


Yale Police were allegedly called by a white student to report a black student sleeping in a common room on Tuesday, May 9, 2018. The police wouldn't leave even after the woman, Lolade Siyonbola — who is a graduate student at Yale — showed them the key to her room and her ID.


Yale Police were allegedly called by a white student to report a black student sleeping in a common room on Tuesday, May 9, 2018. The police wouldn't leave even after the woman, Lolade Siyonbola — who is a


A Starbucks store manager in Philadelphia asked Rashon Nelson and Donte Robinson to leave because they had not made any purchases. After they declined, and said they were waiting for a friend, the manager called the police. Six officers showed up and handcuffed the men, a confrontation which sparked international backlash and was viewed more than 8 million times on social media.


A Starbucks store manager in Philadelphia asked Rashon Nelson and Donte Robinson to leave because they had not made any purchases. After they declined, and said they were waiting for a friend, the manager


A white woman called the police on Michael Hayes, a black real estate investor in Memphis, who was inspecting a house in May 2018. The video went viral, and the ending had a surprising twist.

A white woman called the police on Michael Hayes, a black real estate investor in Memphis, who was inspecting a house in May 2018. The video went viral, and the ending had a surprising twist.

An interaction between a Muslim woman in a niqab and a white man at a Coffee Bean &amp; Tea Leaf in Riverside, Calif. was captured on video. When the woman asked the man why he was being racist toward her, he responded: "I don't like it, how's that? I don't like it because I don't like your religion and it says to kill me and I don't want to be killed by you. How's that?" The man was kicked out of the cafe.


An interaction between a Muslim woman in a niqab and a white man at a Coffee Bean &amp; Tea Leaf in Riverside, Calif. was captured on video. When the woman asked the man why he was being racist toward her, he


A video involving members of Syracuse University's Theta Tau spewing racist, anti-Semitic, homophobic, sexist language and gestures sparked outcry online. 

A video involving members of Syracuse University's Theta Tau spewing racist, anti-Semitic, homophobic, sexist language and gestures sparked outcry online. 

Starbucks under scrutiny again: A Latino customer by the name of Pedro accused Starbucks employees of giving him a cup with a racial slur on it. The incident happened in La Cañada, Calif.

Starbucks under scrutiny again: A Latino customer by the name of Pedro accused Starbucks employees of giving him a cup with a racial slur on it. The incident happened in La Cañada, Calif.

Three black teens prom shopping at a Nordstrom Rack in Brentwood, MO., were racially profiled and accused of shoplifting. An elderly woman approached them and said, "Would your parents and grandparents be proud of what you're doing?" She allegedly also referred to them as a "bunch of bums."


Three black teens prom shopping at a Nordstrom Rack in Brentwood, MO., were racially profiled and accused of shoplifting. An elderly woman approached them and said, "Would your parents and grandparents be proud


A Florida student was seen holding up a sign with a message asking another student to prom that said, "If I was black I'd be picking cotton, but I'm white so I'm picking U 4 prom?"

A Florida student was seen holding up a sign with a message asking another student to prom that said, "If I was black I'd be picking cotton, but I'm white so I'm picking U 4 prom?"

Newly released audio of a 911 call contradicts a San Francisco woman's claims that she was pretending to call police on a girl selling bottled water by her home.

Alison Ettel apologized and stepped down as CEO of cannabis firm TreatWell Health after she was outed as the white woman caught on a viral video supposedly calling police on an 8-year-old African American girl for selling water without a permit last week. Social media users accused Ettel of being racist, dubbing her "Permit Patty."

On Saturday, Ettel told The Chronicle that she only pretended to call police after an argument with the girl's mother escalated, a claim debunked by the 911 audio, obtained Thursday by KTVU.

READ ALSO: 'Permit Patty' resigns from cannabis firm amid backlash from fellow entrepreneurs

In the call, Ettel tells the 911 dispatcher: "I have someone who does not have a vendor permit that's selling water across from the ballpark" and asks for "someone to talk to about that." The dispatcher asks Ettel to hold as he transfers her to the San Francisco Police Department. The call ends after a brief hold. It is not known whether Ettel hung up or was disconnected by accident.

Dispatch records referred to the call as a "suspicious person" report, KTVU said. The news station also confirmed it was placed from Ettel's cell phone number.

The episode erupted Saturday when a video posted to Instagram the day before showed Ettel apparently calling the police outside a South of Market apartment building.

"This woman don't want to let a little girl sell some water. She be calling police on an 8-year-old little girl," said the girl's mother, who was recording the video. "You can hide all you want. The whole world gon' see ya, boo."

OPINION: We should think deeply about the Alison Ettel viral video — and why it matters

 "Yeah, and, um, illegally selling water without a permit?" Ettel can be heard saying on the phone.

(Video: Matt Nelson/Courtesy)

Ettel told The Chronicle that the girl and her mother, later identified as Erin Austin, had been making noise for several hours and that she lost her temper. Ettel said she first asked building security to intervene, but got into an argument with Austin that escalated into the exchange captured on the video.

Austin said the police never arrived Friday. An SFPD spokesperson said officers had not had recent contact with an 8-year-old girl.

READ ALSO: Man calls BART police on person eating a burrito on train

The incident follows a slew of recent viral encounters in which a Bay Area resident was accused of racism or discrimination.

Just three weeks ago, a white man dismantled a black homeless person's encampment in Oakland and tossed some of his belongings into Lake Merritt. Then in April, a woman dubbed #BBQBecky made national headlines after calling police on an African American family barbecuing at Lake Merritt in Oakland. The incident inspired a nationwide "barbecuing while black" movement.

Chronicle staff writer Evan Sernoffsky and SFGATE staff writer Filipa Ioannou contributed to this report. 

Michelle Robertson is an SFGATE staff writer. Email her at mrobertson@sfchronicle.com or find her on Twitter at @mrobertsonsf.