Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The National Weather Service White Lake office has issued a flood warning for the following rivers: Clinton River, Lower Rouge River, and Rouge River.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Expect heavy rains and flooding across parts of southeast Michigan today, according to the National Weather Service in White Lake.
(Photo: National Weather Service)

A steady rain and melting snow soaked metro Detroit, swelled rivers and put pressure on sewer systems Tuesday, as Wednesday's forecast called for even more rain. 


The National Weather Service issued a flood warning for several rivers in southeast Michigan. And counties in the region will remain under a flood watch until at least Wednesday afternoon. 


From 6 a.m. Monday through 7 p.m. Tuesday, nearly 2 inches of rain had fallen in the Pontiac area as temperatures tied a record high of 63 degrees, according to weather service meteorologist Alex Manion. Detroit saw about 1.6 inches of rain. 


The weather service's White Lake office issued flood warnings for the Clinton, Flint, Lower Rouge, Rouge, Saginaw, Shiawassee and Tittabawassee rivers. The warnings were also issued for Kearsley Creek, Mill Creek and Swartz Creek. 


Localized flooding was reported Tuesday. In Canton, Lower Rouge flooding forced the closure of Sheldon Road between Palmer and Geddes.


And the heavy rains, coupled with extensive snowmelt over the past several days, had local storm water systems over capacity. 


“We have already had a combined sewer overflow into Lake St. Clair. This water has been treated to state standards, but any action we can take to reduce this overflow helps reduce this impact,” said Macomb County Public Works Commissioner Candice Miller.


Read more:


Mackinac Bridge closed due to falling ice


Detroit is warmer than Phoenix - in February


She asked residents to hold off doing laundry, reducing the length of showers and only running dishwashers when full until the weather breaks.
 
“Many of our communities have combined sewer systems, where both storm water and sanitary sewage travels in the same pipes. If we can reduce the amount of sewage entering the pipes, we can reduce the amount that is spilling into Lake St. Clair during this heavy rainfall,” Miller said. 


In Flint, meanwhile, floodwaters left some motorists trapped in their cars. Some roads were closed Tuesday in Kalamazoo and the surrounding area because of high water.


To help avoid possible flooding, City of Ferndale Department of Public Works employees Zach Hreha, 25, of Warren, left, teams up with Robert Geary, 20, of Warren to clear storm drains in Ferndale on Tuesday, Feb. 20 2018. (Photo: Mandi Wright, Detroit Free Press)

 


More heavy rain is expected Wednesday, with much cooler temperatures. The forecast high is  45 degrees in Detroit. The raindrops will taper off by late morning. 


Sunny skies return Thursday with highs in the upper 30s and a chance of snow Thursday night.


Read more:


It may flood in Detroit. Here's how to prepare


Man, 22, dead after car crashes in Detroit


Michigan State Police officials urged residents to prepare.


“Floods can be both damaging and life-threatening,” Capt. Chris Kelenske, deputy state director of Emergency Management and Homeland Security and commander of the Michigan State Police, Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division, said in a news release.


“Residents should take steps to prepare and stay safe. They should protect their property against any flooding hazards and check to ensure they are covered by insurance. When traveling, please be careful and do not drive through flooded roads.”


The Michigan Department of Transportation said it canceled pavement repairs on I-696, I-75, and U.S.-24 on Wednesday and will resume work on Thursday because of the weather conditions. 


Here’s an overview of the latest observed value and forecasted crests of rivers that are near flood stage in metro Detroit:


Contact Hasan Dudar: hdudar@freepress.com.
