Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Troy police arrested the suspect near the restaurant.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Kenneth Travier, a 61 year old Detroit resident was arrested in connection to an armed robbery at the Kona Grill in Troy.
(Photo: handout, Troy Police Dept.)

A man who fired a shotgun while trying to rob Kona Grill in Troy was arraigned Monday on charges of armed robbery and possessing a firearm while committing a felony. 


Kenneth Travier, 61, of Detroit, ran from the scene and was arrested nearby, according to Troy police. Officers recovered the shotgun. 


Employees were closing down the restaurant on Big Beaver Road at about 11:45 p.m. Sunday when Travier, wearing a mask, tried to push his way into a back office, police said.  An employee was inside the office.


"The employee fought off the man, sprayed him with pepper spray and was able to get the door closed," reads a news release from Troy police. "Travier subsequently fired the shotgun through the door. No employees were injured and no patrons were present."


More: Three men sentenced in violent robbery of Dearborn jewelry store


More: Detroit cop responds to robbery report, opens fire, discovers it's a video shoot


Travier fled without stealing anything, Sgt. Meghan Lehman said.  


During his arraignment, Travier was denied bond. 


Anyone with information about the incident is asked to contact the Troy Police Department at 248-524-3477.


Contact staff writer Ann Zaniewski at 313-222-6594 or azaniewski@freepress.com. Follow her on Twitter:@AnnZaniewski 
