Gallery: N.J. week in crime: Sept. 15, 2017


    
        
            By Jeff Goldman

jeff_goldman@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

NORTH WILDWOOD -- A 35-year-old man wanted by the FBI in California and two others were charged with burglarizing a North Wildwood home on Wednesday night, authorities said. 

The fugitive, Robert L. Portune, and a Middle Township man were hiding in a bathroom in a home on the 1400 block of Delaware Avenue around 11 p.m., North Wildwood police said in a statement. The pair allegedly forced open a rear door and entered the home, prompting a neighbor to call police.

Man in gold Cadillac had heroin, cops say

Officers also found a woman sitting in car outside the home, according to police.

Portune of Vacaville, Calif. had been sought by the FBI's Sacramento, California office on weapons charges, authorities said.

North Wildwood police charged him with burglary, theft, criminal mischief, hindering apprehension, disorderly conduct and conspiracy. 

Jonathon L. Reyes, 21, of the Green Creek section of Middle Township and Danielle Gennarelli, 25, of North Wildwood were charged with the same offenses. 

Protune was sent to the Cape May County jail to await extradition to California while Reyes and Gennarelli were given summonses and released.

In July, Portune was one of three people arrested after he allegedly tossed a gun out the window of a vehicle being pursued by the California Highway Patrol, according to thereporter.com.

Jeff Goldman may be reached at jeff_goldman@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JeffSGoldman. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        