
    
        
            By Joe Brandt

jbrandt@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

Authorities have identified the woman killed when a car in which she was a passenger crashed into the icy Delaware River Sunday, and announced the arrest of her boyfriend who allegedly left her to die.

Jacob T. Garrett, 24, of Burlington City, was driving on Riverbank Road in Burlington City "at a high rate of speed" when he struck a parked minivan near Wood Street around 1 p.m. Sunday, the Burlington County Prosecutor's office said in a statement.

The crash caused the car to tumble over the river wall and into the water, where the front of the car broke through the ice.

Garrett got out. 

"Help my girlfriend," Garrett told witnesses before fleeing, the prosecutor's office said.

Garrett's girlfriend, Stephanie White, 23, also of Burlington City, was still inside.

White was pulled from the car by first responders. She had her seat belt still on and was submerged in the water, the statement said. She was pronounced dead at a local hospital.

A Burlington City police K-9 tracked Garrett to the Burlington Towne Center North light rail platform, and police had the train stopped at the Beverly/Edgewater Park station, where police found Garrett 

Garrett was charged with leaving the scene of a fatal accident, causing death while driving with a suspended license and endangering an injured victim. He is being held in Burlington County Jail before a first appearance in county court.

Joe Brandt can be reached at jbrandt@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JBrandt_NJ. Find NJ.com on Facebook. 

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        