WBNS-TV’s on-line public inspection file can be found on the FCC website or at 10TV.com/fcc. Individuals with disabilities may contact Becky Richey at pubfile@10tv.com or 614.460.3785 for assistance with access to the WBNS-TV public inspection files.


©Copyright 2018, WBNS-TV, Inc. All Rights Reserved. For more information on this site, please read our Privacy Policy, About Our Ads and Terms of Service. It is the policy of The Dispatch Broadcast Group to provide equal employment opportunity to all qualified individuals without regard to their race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, martial status, disability, military status, citizenship or any other legally-protected status in accordance with applicable local, state and federal law.

A former Columbus firefighter has been sentenced to five years community control after he entered a plea to an abduction charge earlier this year.


Timothy Durbin will have to check in with a probation officer for five years and he will serve no jail time in this case.


He entered an Alford plea to a third-degree felony charge of abduction in September.


He will have to check in with a probation officer for five years and he will serve no jail time in this case.


In an Alford plea, defendants claim they are innocent of a crime but recognize he would be found guilty if the case went to trial.


“The decision to accept the Alford plea was a difficult one,” said First Assistant Prosecutor Kyle Rohrer. “It is my hope that the ruling today will help this victim and her family move on from this awful crime and ongoing legal process.”


Durbin was initially indicted in April 2015 and accused of raping a victim younger than 10-year-old from July 1, 2003 through July 31, 2004.


The case was dismissed but Durbin was re-indicted later in 2015 on four counts of rape, two counts of gross sexual imposition, and one count of kidnapping.


At the time, Delaware County Prosecutor said, “"We dismissed the case because the court excluded our expert witnesses and court-ordered records were not available for review prior to trial. After further investigation and review of the records, Mr. Durbin was re-indicted."


That case ended in a hung jury in 2016.


In the sentencing, Durbin was also ordered to have no contact with the victim.