




A former assistant Franklin County prosecutor was sentenced Friday to three days in jail and three years on probation after pleading guilty to a misdemeanor count of drunken driving for causing a crash that injured a motorcyclist at a Downtown intersection.


Nathan Yohey, 38, of the Near East Side, also pleaded guilty to a felony charge of failing to stop at the scene of the crash, but he was approved for a treatment program that, if completed successfully, will lead to the dismissal of that count.


The program, known as intervention in lieu of conviction, requires Yohey to remain free of drugs or alcohol for a period of one to five years, depending on how long the court decides he must be supervised.


His defense attorney, W. Martin Midian, said Yohey has been in recovery and undergoing treatment since shortly after the March 16, 2016, incident.


The sentence was imposed by Franklin County Common Pleas Judge Michael J. Holbrook.


Police reported that Yohey was driving a GMC pickup truck west on East Broad Street shortly before 11 p.m. and made a left turn onto South 3rd Street, colliding with a motorcycle and a car. The motorcyclist, Brian Millar, underwent surgery at OhioHealth Grant Medical Center.


Prosecutor Ron O'Brien fired Yohey the day after the crash. Yohey had attended a beer-and-brats fundraiser for O'Brien at the Germania Club on South Front Street in the Brewery District several hours before the crash.


Millar attended the hearing and supported the plea agreement, which also included the dismissal of the most-serious charge, aggravated vehicular assault.


The case was assigned to a special prosecutor, Kyle Rohrer of the Delaware County prosecutor's office, to avoid a conflict of interest for O'Brien's office.


 


jfutty@dispatch.com


@johnfutty


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.