




A father whose 3-year-old son was found naked and covered in trash in the man's parked car in the University District was placed on probation Tuesday for two years.

Arthur T. Fullard, 27, of Worthington, pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor count of child endangering. A misdemeanor charge of possessing drug paraphernalia was dismissed by the Columbus city attorney's office as part of a plea agreement.

Franklin County Municipal Court Judge Andrea C. Peeples sentenced Fullard to 180 days in jail, suspending all but the 59 days he has served since his arrest, and imposed probation. He can be sent back to jail for the remaining 121 days if he violates probation.

Peeples also ordered him to have no contact with his son until there are assurances from Children Services that "things have changed" in Fullard's life.

Fullard declined to make a statement during the brief court hearing.

Assistant City Attorney Johanni Martin Luna said she doesn't know who has custody of the boy. A Children Services spokeswoman said she can't comment about the agency's involvement in the case or who is caring for the child.

Instead of being released from jail, Fullard will be transferred to Delaware County, where there is an active warrant charging him with failing to appear in a drug case.

On Aug. 13, a Columbus police officer and an Ohio State University police officer were on patrol when they found a Chevy Cavalier filled with debris, including "trash, spoiled food and cigarette butts," in an alley behind the 300 block of East 16th Avenue.

One of the officers noticed a small hand in the debris, leading to the discovery of a sleeping boy "completely naked ... crammed into an infant seat that was too small for him," police reported.

Fullard eventually returned to the vehicle and was arrested by the officers, who reported that he was "slightly disoriented" and "appeared to be under the influence of drugs or possibly experiencing withdrawal symptoms." Officers found drug paraphernalia on Fullard and in his car. 

jfutty@dispatch.com

@johnfutty


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.