The voice of journalism

News of impending cuts at The Denver Post came first from Twitter. “In a staff meeting, the @DenverPost editor just told us that we are cutting 30 positions in the newsroom,” wrote City Hall reporter Jon Murray. “There are some sobs in the room.” The paper soon confirmed that its newsroom of around 100 would be reduced by almost a third, slashing its capacity to cover one of the nation’s booming cities. (Its newsroom had already been cut by two thirds, from 300 at its peak.)

The cuts at the Post, which has already seen several rounds of layoffs, will leave the region’s preeminent paper with fewer resources to provide the sort of accountability journalism that has won it several Pulitzer Prizes. “I’m sure some commenters will cheer what they believe is the eventual demise of the mainstream media, but there is nothing to celebrate when a city has fewer journalists working in it,” Editor Lee Ann Colacioppo wrote in a memo to staff on Wednesday. But the story isn’t just a local one; it’s part of a pattern playing out around the country at newspapers controlled by one company.

ICYMI: While ABC, CBS, and NBC all had special reports on student walkout, Fox went a different direction.

The Post is just the most recent outlet owned by “vulture” hedge fund Alden Global Capital to face the ax. Alden controls Digital First Media, the country’s second largest newspaper chain, which has a pattern of gutting newsrooms and selling off valuable office space to squeeze profit from the industry. In the Bay Area, it has decimated the San Jose Mercury News, cutting a newsroom of more than 400 down to about 40 staffers. Writing last month on the purchase of the Boston Herald by Digital First, Joshua Benton argued, “just short of setting the place on fire, being bought by Digital First is about the worst outcome possible.”

The man behind Alden Global Capital is Randall Smith, a press-shy billionaire who Julie Reynolds profiled in The Nation last fall. “He has no experience with actually managing a newspaper, and his professional history reflects no interest in journalism beyond profiteering,” Reynolds wrote.

ICYMI: How hacked emails and a yacht in Monaco ended my career at The Wall Street Journal

The Washington Post’s Margaret Sullivan likened Digital First’s approach to strip-mining. Cataloguing the stunned reactions from Denver, she notes that “Digital First is wreaking similar havoc all over the country.” That result of that havoc is fewer journalists working in dozens of cities. As Denver Post Broncos beat reporter Nicki Jhabvala tweeted in response to the news, “This is why hedge funds shouldn’t own newspapers.”

Below, more on the coverage of cutbacks in Denver and elsewhere.

 

Other notable stories

ICYMI: Student walkout keeps media attention on gun violence

                        
                        


In January 2014, Marwan Hisham invested $2,000—his earnings from his family’s tomato and eggplant harvest—in a satellite dish, which he installed on the top of his uncle’s café in Raqqa. Hisham’s hometown had just become the de facto capital of...