
			Trending:		

Two games into the season, every team in the AFC West can argue for its status among the NFL elite.

Every team except one.

Denver, Oakland and Kansas City are all undefeated. The Chargers, meanwhile, are winless. Sure, their two losses have come by just five combined points, but scoring margins don’t count in division standings. And given how brutal the AFC West looks so far, they don’t have much room for error — especially not with Kansas City coming to StubHub Center on Sunday (1:25 p.m., Ch. 2).

“It’s as good as I can remember in some time,” Chargers quarterback Philip Rivers said of the quality of the division. “We’ve just got to hold up our end of it now.”

“You can’t afford to fall back,” said cornerback Casey Hayward.

Some could argue that the Chargers already have. Since 2007, according to OddsShark, 83 teams have started the NFL season with two losses. Of those, only nine rebounded to make the playoffs. But such numbers are reflective rather than predictive, and professional athletes are nothing if not stubbornly self-confident.

“I know there’s all the stats out there,” Rivers said, “about how many percentage of teams that start 0-2 make this — I know all those things are out there. But we have 14 games left. … There’s a lot of football left.”

Numerous times this month, the 35-year-old quarterback has shaken off suggestions of a nightmarish deja vu. The Chargers are 1-10 in one-score games since the start of last season, yes — but this year’s losses, Rivers argued, have not come as a result of “sloppy, bad football.” This version of the team simply hasn’t gotten into a good rhythm, despite its occasional sparks of promise.

Rivers also pointed to past comebacks as reason for hope.


In 2007, the Chargers started 1-3, but closed the regular season a six-game winning streak before eventually falling to the Patriots in the AFC Championship game. The following season, the Chargers opened 0-2, but eventually clawed back to .500. And the year after that, they shook off a 2-3 start by reeling off 11 straight wins.

Related Articles




			
	
				
			Bonsignore: 5 big NFL questions before training camps begin		

			
	




			
	
				
			As the Raiders prepare to say a long goodbye to Oakland, they are immersing themselves in their new home in Las Vegas		

			
	




			
	
				
			Chargers training camp scheduled to start July 28		

			
	




			
	
				
			Chargers rookie Derwin James is flashing his skills, but what position will he play?		

			
	




			
	
				
			Chargers have reached out to tight end Antonio Gates		

			
	

The problem? The AFC West was far weaker a decade ago. Through those three seasons, the Chargers were the only team in the division to make the playoffs. None of their rivals recorded a winning season during that span, allowing the Chargers to make the playoffs even in 2008 as an 8-8 team.

This year’s division looks as strong as it has ever been. Kansas City and Oakland both possess top-five offenses. Denver has a top-five defense, coupled with a quarterback (former seventh-round pick Trevor Siemian) who is playing better than anyone outside of Colorado imagined.

It’s not hard to envision a scenario in which three teams from the same division make the playoffs — something that has happened just six times since the NFL’s divisional realignment 15 years ago.

The Chargers certainly aren’t out of the playoff picture yet. They enter their second home game as three-point underdogs, but nearly upset Kansas City on the road last year before receiver Keenan Allen tore his ACL. They won’t enter this matchup at full strength either, not with starting linebacker Denzel Perryman (ankle) and Pro Bowl cornerback Jason Verrett (knee) both on injured reserve.

But even if this isn’t a must-win game, it will at least serve as another barometer for a franchise that has stumbled through its Los Angeles relocation.

“This is the best team in the National Football League,” said Chargers head coach Anthony Lynn said of Kansas City. “If we stack up against this team and beat this team, what does it say about us?”

Message of unity

During a rally in Alabama on Friday night, Donald Trump lambasted NFL players who did not stand for the national anthem as a “son of a b—-,” and called for them to be fired for protesting police brutality. On Saturday, those around the league responded, with varying degrees of force.

Packers tight end Martellus Bennett wrote: “I’m ok with being fired for what I believe in.” Seahawks receiver Doug Baldwin compared Trump to “a child craving attention,” and expressed hope for “justice and love to win out.” Bills running back LeSean McCoy called Trump an “a——.”

Statement from Seahawks wide receiver Doug Baldwin. Maybe my favorite response thus far. pic.twitter.com/MpH2Y1dC44

— Dave Zirin (@EdgeofSports) September 23, 2017



49ers CEO Jed York released a statement that began with: “The callous and offensive comments made by the President are contradictory to what this great country stands for.” Giants co-owners John Mara and Steve Tisch called Trump’s comments “inappropriate, offensive and divisive,” and argued that the vast majority of players use their platforms to “make a positive difference in our society.”

NFL commissioner Roger Goodell’s statement did not reference Trump by name or title, but said in part, “Divisive comments like these demonstrate an unfortunate lack of respect for the NFL, our great game and all of our players, and a failure to understand the overwhelming force for good our clubs and players represent in our communities.”

Chargers owner Dean Spanos opened his own response by referencing Goodell’s statement.

“I wholeheartedly agree with the commissioner’s statement,” Spanos said. “The NFL and its players, more than anything, have been a force for good.  What our country needs right now is a message of unity, civility and mutual respect.”

Eight NFL owners donated a combined $7.25 million to Trump’s inauguration earlier this year: Robert Kraft (Patriots), Jerry Jones (Cowboys), Stan Kroenke (Rams), Dan Snyder (Washington), Woody Johnson (Jets), Bob McNair (Texans), Shahid Khan (Jaguars) and Ed Glazer (Buccaneers).

Get the latest news delivered daily!