The “Monday Night Football” analyst will return to the team that he coached from 1998-2001

Getty Images 

The modern voice of ESPN’s “Monday Night Football” is heading from the broadcast booth back to the field.

Jon Gruden is expected to sign a 10-year deal worth nearly $100 million with the Oakland Raiders on Tuesday, ESPN’s Adam Schefter has reported.

Gruden previously coached the Raiders from 1998-2001, before heading to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 2002 — where he ironically beat Oakland in Super Bowl XXXVII.

Also Read: ESPN's Suzy Kolber on Why 'Monday Night Football' Is 'More Than a Game'

Gruden will replace Jack Del Rio, who was fired after the regular-season finale on Sunday.


The NFL guru nicknamed “Chucky” (because he looks like the demonic character from “Child’s Play”) has been a longtime target for Raiders owner Mark Davis, dating back to when his late father, Al Davis, owned the team.

Also Read: 'Inside the World of ESPN' Author Defends John Skipper's Performance as Network President

If confirmed, Gruden’s deal will be the largest contract for a head coach in the NFL, and he will be running the most expensive coaching staff in NFL history, per NFL Media’s Ian Rapoport. Gruden’s staff are expected to get four-year contracts with at least one of those years in the Bay Area and the others coming in Las Vegas when the team relocates.


Also Read: NFL, Oakland Raiders, Vegas Golden Knights Offer Support to Las Vegas Victims' Fund

Gruden’s last game coaching the Raiders was the infamous Tuck Rule game against the New England Patriots in January 2002. Tom Brady went on to lead the Patriots to victory in Super Bowl XXXVI, and four more times since the game. The Raiders have had only one two winning seasons since Gruden’s departure.

The Raiders have yet to comment on their choice of new head coach.

Since the first ESPYs Awards in 1993, the show has celebrated the best sports action from throughout the year while honoring trailblazers from all realms. It was originally held in March or April from New York City, but has since moved to its regular spot in July following the MLB All-Star game and migrated west to Los Angeles. Check out some of the best moments from the last quarter decade.

Jimmy V's historic speech begins it all (1993)Long before the Jimmy V Award existed, its namesake Jim Valvano made what still stands as the most famous speech in ESPYs’ history – and possibly all of sports. “I'm going to speak longer than anyone else has spoken tonight," Valvano said, accepting the first ever Arthur Ashe Courage Award (and everyone was more than OK with that). "Time is very precious to me. I don't know how much I have left and I have some things I would like to say." The N. C. State basketball coach was battling terminal bone cancer and died less than two months later.

Michael Sam accepts the Courage Award (2014):After becoming the first openly gay football player to enter the NFL draft in 2014 (where he was picked by the St. Louis Rams), Michael Sam was then presented the Courage Award by Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson. Sam quoted Arthur Ashe, telling the audience: "Start where you are, use what you have, do what you can.” The University of Missouri alum went on to tell the audience: "Those were the words to live by, whether you're black or white, young or old, straight or gay ... Football raised me, football taught me about hard work."

Sidney Poitier honors Muhammad Ali (1997):A Hollywood legend honored a boxing legend with an Oscar-worthy speech and the result was nothing short of magical. "In an age of discrimination, he stood up for racial pride. In an era of lost values, he had a spiritual rebirth. In a time of war, Muhammad Ali spoke of peace,” Poitier said when he took to the podium.

Stuart Scott's inspirational cancer speech (2014):Longtime “SportsCenter” anchor Stuart Scott became a part of the show in 2015 when he accepted the Jimmy V Perseverance Award. Up until then, few knew the extent of Scott’s cancer battle as he never let the struggle show on-air, but the sports broadcaster took the entire room with him on a beautiful, tear-jerking journey. “You beat cancer by how you live, why you live and in the manner in which you live. So live. Live. Fight like hell and when you get too tired to fight then lay down and rest and let somebody else fight for you." Scott died in January 2015 at age 49 – but he never lost the fight.

Devon Still accepts award for sick daughter Leah (2015):Cincinnati Bengals defensive tackle Devon Still became a household name during his five-year-old daughter Leah’s cancer battle, as he put supporting her ahead of his NFL career. Too sick to attend the ESPYs herself, the brave little girl said via video: “Sorry I couldn’t be here, everybody. Thank you for supporting me while I beat out cancer,” before her dad sent the message “don’t give up.” Two years later, Leah is cancer-free and the face of the Still Strong Foundation.

Ben Affleck pays tribute to a Yankees great (2015)A die-hard Boston Red Sox fan presenting a New York Yankees legend with the Icon Award, what could go wrong? Thankfully, “There was something about him [Jeter] that made the boos ring a little hollow. Maybe it was his inimitable class, maybe it was that he won with dignity and lost with grace. Maybe it was simply that we knew no matter what, he was a winner regardless,” Affleck said. "He broke my heart 100 times, if not more. And he broke it again when he retired.”

Jamie Foxx serenades Serena Williams (2003): We all heard Jamie Foxx sing as Ray Charles in Oscar-winning “Ray,” but no one expected him to honor Serena Williams with a little ditty titled, “Can I Be Your Tennis Ball?” when he served as host in 2003 and 2004. "15-love, 30-40 love, advantage you, 'til you get to deuce," went the catchy lyrics. Not even a Grand Slam champion could resist that.

Craig Sager’s colorful Jimmy V Award speech (2016) Even though he spent the bulk of his career at Turner Sports, Craig Sager was beloved at ESPN. The “NBA on TNT” reporter lit up the stage in a rainbow bright jacket and yellow shirt before delivering a moving speech while accepting the Jimmy V Award. “I will continue to keep fighting -- sucking the marrow out of life, as the marrow sucks the life out of me,” Sager said. Sadly, he passed away from leukemia in December.

Lauren Hill's parents remember her (2015):College basketball phenomena Lauren Hill succumbed to a brain tumor three months before the ESPYs but that didn’t deplete her presence on the big night. When her parents took to the stage to accept the Best Moment award on her behalf, there wasn’t a dry eye in the house. "We are so thankful to everyone who helped make Lauren's moment possible," Lauren's mother, Lisa Hill, said.

Bill Murray sings the “SportsCenter” theme song (1994) Diehard Chicago Cubs fan Bill Murray saw his dream come true last year with the World Series victory, but long before the Cubs’ curse was broken, Murray took to the stage to host the 1994 ESPYs, and put his sports knowledge and singing talent to the test by belting out the signature “SportsCenter” tune.

Justin Timberlake sings “I Love Sports” (2008):Timberlake really does love sports, and he wasn’t afraid to tell the world while hosting the 2008 awards. The former NSYNC singer put his obsession to music in the catchy song that reflected on the sports year, poked fun at celebrity couples Jessica Simpson and Tony Romo and Tom Brady and Gisele Bundchen, and mocked his role in Janet Jackson’s Nipplegate Super Bowl scandal.

Norm Macdonald tries to offend everyone (1998):In comparison to Timberlake’s love of sports, Norm Macdonald ripped out the hearts of every sports fan watching with his ruthless opening monologue. From the Dallas Cowboys stripper scandal and O.J. Simpson, to rape allegations against Anthony Mason, no topic was too sensitive for the “Saturday Night Live” alum.

Justin Timberlake vs. the Kansas Jayhawks (2008)Forever the performer, Tennessee native Timberlake couldn’t hide his love of the Memphis Tigers when he hosted the 2008 ESPYs – which meant ripping into Kansas Jayhawks star Mario Chalmers for beating his beloved team in the NCAA final. Unfortunately for the host, that victory earned Kansas the Best Game award.

Caitlyn Jenner's tearful speech (2105)The former Olympian captivated the audience when she accepted the Arthur Ashe Courage Award. There was a hushed silence when she took to the stage in a sweeping white gown, but that soon broke into applause and standing ovations. “Trans people deserve something vital: They deserve your respect,” Jenner said.

Robin Roberts is introduced by LeBron James (2013):A legend in her own right, Robin Roberts got an introduction worthy of royalty from LeBron “King” James when she was honored with the Arthur Ashe Award for her public handling of her battles with breast cancer in 2007 and myelodysplastic syndrome. The "Good Morning America" host got a standing ovation when she went on stage to receive the award from the NBA great.

LeBron James’ “LeBrogative” dance (2007)The Cleveland Cavaliers star was also part of a far less serious memorable moment in 2007 when he wore a wig and baggy pants to dance to “My LeBrogative” during his 2007 hosting gig. MC Hammer, eat your heart out.

 

Dewey Bozella following his wrongful imprisonment (2011)Former amateur boxer Dewey Bozella's wrongful imprisonment for murder turned him into a national news story, and his appearance at the 2011 ESPYs to accept the Arthur Ashe Award following his release after serving a 26 year prison sentence turned him into a household name. 

Drake performs two potential hits (2014)Everything Drake touches turns to gold, and that includes spoof songs he performs while hosting the ESPYs. "Honorable Mention" and "Side Pieces" were both cool  enough to be hit singles if the rapper ever released them -- even though they're meant to be cheeky jokes poking fun at sports stars and their other halves. 

Gronk hosts a dance party (2015):What's better than one Gronkowski dancing at the ESPYs? Four, of course! Rob and his equally-as-hyped brothers Dan, Chris and Gordie Jr. did a joint shoulder-bumping, jumping celebration when the New England Patriots tight end won Comeback Player of the Year in 2015. Despite being a Seattle Seahawks fan, host Joel McHale even closed the show by thanking “everyone for coming, and Rob Gronkowski.”

Will Ferrell accepts an award as Tiger Woods (2008):Long before Tiger Woods began hitting the news for the wrong reasons, Will Ferrell played a caricature of the golf champion in a hilarious ESPYs skit. "People are always asking me, 'Tiger, how do you do it?' And my answer is, 'Shut up.' I ask the questions."

NBA stars take a stand (2016):Politics and sports often inevitably crossover, and in 2016 Carmelo Anthony, Chris Paul, Dwyane Wade and LeBron James opened the ESPYs by addressing the Black Lives Matter protests and recent police shootings. “We cannot ignore the realities of the current state of America,” Anthony said as the four NBA super stars stood on stage together.

Destiny's Child twerk with Serena Williams (2005):Beyonce and co. were twerking at the ESPYs long before Gronk made it cool again. Destiny's Child were joined on stage by Serena Williams and track star Allyson Felix for a special performance of "Lose My Breath." Williams went on to appear in Beyonce's video for "Lemonade" last year.

Chance the Rapper's Muhammad Ali tribute (2016):Tributes to the greatest of all time filled the 2016 ESPY Awards, with the event taking place just over a month after his death. But none was more tuneful than the Chance the Rapper's closing song, which left guests with a black and white image of the Ali as they left the show instead of the customary confetti.

Pat Summitt defies the odds -- again (2012):Despite battling Alzheimer's disease, University of Tennessee Lady Vols basketball coach Pat Summitt gave one of her signature inspiring speeches when she was presented with Arthur Ashe Award by fellow Tennessean Peyton Manning. "It is time to fight," the winningest D-1 coach in NCAA history said. "As I ask all of you to join me together so we will win."

Stevie Wonder presents Best Team to the Lakers (2009):Musical great Stevie Wonder got to celebrate the Lakers' glory years when he presented the Best Team award to Kobe Bryant, Derek Fisher and their teammates. While that was pretty cool, but it will be Wonder's awesome introduction -- which included a promised that he planned to become "a quarterback for the Steelers or a point guard for the Cavaliers," before breaking into song that sticks in most people's memories.

TheWrap looks back at 25 years of hilarious and heartfelt highlights

Since the first ESPYs Awards in 1993, the show has celebrated the best sports action from throughout the year while honoring trailblazers from all realms. It was originally held in March or April from New York City, but has since moved to its regular spot in July following the MLB All-Star game and migrated west to Los Angeles. Check out some of the best moments from the last quarter decade.