Mostly clear. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 20 mph..

Mostly clear. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:52 pm

Matthew Arnold

Matthew E. Johnson

Matthew Arnold

Matthew E. Johnson

A sobbing mother collapsed at a service memorializing her slain son Thursday evening.

Rebecca Lewis, 49, was hospitalized in good condition at the Nebraska Medical Center, suffering from what her family described as heart trouble.

The service was a First Responders Prayer Walk, held at the site near 48th Avenue and Y Street where Lewis’s son, Matthew E. Johnson, was killed Wednesday afternoon.

Police arrested Matthew K. Arnold, 31, of Bellevue in connection with the slaying. He was booked into jail on suspicion of second-degree murder.

Johnson, 32, was fatally shot at 4 p.m. Wednesday, police said. About 11 hours later, investigators saw a man fitting the description of Johnson’s assailant getting into a vehicle near the site of the shooting. The officers made a traffic stop and arrested Arnold without incident.

Johnson and Arnold have lengthy criminal histories, with each serving a stint with the Nebraska Department of Corrections.

An aunt, Kathy Pokorny, said the family was told by acquaintances of Johnson that the two men had been arguing over which of them would be able to deal drugs out of a house when the shooting occurred. Police could not confirm if that was true.

About 30 mourners gathered along the street to honor Johnson. His mother watched from inside a minivan.

“They took him so young,” Lewis sobbed as the Rev. Rich Blackburn of First Responders prayed with her. “It doesn’t make any sense.”

The Rev. Bruce Williams, who led the service, asked those assembled to say something about Johnson.

“He had an infectious laugh,” one said.

“He was a wonderful child,” a woman said.

“A good father,” said someone else.

Lewis fell out of the van and onto the ground.

Loved ones rushed to her aid. Members of First Responders prayer group comforted her, and she was covered her with blankets.

She remained conscious. An ambulance took her to the hospital.

Johnson’s aunt said her nephew had trouble with drugs.

“He was a good kid. He got caught up in the addiction,” Pokorny said. She said she believed he had problems with methamphetamine and fentanyl.

Pokorny said Johnson had lived with her in suburban Houston for several years, where he was a star outside linebacker at J. Frank Dobie High School.

He was being courted by big-name schools such as Texas A&amp;M, she said, but instead he returned to Omaha to be with his mother.

He got a girl pregnant and turned to drugs.

He later cleaned up, stayed off drugs for several years and worked as a cook at Rosenblatt Stadium. “He was there until they shut it down,” she said.

Johnson was a father of three boys and two girls ages 9 to 14. He enjoyed taking his three sons fishing.

Johnson’s family has set up a GoFundMe page for funeral expenses: https://www.gofundme.com/beloved-matthew-eric-johnson 

“It just doesn’t seem real,” Pokorny said, sobbing. “It just doesn’t seem real.”

Be the first to know when news happens. Get the latest breaking headlines sent straight to your inbox.




Matthew Arnold

Matthew E. Johnson




The prosecutor also said in court that an eyewitness identified Arnold. No other details were revealed.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


