Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Joshua Rhett Miller


		
		
		
		
	


									January 5, 2018 | 10:16am
											| Updated January 5, 2018 | 12:56pm
												

A former high school gym teacher in California who pleaded no contest to having sex with a teen student — after texting him that she wanted to pull him into the gym equipment room — may dodge jail.

Corine Audiat, 32, agreed to a plea deal with Alameda County prosecutors last month in which she pleaded no contest to two felony charges, including statutory rape, in exchange for the dismissal of five additional charges, the East Bay Times reports.

Audiat, who taught in the Fremont Unified School District since 2008, was arrested in late 2016 for allegedly having sex with a 16-year-old student who attended Washington High School, where she had been assigned since 2012. She also coached swim teams at Mission San Jose High School and for the East Bay Swim League.

Police in Fremont launched an investigation in November 2016 after getting a tip that Audiat had been romantically involved with a male student. She was arrested on Thanksgiving Day before being released after posting bail. Days later, she was booked on additional charges — for a total of six felonies and one misdemeanor — and was again released after posting bail.

A lawsuit filed earlier this year on behalf of the alleged victim accused Audiat of “grooming” her students by enticing them with ongoing flirtation, text messages and displays of affection like hugging. In May 2016, according to the lawsuit, Audiat texted a 16-year-old boy that she wanted to pull him into the gym equipment room and kiss him. The relationship began turning sexual the following month, the lawsuit claims.

As part of her plea deal, Audiat may serve up to 180 days in county jail, but a judge may also allow her to serve that sentence at home while under electronic monitoring when she’s sentenced on Feb. 9, according to the newspaper.

Audiat also faces up to five years of probation and will need to register as a sex offender in California, as well as surrender her teaching license, which was suspended following her arrest, according to Teresa Drenick, a spokeswoman for the Alameda County District Attorney’s Office.

Drenick declined to elaborate on details of the plea deal. Audiat’s attorney, meanwhile,  did not respond to a message seeking comment, the East Bay Times reports.


			Read Next
		


			
				Man confesses to killing neighbor clearing snow from his d...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Man confesses to killing neighbor clearing snow from his d...			
		

Share Selection

81,060

57,343

53,716

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters