Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Jackie Salo


		
		
		
		
	


									May 30, 2018 | 6:49pm
											| Updated June 1, 2018 | 7:22am
												

This drunk driving suspect says she’s just a follower of Christ.

After allegedly boozing behind the wheel Sunday night, Nicole Ann Mintner defended herself to police by telling arresting officers that “Jesus drank wine and so did I,” The Village News reported.

Deputies said they found the 45-year-old asleep at the wheel inside a silver Dodge with her hazard lights activated and engine running in Sumter County, Fla.

During police interviews, Mintner reportedly refused to take off her sunglasses and slapped an officer twice on the shoulder.

She told officers that she had taken Xanax then later admitted to drinking alcohol after four empty sangria bottles were found in her center console.

Mintner was placed under arrest and into the back of a patrol car where she “continuously” screamed and threatened to urinate while en route to Sumter County Detention Center, according to deputies.

When they arrived at the jail, officers attempted to perform field sobriety tests on Minter but she kept talking over them and began singing “Amazing Grace,” according to the Village News.

She also reportedly threw her socks at a camera recording the tests and exposed herself to the officers.

“The defendant removed her right breast from her shirt and completely revealed it to the camera and jail staff,” according to the police report obtained by the newspaper.

Mintner was booked on charges of driving under the influence, battery on a law enforcement officer and resisting an officer. She was released Monday on $6,000 bond, according to court records.


			Read Next
		


			
				Teen indicted for killing girlfriend, discarding body on d...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Teen indicted for killing girlfriend, discarding body on d...			
		

Share Selection

84,442

61,166

51,500

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters