Generally clear. Low 64F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 64F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:54 pm

Terry Snow, left, and Clyde Fuller, both former employees of the Southeast Berrien County Landfill, pleaded guilty in March to embezzling more than $250,000 from the landfill. Photos provided.

Terry Snow, left, and Clyde Fuller, both former employees of the Southeast Berrien County Landfill, pleaded guilty in March to embezzling more than $250,000 from the landfill. Photos provided.

NILES — One of two men convicted of embezzling over $250,000 from the Southeast Berrien County Landfill was sentenced to prison Monday. Sentencing was delayed for the other man to give him more time to sell property to pay toward restitution.

Former landfill employee Terry Eldon Snow, 54, of Eau Claire, was sentenced Monday to 20 months to 20 years in prison. He has credit for three days already served and was ordered to pay just under $294,000 in restitution and $258 in fines and costs.

Monday, Snow and his attorney, William Weise, turned over $25,900 toward the restitution owed. Berrien County Trial Judge Charles LaSata also ordered a 2012 Dodge Ram truck and $66,000 in a United Federal Credit Union account forfeited.

Both Snow and former landfill general manager Clyde “Sonny” Fuller III each pleaded guilty to one count of embezzlement over $100,000 in late March. The embezzlement started in December 2016 and continued until their termination from their jobs last July.

The embezzlement was discovered by Niles Township trustee Herschel Hoese, who is also a landfill board member. Hoese testified in January that he had concerns about large payments to an unknown company and asked the Berrien County Sheriff’s Department to investigate.

Investigators uncovered the fact that Fuller and Snow had set up a shell company and funneled money to it from the landfill.

The sentencing for Fuller, 47, of Buchanan, is set for June 25. The plea agreement he reached with the Berrien County prosecutor calls for him to serve a minimum of 40 months in prison.

LaSata revoked Fuller’s bond and ordered him to serve the time before sentencing in jail.




                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Be the first to know about breaking news with email alerts sent right to your inbox.

The news you need to start your day, sent weekday mornings.

The day's top 5 news headlines, sent weekday afternoons.