Scattered thunderstorms early, then becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

Scattered thunderstorms early, then becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:15 pm

A Paris resident received a five-year jail sentence when he pleaded guilty to charges associated with a fatal wreck that happened nearly seven years ago. This plea was among 21 heard during Tuesday’s appearance day in Henry County Circuit Court.

Emmitt Paul Jones, 33, whose address was listed in court records as 370 Jones Bend Road Extended in Paris pleaded guilty to vehicular assault in the death of Tony Martez Teague on May 20, 2011. Teague, who was 19 at the time, was pronounced dead at the scene of the accident.

Jones was driving the 2005 Dodge Durango in which Teague was a passenger. The vehicle hit a tree off Rison Street in Paris and rolled over onto its roof. According to an accident report at the time, Jones was able to escape the vehicle before the gas tank exploded.

Jones was indicted in circuit court in July of 2012 but never reported for court.

In November of 2017, Jones was located living in Picayune, Miss., when police there checked his records and found he was wanted in Henry County.

Jones’ five-year sentence will be served split with one year in continuous confinement in the Department of Correction and the balance on supervised probation. He was given credit for 73 days he has already served in jail.

After his plea was accepted and his sentence handed down, Jones said he wanted Teague’s family members to know that he was “truly sorry” for what had happened.

“I hope they can forgive me. I loved him like a brother,” he said of Teague.

Other defendants pleading guilty to drug related charges during Tuesday’s court proceedings are listed in a separate story on Page 10 in today’s Post-Intelligencer.

Other defendants pleading guilty to other charges (listed with age, last known address, charges and sentences) include:

THEFT/BURGLARY

• Taylor Reni Kendall, 23, 223 E. Main St., Puryear — Aggravated burglary.

Kendall was sentenced to serve three years in the DOC on the burglary charge. The sentence will be served split with nine months in continuous confinement or in an inpatient drug and alcohol rehabilitation center.

The remainder of her sentence is to be served in the community corrections program.

• Michael Anthony Wallace, 33, 208 Jack Younger Lane, Paris — Burglary.

Wallace was sentenced to serve two years in the DOC.

The sentence will be served split with 60 days in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation. He was also ordered to pay $200 in restitution.

Wallace was given 42 days of jail credit.

SEX CRIMES

• Mark Edward Accomazzo, 50, 75 Courtney Circle, Springville — Two counts of solicitation of a minor.

Accomazzo was sentenced to serve three years in the DOC on one of the solicitation charges.

The sentence will be served split with time served (166 days) in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

The second charge against Accomazzo was dismissed.

ASSAULT

• Cody E. Darling, 20, 400 Mays Bridge Road, Springville — Aggravated assault.

Darling was sentenced to serve six years in the DOC.

He was given credit for 205 days he has already served in jail.

• Dex Dexter Haynes, 27, 721 Spruce St., Apartment 1, Paris — Aggravated assault.

Haynes was sentenced to serve eight years in the DOC. The sentence will be served split with nine months in continuous confinement and that balance on supervised probation.

• Delena Beatrice Kerr, 41, 136 Gaston Drive, Buchanan — Abuse of a corpse.

Kerr was sentenced to serve one year in the DOC.

OTHER

• Christina Gail Denton, 39, 1485 Guthrie Road, Paris — Failure to appear.

Denton was sentenced to serve one year in the DOC.

Her sentence will be served split with 30 days in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

• Randy May, 44, Memphis — Evading arrest and DUI.

May was sentenced to serve two years in the DOC on the evading charge and 48 hours in the county jail on the DUI.

The sentences will be served concurrently and split with time served (37 days) in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised state probation.

• Joe Douglas Ray, 60, 195 Whiskey Ridge Road, Paris — Unlawful possession of a weapon.

Ray was sentenced to serve three years in the DOC.

His sentence will be served split with 90 days in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription