Sunny. High 96F. Winds S at 10 to 15 mph..

A clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 5:52 am

Eric Scott

Eric Scott

COUNCIL BLUFFS — A Nebraska escapee who was recaptured Thursday in Council Bluffs is coming back to Nebraska.

At a court hearing Friday morning at the Pottawattamie County Courthouse, Eric Scott agreed to be sent back to face charges in Nebraska. He now also faces charges in Iowa, including theft and being a felon with a firearm.

Scott, 37, escaped Wednesday while being driven from the Nebraska State Penitentiary by a Dodge County deputy.

Scott freed himself from his handcuffs and pulled his leg-iron chain around the deputy’s throat as he drove, authorities said, drawing his body against the headrest. It was unclear how Scott managed to remove his handcuffs, which were attached to a restraint belt.

A spokeswoman for the Nebraska Department of Correctional Services said Friday that policy dictates that inmates such as Scott be strip-searched by corrections employees before being transferred into another agency’s custody. Dawn-Renee Smith said that law enforcement officers who take custody of inmates for transport are also allowed to do their own strip search if they deem it necessary.

After a day on the run, Scott was arrested by Pottawattamie County sheriff’s deputies on Thursday about 3 miles north of their office near Council Bluffs. He had the Dodge County sheriff’s deputy’s handgun in a duffel bag, Pottawattamie County Sheriff Jeff Danker said.

The Dodge County deputy, whose name Sheriff Steve Hespen declined to release, is a 30-year veteran at the Sheriff’s Office. He was driving Scott from the Lincoln prison to the Dodge County Jail to face charges of child sexual assault. Scott was scheduled to have a preliminary hearing Thursday.

He eventually will head back to prison to serve out his time for a fifth offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, then face charges in either Saunders County or Dodge County in connection with assaulting the officer and escaping, Dodge County Attorney Oliver Glass said Thursday.

Eric Scott in @PottCoSheriff jail, agreed to extradition back to Nebraska. Will face Iowa charges eventually @nonpareilonline pic.twitter.com/pSYuIHoyJ8

Be the first to know when news happens. Get the latest breaking headlines sent straight to your inbox.




Eric Scott




The examination will focus on the circumstances that led Eric Scott, who was spotted and arrested Thursday near Council Bluffs, to be able to gain control of a car and leave a deputy on the side of a road near Ceresco.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


