Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Last fiscal year more than 1,000 people applied to pretrial intervention in Ocean County. This week, Lakewood residents charged with fraud did the same.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    From allegations of million-dollar welfare fraud to a crumbling school district, we show you the major issues facing the fastest-growing city in New Jersey.
    Ryan Ross

Authorities made a second round of arrests related to public assistance fraud in Lakewood on July 27.
(Photo: Courtesy Ocean County Prosecutor's Office)

Ten Lakewood residents charged with welfare fraud and seeking entry into a probationary program are just a sliver of the number of defendants in Ocean County that apply each year.


Between July 2016 and June, about 1,460 residents of Ocean County applied for pretrial intervention, according to Pete McAleer, spokesman for the state Administrative Office of the Courts. That decreased by about 400 people from the prior fiscal year, according to McAleer.


More: Medicaid fraud: 10 in Lakewood could avoid conviction


More: Lakewood fraud: Vaad met with N.J. officials before amnesty deal


On Wednesday, six people charged in the welfare fraud investigation appeared in court in Toms River and indicated through their lawyers they would apply for the program. At least four others have also applied, according to court records, and it is possible that others among the 26 charged in the investigation will do the same as their cases move through the court system.


"This is nothing out of the ordinary in the court process," Ocean County Prosecutor's Office spokesman Al Della Fave posted on Facebook on Wednesday. "The prosecutions are far from over. It is typical for all defense attorneys representing defendants without a prior record and charged with a third degree crime to apply to the court for (pretrial intervention). Their application will undergo review and is not necessarily a given."


The pretrial intervention program is generally available to first-time non-violent offenders, according to the state judiciary, and requires a prosecutor's approval to participate.


The perks for defendants? They can avoid permanent convictions on their records. For taxpayers, the program saves time and costs of staffing courtrooms.


The pretrial intervention program is separate from a special amnesty program being offered to Ocean County residents.


More: Lakewood fraud arrests spawn teachable moment


Following the raids in county's largest city, the state comptroller offered a program allowing welfare recipients to repay any wrongfully received benefits, plus a fee, to avoid prosecution.


Responding to criticism that the amnesty program gave favorable treatment and allowed people to dodge jail time, State Comptroller Philip James Degnan previously noted that many offenders would qualify for the pretrial intervention probationary program — meaning they would not face jail time, anyway.


More: Lakewood struggling to move past fraud charges, controversies


More: Lakewood Medicaid cheats stay home; amnesty meeting attracts few


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

In Ocean County Superior Court:


Fiscal year 2016-17:


1,458 pretrial intervention program applications


2,481 new criminal cases went on to be indicted


Fiscal year 2015-16:


1,892 pretrial intervention applications


3,424 new criminal cases


Source: New Jersey Administrative Office of the Courts


Stacey Barchenger: 732-643-4245; sbarchenge@gannett.com
