Photo: AP

A couple and their two baby girls were killed Tuesday when their car veered into oncoming traffic and was smashed by a van on a Mojave Desert highway, authorities said.

The couple, who were in their 20s, and a girl about a year old died when their green Kia sedan veered out of control at about 10:30 a.m. on the Sierra Highway in Palmdale, north of Los Angeles, investigators said.

Another girl, also believed to be about a year old, died at a hospital.

The adults were wearing seatbelts and the children were in car seats, authorities said. Their names were not immediately released.

The car was T-boned by a vanpool from the Antelope Valley Transit Authority. It wasn’t carrying passengers but the driver was taken to a hospital for treatment of non-life threatening injuries, authorities said.

Television news footage showed a passenger van with its front end crushed and a completely demolished car.

“We believe speed may be an issue” and investigators would use skid marks to help determine how fast the car was going when it crossed into oncoming traffic, Los Angeles County sheriff’s Detective Rowell Quemuel told KABC-TV.


A police dog in Spain apparently has been trained to perform CPR. In a video of a demonstration posted on Facebook by 




Narendra Modi, whose supporters boast of his physical prowess and indifference to sleep, has shared the secrets to his 




Modern great Cristiano Ronaldo left Real Madrid to join Italian champions Juventus for 100 million euros ($117 million)




The UAE Cabinet has adopted a decision to implement the value added tax refund system for tourists, which will 




George Clooney was launched 20 foot into the air after his motor scooter smashed into a car at 60mph in Italy earlier 




The Thai hospital where the 12 boys and their soccer coach are recuperating after being rescued from a flooded cave has




The Pakistani Taliban on Wednesday claimed responsibility for an overnight suicide bombing at a rally that killed a 

