By

Hannah Moore For Dailymail.com


and 
Ap






  Published:
  18:37 EDT, 3 July 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  14:12 EDT, 5 July 2018







           3

View  comments

Bryan Byrd (left) and Lei'lani Cathey (top center), were killed in a horrific car crash on Tuesday, along with their daughters Lei'niyah (bottom center) and Blayre (right)

 A couple and their two baby girls were killed on Tuesday when their car veered into oncoming traffic and collided with a van on a Mojave Desert highway, authorities said.


The engaged couple, Bryan Byrd, 21, and Lei'lani Cathey, 20, and their daughter, who is about a year old, died when their green Kia sedan veered out of control at about 10.30 am on the Sierra Highway in Palmdale, north of Los Angeles, investigators said.


Their second daughter, also believed to be about a year old, died later in hospital.


The young girls are Lei'niyah Byrd, 2, and Blayre Bird, 1. It is not clear which daughter died in the car and which in hospital. 


Authorities said Leilani and Bryan were wearing seatbelts and their children were in car seats.


The car was T-boned by a vanpool from the Antelope Valley Transit Authority. 


It wasn't carrying passengers but the driver was taken to a hospital for treatment of non-life threatening injuries, authorities said.


Television news footage showed a passenger van with its front end crushed and a completely demolished car.


Los Angeles County sheriff's Detective Rowell Quemuel told KABC-TV police believe speed may have contributed to the crash.


He said investigators would use skid marks to help determine how fast the car was going when it crossed into oncoming traffic.


The young family were in a green Kia (right) driving along a highway in Palmdale when they crashed into an AVTA van (left)

The couple, who were engaged to be married are being mourned widely on social media (left: Lei'lani, right: Bryan)

The car was completely destroyed in the crash, which investigators believe may have been caused in part by speed

Quemel told NBC many of the detectives at the scene were shaken by the severity of the crash, and encouraged people to slow down on the road. 


'This is very difficult to see when we have a family that passed away from a traffic collision,' he said. 


'That's why we try to enforce speed in Palmdale because it is a problem.'


The young family are being mourned deeply by friends online, and a GoFundMe has been set up to help pay for their funerals. 


Bryan's sister Carolyn wrote on Facebook: 'I love you guys so much this is so hard... I know y'all in a better place I just can't wrap my head around this'.


'Please come back.'


The front of the AVTA van was badly smashed, but the driver was taken to hospital with non-life threatening injuries

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group