An Elgin man in jail awaiting trial in a 2015 murder was sentenced to 15 years in prison on previous drug charges, Kane County officials said Monday.


On Friday, William M. Ingram, 30, first block of Poplar Creek Drive, was sentenced by Circuit Judge Donald M. Tegeler, Jr., to the Illinois Department of Corrections following a July jury trial.


Ingram was convicted of a class X felony count of unlawful possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver within 1,000 feet of a church, a class 1 felony count of unlawful possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver, a class 4 felony count of unlawful possession of a controlled substance and a misdemeanor count of driving with a suspended license.


According to the release, sometime after 8 p.m. June 20, 2014, Elgin police saw Ingram drive into the parking lot of a business in the 500 block of Tollgate Road in Elgin.


Elgin officers recognized Ingram and knew he was driving on a suspended license, wanted on an arrest warrant and on parole.


Officers found a plastic bag containing 1.7 grams of cocaine on the ground between the open car door and the car immediately after Ingram was removed from the car.


When police searched Ingram, they found $4,700 cash.


Ingram told police he went to the location to sell drugs, and he was selling drugs because he needed money. The location is about 200 feet from a church in the 500 block of Church Road in Elgin.

Ingram has multiple convictions in Kane and McHenry counties since 2007, according to court records.


Ingram is charged with first-degree murder in the 2015 killing of Devonte Turner in Elgin. That case is pending, and Ingram's next court appearance in the case is April 5.


The drug case was prosecuted by Kane County Assistant State's Attorneys Greg Sams and Joseph Gay.


A Kane County jury convicted an Elgin man on Monday for possessing cocaine he planned to sell near a church, according to a news release from the Kane County State's Attorney.

William M. Ingram, 30, of the 0-99 block of Poplar Creek Drive in Elgin, was convicted of a class X felony count of unlawful...

"At the time he was arrested in this case Mr. Ingram was a convicted drug dealer and on parole. He is a threat to the safety of the community and belongs in prison," Kane County State's Attorney Joe McMahon said.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for the Courier-News.