The Chicagoist archives brought to you by WNYC. Read the press release here.

Chicagoist is a website about Chicago

     Brian Peck / Elgin Police Department
 A 55-year-old man is charged with murdering his mother and dumping her dismembered remains in duffel bags in the Lincoln Park Lagoon, according to authorities. Prosecutors reportedly said Brian M. Peck told investigators he killed his mother after a confrontation boiled over when she said he was playing Jimi Hendrix too loud.

Brian Peck faces two counts of first-degree murder and one count of concealment of a homicidal death in the death of his mother, Gail Peck, 76, Elgin police announced on Tuesday.

Human remains were discovered inside two duffel bags in the Lincoln Park Lagoon on Saturday morning after a fisherman called authorities, according to Chicago police. The police department began working with Elgin detectives after Peck's disappearance was reported "as to the possibility that the body found was Gail Peck." 

"Evidence that the body was that of Gail Peck was obtained after thorough research by investigators, and DNA testing is also currently being conducted to verify this evidence," Elgin police said in a release on Tuesday.

Brian Peck was the one who reported his mother missing, on Friday afternoon, according to Elgin police. Peck told police that his mother went for a walk with her dog. The dog returned home, but she did not, Peck reported, according to police.

Prosecutors reportedly said that Gail Peck was killed on Wednesday.

Brian Peck told authorities that his mom pulled out a military knife during an argument after she complained that his music was too loud, prosecutors said at a bond hearing on Tuesday, according to the Courier-News. He said he then kicked out his mother's legs and stomped on her legs and neck, prosecutors reportedly said.

Brian Peck pleaded guilty to domestic battery last year after his mother said her son punched her in the face and tried to choke her, according to the Courier News.

Peck was ordered held without bail on Tuesday.