Heavy rain caused the Fox River to to flood Tuesday and prompted the National Weather Service to issue a flood warning through the early Monday morning.


More than two inches of rain in Elgin caused the river to be close to spilling onto the bike path near the Grand Victoria Casino on Wednesday morning and flooded Walton Island Park, located between the Hemmens Cultural Center and Gail Borden Public Library, Elgin Police Department spokeswoman Kristie Hilton said.


Varsity Drive near Elgin High School was temporarily under water and blocked off with barricades up, Hilton said. Also hard hit was the city’s west side and Tyler Creek, city spokeswoman Molly Center said. The city received more than two inches of rain Tuesday, she said.


Royal Boulevard was closed for a period of time as was Eagle Road and Diane and Deborah avenues in the Eagle Heights neighborhood were under water this morning, Center said. City crews were out clearing catch basins in areas where water has subsided, she said.


In St. Charles, the Fox River overflowed its banks in some locations and strong currents were noted, according to a City of St. Charles news release. Officials advised residents to stay out of the river and floodwater and to avoid submerged paths and other flooded areas.


“We understand people are captivated by the power of the river and seeing flooded areas under water. But the river at this stage is extremely dangerous,” St. Charles Fire Chief Joe Schelstreet said in the release. “Never enter floodwater, no matter how shallow it seems. The water can contain debris and contaminants that are detrimental to your health.”


The heavy rains forced the closure of First Street and Lincoln Avenue in West Dundee's riverwalk.


“But this morning we found (the water level) was down about a foot and it seems to be receding so we haven’t mobilized to do any sandbagging yet,” West Dundee Public Works Director Eric Babcock said. "We're doing OK."

“The forecast calls for (the water levels) to continue to recede,” Babcock said.


The reporting station along the Fox River in Algonquin was near major flood stage Tuesday night, according to the National Weather Service. The highest level recorded was 11.92 feet, just short of the12-foot major flood stage level. It had dropped to 11.2 feet but Wednesday morning, but the flood warning is in place through Monday, the weather service said.


Forecasts are calling for extreme heat to move into the area by week’s end, with highs in the mid-90s predicted for Friday and Saturday, the weather service said.


Freelance reporter Erin Sauder contributed to this story.


MORE COVERAGE:  Officials confirm 2 tornadoes in Will County, 1 in Kane; Manhattan post office damaged; hot weather on the way »


raguerrero@tribpub.com


Twitter @rafaguerrero14