Homeless people who were staying in a local man's basement were never at risk of being thrown out in the cold, Elgin Mayor David Kaptain said Monday.


"If they choose to go to another shelter, we take people," to those shelters, he said.


Kaptain's statement was in response to national coverage following a Courier-News story about a makeshift shelter that was shuttered by code enforcement citations. Kaptain made the comments because he feared that information was lost in the coverage.


Following a December story in the Courier-News, news outlets including the New York Times, New York Post and NBC News reported on Elgin's decision to shut down a makeshift basement shelter. Kaptain said he and other city employees have received numerous emails, phone calls and social media comments because of the media attention.


"We take people from downtown all the time and find them transportation," to any local shelter, if they ask for it, Kaptain said.


On most nights since Christmas Eve, Tammy Wheatley has left her full-time job and headed to Elgin's First United Methodist Church for her volunteer job — coordinating the emergency homeless shelter.

She and other volunteers, rotating a sleeping schedule, stay at the church for 12 hours, from 7...

Elgin officials on Monday met with Greg Schiller, the resident who set up cots in an unfinished basement, to talk about moving forward and identifying potential gaps in the city's services, said Assistant City Manager Laura Valdez.


"The big thing here is that he put these people at risk in his basement. We did what we needed to do. It is our obligation once we are told of a code violation and putting these people at risk — we have to act on it. There is no choice for us as a city," Kaptain said. "The city is responsible for our residents. Once we know, we have to act and make sure they are safe."


Kaptain, who was not at the city hall meeting, said what may have been lost in the reporting is that the homeless who were staying in the basement were not thrown out in the cold.

Elgin has a robust social service network "that does attract people from other areas," Valdez said.


The police department's social service division leads regular Community Assessment and Management of People needing Shelter meetings that bring together almost 60 people who represent nonprofits, shelters, churches and other agencies providing services to the homeless. Schiller was invited to rejoin that organization, Valdez said.


In the case of the basement shelter, the city had to respond to a potentially dangerous situation that also runs afoul of the city's zoning ordinance, Kaptain said.


The zoning ordinance specifically bans using hotels or motels, hospitals, nursing homes and care facilities, as well as single and multi-family homes, as emergency homeless shelters. Those are defined in the zoning ordinance as "residential facility providing lodging and meals for no more than 12 hours per day to homeless persons."


A year after an Elgin resident was cited for allowing people to sleep in a garage in the 400 block of Lawrence Ave., he has been cited again after he said he let people who are homeless sleep in his unfinished basement.

Greg Schiller said his reading of city code allows for "slumber parties," and...

The house, owned by Schiller's girlfriend, Teresa Quarles, was also cited for code violations, including outdoor storage of a port-a-potty and tires, and a broken window. They were given time to correct those code violations and were not fined, Valdez said. Schiller compared his basement shelter to a "slumber party," where friends gathered to watch TV with him on some cold nights.


Schiller did not respond to a phone call seeking comment Monday.


Elgin city officials said the city offers a number of services to the homeless. Police have a printed list of services to give to those seeking shelter and food, city officials said.


Shelter spaces include spots for at least 100 people needing shelter, Kaptain said, including the Public Action to Deliver Shelter location at 1730 Berkley St., the emergency shelter at the First United Methodist Church of Elgin at 216 E Highland Ave., and the Elgin Police Department.


The police department lobby was once open all day every day, but began to close at 10:30 p.m. until 6 a.m. a few years ago. The homeless are allowed in the lobby during business hours to stay warm.


Kaptain said the city could revisit some policies including reopening the police department lobby as an overnight warming station.


"I think we should talk about that," Kaptain said Monday.


Kaptain said he also wants to discuss raising the temperature at which the Matthew 25:40 Ministry of Elgin — which operates the First Methodist Church's emergency shelter — may open.


When the shelter first opened five winters ago, the city limited it to opening when air temperatures were expected to reach 10 degrees or below, said Tammy Wheatley, who coordinates the emergency shelter for the church.


That temperature was raised to 15 degrees during the 2016-2017 winter season with the Elgin Police Department's blessing, officials said. The PADS shelter, which typically is open from 7 p.m. to 7 a.m., began staying open all day during the recent cold snap.


Kaptain said the city may consider allowing the emergency shelter to open at 32 degrees, but that it hasn't been determined if that means air temperature or wind chill.


"Let's get that defined and where are we going from here," Kaptain said.


While a higher temperature threshold is appreciated, the question is whether the First Methodist Church can handle the extra hours in the facility that allows several other groups to use the space for activities and rehearsals, Wheatley said.


"They might not want that impact on their building," Wheatley said.


The national attention to Elgin's homeless residents has brought out a few volunteers, she said.


"I have had people fill out an application, and a few have signed up for hours so far," Wheatley said.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for the Courier-News. 