If a majority of the Elgin City Council has its way, the city’s next police chief will come from within department ranks.


The council held a public discussion on the selection process at its Wednesday committee of the whole meeting in the wake of the departure of Chief Jeff Swoboda, who left for a new chief job in Fort Collins, Colo., and the resignation of interim Police Chief Bill Wolf, who is leaving to take a deputy chief post in Schaumburg.


While no vote was taken, an informal count done by Mayor Dave Kaptain showed that he and council members Terry Gavin, Rose Martinez, Toby Shaw and John Steffen want City Manager Rick Kozal to appoint a new chief from among the department’s current employees. Three others — Tish Powell, Richard Dunne and Corey Dixon — prefer a broader search and Councilwoman Carol Rauschenberger is undecided.


Kaptain said he believes the department has strong candidates and it makes more sense to promote from within its ranks.


“This applies to all departments. If we can’t grow good employees, we have failed this city,” Kaptain said. “I am proud of the people who work here.”


Powell said she didn’t disagree, but thought the council would be better served by deciding what they’re looking for in a new chief and setting a vision for the department’s future before deciding if what they’re seeking fits the qualities and credentials of someone on staff.


Picking the right chief is especially important now, she said, because of the ongoing Illinois State Police investigation into the police shooting death of Elgin resident Decynthia Clements in March.


“We should be committed to casting a wide net, as we have discussed in the past, to ensure that we find the most qualified pool of applicants from both inside and outside of our organization,” Powell said. “Having an open and transparent process that includes providing opportunities for citizen engagement along the way and defining our values as a community are an essential component of this process.”

Gavin noted that with a city manager-style of government, the appointment is Kozal’s to make. The residents he’s heard from, Gavin said, have told him they’d like Elgin to promote from within or the city risks losing more staff to other towns.


“Another community will take our best,” he said.


Shaw agreed that Elgin is at a critical juncture right now and while the decision will be Kozal’s, his choice for Swoboda’s successor would be Cmdr. Ana Lalley.


“We know what we have. It’s hard to find good people,” Shaw said.


Dunne, who attended the meeting by phone because he was out of town for his job, said opening the search beyond the Elgin department could bring in new ideas. Past Police Chief Chuck Gruber, he said, came from an outside department and brought community policing concepts to Elgin.


“There’s a value to seeing what’s outside,” Dunne said.


mdanahey@tribpub.com