Only days after being named interim chief for the Elgin Police Department, Deputy Chief Bill Wolf has accepted a new job as deputy police chief for the village of Schaumburg, Elgin City Manager Rick Kozal said Tuesday.


Kozal appointed Wolf Friday to fill the temporary vacancy created by the departure of Jeff Swoboda, who started a new job Monday as police chief in Fort Collins, Colo.


Wolf, 49, is a 26-year department veteran who was made a lieutenant in 2006, commander in 2012 and deputy chief in 2013.


Schaumburg spokewoman Allison Albrecht declined to confirm that Wolf had been offered the job, which is contingent upon background checks and other pre-employment paperwork.


"It is the village’s practice that candidates applying for positions and any offers extended for positions within the village are kept confidential until the appropriate time," Albrecht said.


According to the Schaumburg deputy chief job posting on govhrusa.com, the person chosen deputy chief would be considered for the chief’s job at a later date.


“The new deputy police chief will have a unique opportunity to learn about the department from the current chief of police while contemplating the possibility of transitioning into the top leadership role when the chief retires,” the job posting said. “Although not definite, the new deputy chief will be given strong consideration for promotion upon the chief’s retirement, based completely on merit, experience, abilities, education and fit.”


The current Schaumburg police chief is James Lamkin, a former Elgin deputy chief who left in 2003 for the top job in St. Charles. He took over Schaumburg’s police department in 2013.

Under Elgin ordinances, the city administrator is in charge of hiring the chief of police and chooses the process by which the position is filled, Elgin Mayor David Kaptain said.


"It is (Kozal's) decision to look outside or deeper into staff that is already there,” Kaptain said. “Jeff Swoboda said at his (retirement) ceremony that anyone in the (command staff) is capable of taking over.”


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.