


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Sen. Bob Menendez joined dozens of faith leaders and activists outside a federal immigration detention center in Elizabeth on Friday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    U.S. Sen. Bob Menendez says at a rally outside the Elizabeth Detention Center that the Trump administration is criminalizing asylum seekers.
    Steph Solis, @stephmsolis

U.S. Sen. Bob Menendez blasts President Donald Trump’s executive order in a speech he gave Friday morning, June 22, 2018, during a rally outside the Elizabeth Detention Center.
(Photo: Stephanie Solis/NorthJersey.com)

Dozens of faith leaders, public officials and human rights activists rallied outside a federal immigration detention center in Elizabeth on Friday, demanding the immediate reunification of families that have been separated after crossing the southwestern border.


Sen. Bob Menendez, D-N.J., said President Donald Trump's move on Wednesday to end the practice of separating children from their parents under a new "zero tolerance" approach to immigration enforcement had not solved many of the problems that the new policy had created.


“Let me be clear about the executive order signed by Trump,” Menendez said. “It doesn’t end the ‘zero-tolerance’ policy. It doesn’t stop criminalizing asylum seekers. Nor does it address how to reunite the thousands of young children separated from their parents.”


Behind him, a protester held up a banner-sized photo of young immigrant children behind a fence sleeping with emergency thermal blankets. 


An estimated 2,300 families have been torn apart since April under the “zero-tolerance” policy, which orders the criminal prosecution of anyone who is caught crossing the border illegally.


More: 'What I saw ... is inhumane:' NJ Democrats meet with detainees separated from children


More: New Jersey agency has federal contract to shelter migrant children


More: NJ Democrats demand end to immigration policy of separating families at the border


By taking suspected unlawful immigrants into criminal custody, immigration authorities were forced to remove their children, some of whom were diverted to "tender age" shelters for children under 13. The separation of families sparked a public outcry from human rights advocates and elected officials from both parties.


Trump signed his executive order under enormous pressure after White House officials said that only Congress had the power to reverse the practice. It states that families should be detained together unless immigration authorities determine a parent posed a threat to the child.


“What we’re seeing here is ugly. We can’t believe this is happening here in this country,” Pablo Pizarro, pastor of the Lighthouse Assembly of God church in Newark, said in Spanish,” but we want to let everyone here today know that we are all foreigners, we are all immigrants, we are all families.” 


U.S. Sen. Bob Menendez, left center, holds hands with faith leaders as Newark Pastor Pablo Pizarro leads protesters in a prayer Friday morning outside the Elizabeth Detention Center, Friday, June 22, 2018. (Photo: Stephanie Solis/NorthJersey.com)

Mayor Adrian Mapp of Plainfield compared the detention of children to the separation of black babies from their enslaved mothers. The infants were sold and later put to work on plantations in the South and the Caribbean until the 19th century.


“Several generations grew up not knowing the solace of mother’s love or the warmth of family circles,” Mapp said, urging people to speak out against family separations along the border.


The Elizabeth Contract Detention Facility also was the site of a protest on Sunday. Seven Democratic House members from New Jersey and New York met with detainees, some of whom said they had been separated from their children after crossing the border. Nearly 500 people took part in a protest following the visit. 


Protesters gather Friday morning outside the Elizabeth Detention Center protesting the separation of more than 2,000 immigrant families along the Southwest border. (Photo: Stephanie Solis/NorthJersey.com)

Rep. Frank Pallone, D-Monmouth, said representatives spoke with a man from Central America who was separated from his 7-year-old brother after the two entered the United States. The man said he left his native country because he had been targeted by drug leaders, Pallone said. Another detainee told the lawmakers he had been separated from his 5-year-old daughter, who he believes may be in Michigan.


The protest on Friday came a day after New Jersey announced it would join a multi-state lawsuit demanding a reunification process for families and allowing asylum petitions along the border under U.S. asylum law.


“Today we stand together as Christians and Jews and Muslims and everyday human beings, saying all families belong together,” Menendez said. “The America we know doesn’t put children in cages.” 


Steph Solis: @stephmsolis; 732-403-0074; ssolis@gannett.com
