Warning, this post contains upsetting content about the sexual exploitation of children.





The Alabama man wanted for a viral child rape video that was shared widely on Facebook has been arrested. His fiancée was also arrested; cops say she helped him evade arrest.

Authorities in Elmore County, AL say the man sought for his suspected role in the investigation turned himself into authorities at 2:30 am on Tuesday. Germaine Moore, 44, is currently being held at Elmore County Jail.


Alabama Internet Crime Against Children Task Force Lt. Brooke Walker told a reporter that press attention led to the predator's surrender.




"We're definitely glad he's in custody,'' Walker told AL.com Tuesday. "I"ve been doing this for 12 years, and he's the top."


Moore faces 11 felony charges, and more are expected to be filed. Snip:

The little girl in the video, whose age is not being released, was located and is safe.

Moore is charged in Alabama with sexual assault of a child, distribution of video depicting the assault and first-degree criminal sexual conduct. More charges against Moore are expected, said Tony Garrett, executive director of Crime Stoppers.


If you or someone you know shared this video, or snuff clips like it, authorities have one word for you.

Stop.


I have 7 more. 


What the fuck is wrong with you.

Said Madison County Chief Trial Attorney Tim Gann today, to all who viewed and shared the clip on social media, 

“If you saved it, if you posted it to your page, if you sent it to someone else,” Tim Gann, Madison County Chief Trial Attorney explained, “you’re disseminating child porn and that’s a felony. If you are in possession of it, no matter your good intentions, that is also a felony. So, in this case, it’s very disturbing that people feel like it’s ok to post something awful happening to a child on social media.”


 Moore's fiancee, Tonya Hardy, was arrested Monday night when she failed to cooperate with investigators after a search of Moore's home. From AL.com:

She will be charged with hindering prosecution. Though she goes by the last name of Moore, her social media indicates they planned to be married later this year.





From reporting at ABC News:


WSFA-TV reports that 44-year-old Germaine Moore turned himself in to Millbrook Police around 2:30 a.m. Tuesday. He is charged with sexual assault of a child, distribution of video depicting the assault and first-degree criminal sexual conduct.


News outlets report that the victim has been located and is safe.


Crime Stoppers executive director Tony Garrett tells Al.com that more charges are expected.


State Bureau of Investigation Lt. Brooke Walker says Moore's fiancee was arrested Monday night and is not cooperating.


Moore also is wanted in Detroit, where prosecutors allege that he sexually assaulted three girls.


The video circulating on Facebook and other social media as far as Colorado and France shows a young girl performing oral sex on an adult.


Montgomery Police charged 42-year-old Jerrell Washington with distributing it, and warn that anyone who shares the video, even in outrage, can be charged as well.



[PHOTO: Germaine Moore, 44, and his fiancee Tonya Hardy Moore. “Alabama state authorities say Moore is the suspect sought in a viral video where a young girl was forced to perform oral sex on him. His fiancee is charged with hindering prosecution after investigators say she refused to tell them Moore's location and was uncooperative.” (Elmore County Jail via Al.com]




There’s a long history of TV programs that exploit the personal struggles of individuals for ratings. Now there’s a new game show that tackles the student loan crisis. Like its predecessors in this genre, it’s bad.




The BBC reports that the last of the boys trapped deep in a flooded Thai cave is out, along with their coach. • All 12 members of a Thai youth football team and their coach have been brought safely out of the cave in northern Thailand • Eight boys rescued on Sunday and Monday are […]




YouTube just unveiled a plan to combat phony conspiracy videos intended to manipulate or defraud viewers.


		

		
		





We all lead unique lives and, as a result, experience stress in different ways. So, when it comes to dealing with anxiety, wouldn’t it make more sense to choose a tailored solution over a cookie-cutter one? That’s the mindset driving Mindbliss and its unique, AI-curated meditations. Lifetime subscriptions are available today for $49.99. Designed to […]




From wedding proposals to college graduations, there’s nothing wrong with reaching for the camera to capture a special occasion, but sometimes a photo isn’t quite enough to immortalize life’s greatest moments. Whether you walked down the aisle or into your first home, Strellas Personalized Star Maps commemorate your biggest milestones on a stellar scale. You […]




With the ability to recognize images, curate playlists, and even hold a decent conversation, we wouldn’t blame you if you thought AI innovations like Siri were powered by magic. Of course, the reality is that, rather than shamrocks and pixie dust, these breakthroughs are made possible thanks to advancements in machine learning technology and a […]






Read the rules you agree to by using this website in our Terms of Service.

We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.

Boing Boing uses cookies and analytics trackers, and is supported by advertising, merchandise sales and affiliate links. Read about what we do with the data we gather in our Privacy Policy.

Who will be eaten first? Our forum rules are detailed in the Community Guidelines.

Boing Boing is published under a Creative Commons license except where otherwise noted.

		Mark Frauenfelder
     		Cory Doctorow
     		David Pescovitz
     		Xeni Jardin
     		Rob Beschizza

Jason WeisbergerPublisher

Ken SniderSysadmin

		About Us
				Contact Us
				Advertise
				Forums
				Shop	
				Shop Support