

Chronicle News Services


                  1 Ex-congressman imprisoned: Former Rep. Anthony Weiner reported to prison Monday to begin a 21-month sentence for sexting with a 15-year-old girl. Weiner is being held at the Federal Medical Center Devens in Massachusetts, a Bureau of Prisons spokesperson said. The facility in Ayer, about 40 miles west of Boston, has over 1,000 inmates at the medical center and over 100 more at an adjacent minimum security satellite camp. Weiner was sentenced in September by a judge who said the crime resulted from a “very strong compulsion.” Amid a sexting controversy involving women, the New York City Democrat resigned his House seat in 2011 only to have new allegations doom his 2013 run for mayor.


                  2 Corruption trial: A jury on Monday began deliberations in the bribery and fraud trial of Sen. Bob Menendez, D-N.J., and a wealthy friend. Attorneys concluded closing arguments as the trial in Newark entered its 10th week. Menendez is charged with accepting gifts from Florida eye doctor Salomon Melgen, a longtime friend, in exchange for pressuring officials on behalf of Melgen’s business interests. Both men have denied any wrongdoing. Menendez’s lawyer told jurors the prosecution never presented actual evidence of a bribery agreement and didn’t sufficiently connect alleged bribes to actions by Menendez. In a rebuttal summation, a prosecutor accused the defense of using a strategy of “distraction and misdirection.”


                  3 Plane crash: A small plane crashed in the southern New Mexico community of Hatch, killing all four people on board, authorities said Monday. The cause of Sunday’s crash of the single-engine plane about 300 yards from the airport in Hatch was not immediately known. The Federal Aviation Administration is investigating. The victims, from Texas, were identified as Anthony Deramus, 57, Christopher Howell, 33, Kanequa Chancellor, 41, and Malcolm Watkins, 25. Watkins lived in Waxahachie, Texas, and the others were from El Paso.


                  4 Contaminated water: A judge on Monday began hearing testimony against a Michigan official who faces criminal charges tied to a Legionnaires’ disease outbreak during the Flint water crisis. Twelve people died. Dr. Eden Wells is the state’s chief medical executive. She is charged with involuntary manslaughter, obstruction of justice and lying to an investigator. The state attorney general says Wells and others could have saved lives by telling the public about a Legionnaires’ outbreak. It wasn’t disclosed until January 2016. A judge must decide if there is sufficient evidence to send Wells to trial.


                  5 School threat: A man threatened a staff member at a private university in Orange County and posted videos of himself holding guns and talking about a desire to go on a killing rampage, police said Monday in announcing his arrest. Authorities said they got a report Wednesday about an email exchange between David Kenneth Smith, 39, of Los Angeles, and the staff member over discipline Smith faced for marijuana use when he attended Soka University in Aliso Viejo in 2008. Smith then emailed the staffer a link to a YouTube video showing him with a semi-automatic pistol on his chest speaking about the school, the Sheriff’s Department said in a statement. He had also recently posted other videos of himself holding weapons and speaking of his desire to kill, authorities said. Smith was arrested on suspicion of criminal threats.


                  6 Rapper name: Rapper and producer Sean Combs has changed his nickname once again. In a video posted to Twitter Saturday, Combs said he was celebrating his birthday by changing his name to “Love, a.k.a. Brother Love.” Combs says he won’t be answering to Puffy, Diddy, Puff Daddy or any of his other monikers. Before announcing what he called “serious, serious news,” Combs explained that the name change was due to the fact that he has changed as a person and is not who he was before. He says he knows changing his name again is “risky” and may come off as “corny.” He turned 48 on Saturday.


                  Chronicle News Services
                