

Danielle Brooks is helping reshape body acceptance and slaying while doing so in a new Lane Bryant lingerie ad. And she’s not the only one stripping down. Azealia Banks takes it all off for a hot shot. Check it inside…

 



Danielle Brooks is a curvy girl who loves her body and it makes us love her even more.

The “Orange Is The New Black” star is featured in a new Lane Bryant lingerie campaign, “#ImNoAngel, and she’s totally changing the game. Gone are the days where you have to be a size zero to be considered beautiful.

The new ad, which debuted during the EMMYs, features Danielle alongside a group of curvy, fly chicks – including Ashley Graham, Denise Bidot and Candice Huffine – who open up about their insecurities. In spite of struggling with different parts of their bodies, they love their imperfections.

"The truth is, the spirit of #ImNoAngel has been ingrained in all of our major brand initiatives since the campaign's initial debut in 2015. Empowering women will never go out of style," Lane Bryant CMO Brian Beitler said in a press release.

And we’re all about women empowerment around these parts, especially with as much ish we have to deal with on a daily. It’s nice to see someone uplift and hold us up on a pedestal for once.

Peep the inspirational ad below:



 

Speaking of taking it all off...



Azealia Banks has NO issue with baring her naked bod. She debuted her new track "Escapades" with nude flicks last month and now she's back with another hot shot.

The Harlem native stripped down to her birthday suit for an Instagram shot where she posed it up in metallic gold paint…and nothing else.

The “212” rapper is gearing up to head out on tour in North America real soon. The 19-stop tour is set to kick off October 3rd in Grand Rapids, MI and will wrap up October 31st in NYC.

Peep the dates below:

October 3 Grand Rapids, MI - The Intersection

October 4 Chicago, IL - Concord Music Hall

October 5 Detroit, MI - St. Andrew's Hall

October 8 Toronto, ON - The Opera House

October 10 Baltimore, MD - Ram's Head Live

October 11 Norfolk, VA - The Norva

October 12 Wilmington, NC - The Muse

October 14 Atlanta, GA - Masquerade

October 15 Jacksonville, FL - Mavericks Live

October 17 New Orleans, LA - Tipitina's

October 18 Houston, TX - Warehouse Live

October 20 Dallas, TX - Gas Monkey

October 21 Austin, TX - Empire Control Room

October 23 El Paso, TX - Tricky Falls

October 24 Phoenix, AZ - The Van Buren

October 25 Las Vegas, NV - Brooklyn Bowl

October 26 Reno, NV - Cargo

October 28 San Francisco, CA - Mezzanine

October 31 New York, NY - Villain

Tickets are on sale now on her website.

Are you copping tix to see her live?

Photos: Danielle's IG/Azealia's IG






Get every story in your inbox!

