Our website uses cookies to improve its performance and enhance your user experience. Through cookies, certain personal data is collected and may be stored temporarily. You can change your cookie settings through your browser. More info: Privacy Policy

NEW YORK (Sputnik) - Asylum seekers and immigrants in the US state of New Jersey are being held in unsanitary and inhumane conditions in facilities that lack clean water or health services, Human Rights Watch said in a report released on Tuesday.

"The conditions in immigrant detention facilities are harsh and often inhumane. Detained immigrants — held under civil, not criminal, authority — are forced to endure a range of hardships, from dirty drinking water to harassment to solitary confinement," the report said. "Many also receive inadequate medical and mental health care."

In February 2018, a group of researchers from Human Rights Watch visited three detention centers in New Jersey — the Elizabeth Contract Detention Facility, the Essex County Correctional Facility, and the Hudson County Correctional Facility, according to the report.

READ MORE: Human Rights Issues Deepen Under Trump, Yet Stem From Other Presidents — Amnesty

While the prolonged detention of immigrants has been a long-standing problem in the United States, the conditions in the facilities have deteriorated over the years, the researchers found.

US President Donald Trump's administration has adopted the harsh approach of keeping asylum-seekers and migrants in detention for the duration of their proceedings.

READ MORE: Rebuked: US Supreme Court Won't Hear White House Appeal of DACA Ruling

The researchers, who were joined on their visits by health and legal professionals, concluded in their report that the detention centers suffer from conditions similar to those found in US correction facilities, including racism, discrimination, and harassment from staff.

The report slammed the "prolonged and unnecessary" detention of immigrants due to lack of viable release mechanisms, such as parole, which in turn harms migrants' chances of securing relief from deportation.

The fact of registration and authorization of users on Sputnik websites via users’ account or accounts on social networks indicates acceptance of these rules.

Users are obliged abide by national and international laws. Users are obliged to speak respectfully to the other participants in the discussion, readers and individuals referenced in the posts.

The websites’ administration has the right to delete comments made in languages ​​other than the language of the majority of the websites’ content.

In all language versions of the sputniknews.com websites any comments posted can be edited.

A user comment will be deleted if it:

The administration has the right to block a user’s access to the page or delete a user’s account without notice if the user is in violation of these rules or if behavior indicating said violation is detected.

Users can initiate the recovery of their account / unlock access by contacting the moderators at moderator@sputniknews.com

The letter must contain:

If the moderators deem it possible to restore the account / unlock access, it will be done.

In the case of repeated violations of the rules above resulting in a second block of a user’s account, access cannot be restored.

To contact the team of moderators, write to moderator@sputniknews.com

Get push notifications from Sputnik International