
;        
        .fc-pinned-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/KENS.png') calc(100% - 45px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
        .fc-dialog-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/KENS.png') calc(100% - 20px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
     



San Antonio Weather Summary: 91 degrees

A teenage gunman is accused of killing 10 people and injuring 10 more Friday at Santa Fe High School, about 30 miles southeast of Houston.


It happened a little more than six months after an attack at Sutherland Springs First Baptist Church in November left 25 people dead, plus an unborn child, and more than 50 years after a University of Texas sniper ushered in what would be considered the modern era of mass killings in America.

In between in Texas were six other mass shootings in public places. Totaled, the eight events have killed 100 people and injured more than 130.


Here is a look at the history of mass shootings in the Lone Star state.


The University of Texas Tower 


Monday morning, Aug. 1, 1966, was hot at the University of Texas at Austin when Charles Whitman took guns, ammunition and canned food to the observation deck of the UT tower and fired at people on the campus below over a period of 96 minutes.


He killed 14 people and injured more than 30 from his position at the top of the tower. Before arriving on campus, he killed his mother and his wife. 


► 10 dead: Gunman opens fire at Texas high school, explosives found
► Shooting suspect: Dimitrios Pagourtzis hid firearms under long coat
► One more: Sante Fe high school shooting in Texas is at least the 20th of 2018


Whitman was shot and killed when police officers and a civilian came to the top of the tower to stop the bloodshed. 


Whitman was 25 and had been a student at the university. Before starting at UT, he was a sharpshooter in the Marines.


Starburst Lounge, El Paso


Barry Chvarak was 21 years old Feb. 3, 1980, when he walked into the Starburst Lounge in El Paso and used a .22-caliber rifle to kill five people and injure three others. 


An account of the incident from an Associated Press story described how one customer at the bar grabbed Chvarak while “another hit him with a pool cue and a third stepped into the path of a bullet to spare a woman’s life.” 

► The tally: 2017 is the deadliest year for mass killings in at least a decade
► Their stories: From Vegas to Texas to Florida, precious lives lost
► Database: Explore U.S. mass killings from 2006 through 2017


Two customers at the bar “subdued Chvarak and held him until police officers arrived. He was arrested and his bond was set at $1 million, according to the AP story. 


Chvarak pleaded guilty to the murders and was sentenced to five concurrent life sentences. He is serving his sentence at a state prison unit in Potter County, Texas. 


When he was eligible for parole in 2000, family members of the people he killed circulated a petition in El Paso to oppose his parole and ensure he was not released, according to an El Paso Times article. He was denied parole again in 2016.


Luby's Cafeteria, Killeen


At lunch time on a Wednesday, Oct. 16, 1991, in Killeen, Texas, George Jo Hennard drove his pickup truck into Luby’s Cafeteria and used a semiautomatic pistol to kill 23 people and injure about 27. 


As police officers arrived at the restaurant, Hennard turned the gun on himself and took his own life. 


There were about 80 people at the restaurant, many of whom were celebrating National Boss’ Day, according to a 1991 story in The New York Times. 


At the time, this was the deadliest mass shooting in the country. 


Wedgwood Baptist Church, Fort Worth


When Larry Gene Ashbrook walked into a youth service at Wedgwood Baptist Church in Fort Worth, he was armed with a semiautomatic handgun, 200 rounds of ammunition and a pipe bomb. 


Ashbrook fired on the group and killed seven people, including several teenagers, according to a 1999 story in The New York Times. He wounded seven others and died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound before law enforcement arrived at the church.


Fort Hood, near Killeen


Eight years before Sutherland Springs, a U.S. Army officer brought a semi-automatic pistol to Fort Hood, a military base near Killeen.  

Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, an Army psychiatrist, killed 13 people and injured more than 30 others when he opened fire at a group of people at a processing center on the base. The area was for soldiers returning from deployment and those preparing to deploy.


► Grieving: 'We will be the last mass shooting,' Parkland students said. They aren't.
► White House: President Trump promises action after Texas school shooting


Twelve He killed 12 service members and one employee from the Department of Defense. 


Hasan was shot by police and survived, but was paralyzed from the waist down. In 2013, he was found guilty of the murders and sentenced to death. 


This event is the deadliest mass shooting at a U.S. military installation. 


Fort Hood, again


Nearly five years after Hasan killed 13 people at Fort Hood, Army Spec. Ivan Lopez used a .45-caliber pistol to kill three people and injure at least 12 others after his request for time off was not approved. 


Lopez died from a self-inflicted gunshot to the right side of his head. 


First Baptist Church, Sutherland Springs


Dressed in black tactical gear and wielding at semi-automatic rifle, Devin Patrick Kelley burst into the quiet country church south of San Antonio and started shooting worshippers at the Sunday morning service.


The attack would claim 26 lives, including an unborn baby whose mother also died, and become Texas' deadliest shooting and the worst church shooting in U.S. history.


► The guns: Those in Texas killing were less lethal than in other mass shootings
► Your kids: 4 tips for talking to your children about tragedy


The gunfire stopped once Stephen Willeford, a plumber who lives near the church, grabbed his own rifle and took aim at the gunman, hitting him twice. As the gunman fled in his vehicle, Willeford and a passing motorist he flagged down, chased after him.


The gunman took his own life when the chase came to an end. 


Follow Madlin Mekelburg and John C. Moritz on Twitter: @madlinbmek and @JohnnieMo

.