
						


						Senators assistant GM Randy Lee 
						
							Darren Brown / Postmedia						
					

BUFFALO, N.Y. — The lawyer representing Ottawa Senators assistant general manager Randy Lee says he plans to file a motion to dismiss “inappropriate, unsubstantiated” harassment charges against his client.


On Friday, Lee appeared in a Buffalo city court, where he entered a not guilty plea to a second charge of harassment. He will return to court on July 20 to argue for a dismissal before judge Amy C. Martoche.


“There’s no offence or violation of the law,” attorney Paul Cambria said. “These are low-level accusations. He has denied them completely.”


Lee is accused of inappropriately touching and making lewd remarks toward a 19-year-old hotel shuttle driver in May while in Buffalo for the NHL scouting combine. He was arrested on May 31 and plead not guilty to the initial charge of second-degree harassment.


Both charges are non-criminal violations in the U.S. court system. The first charge defines harassment as “striking or making physical contact with another person,” and the second charge refers to an individual who “repeatedly commits acts which alarm or seriously annoy,” according to a spokesperson from the Erie County district attorney’s office.


The alleged incident occurred at 10:30 p.m. on May 30. Erie County District Attorney John J. Flynn has said Lee was returning to the Westin from a downtown restaurant and bar, 716. The hotel is owned by Boston Bruins owner Jeremy Jacobs and 716 is in the HarborCenter complex owned by Buffalo Sabres owners Terry and Kim Pegula.


Lee, who has since been suspended by the Senators, is accused of rubbing the driver’s shoulders and making comments referencing his own genitalia.


Cambria said he is not aware of any video evidence of the alleged incident.


“We would wish that there were videos and other things so that we could have them,” Cambria said. “But we’ll see. There may be a motion for discovery as well.”


Cambria said he has been contacted by the civil attorney representing the driver.


As reported by this newspaper, the family of the alleged victim has retained the lawyer with a view toward potentially suing both Lee and the Senators.


“His accusation is that his shoulders got rubbed and now he wants a payday,” Cambria said. “That’s what it appears to be. … And obviously, we’re not interested in anything like that. But it’s a relevant factor that needs to be taken into consideration as to whether this is some sort of money grab.”


Cambria is a prominent criminal defence attorney who has previously represented Hustler magazine publisher Larry Flynt, as well as NHL stars Patrick Kane and Evander Kane.


Cambria questioned whether this case would be handled differently if Lee did not hold a prominent position with an NHL team.


“I think it’s because of this man’s job, it’s gotten all this attention,” Cambria said. “I’ve never seen anybody from the district attorney’s office have a press conference about a non-criminal violation. And that happened for whatever reason. But our hope is that this is handled for what it is, a low-level accusation which my client vehemently denies.”


Lee has been with the Senators for 24 years and most recently played a pivotal role in the club’s decision to move its AHL affiliate from Binghamton to Belleville.


If found guilty, Lee could face a fine and up to 15 days in jail, although the district attorney noted he wouldn’t seek jail time.

365 Bloor St East, Toronto, ON, M4W3L4, www.postmedia.com

© 2018 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.

Powered by WordPress.com VIP