Stay up to date on Portland news and politics. Looking for fun? Here are the best Things to Do in Portland today.




GOOD MORNING, BLOGTOWN! I'll never see you if I had no loot, I'll never see them. I'm just glad I know the truth. LET'S GO TO PRESS.

Oregon gives another rousing "fuck yewwwwww" to Trump by joining in the lawsuit against questioning a person's citizenship in the upcoming census.

Multnomah County Republicans believe that students are being "brainwashed" by PPS into not wanting to get killed by guns in their schools. THIS JUST IN... Multnomah County Republicans are idiot dingbats.

Portland developer Homer Williams is stepping up with a late-breaking offer to turn the Wapato Jail into a homeless shelter, right when Multnomah County commissioners are considering a deal to sell it.

Special Counsel Robert Mueller reportedly told Trump he is not currently under criminal investigation... but is it a trap to get him into questioning, where he will most certainly lie and commit perjury? If so... DON'T TELL TRUMP!!

UNRELATED, I'M SURE: Trump tells Baltic leaders, "I think I could have a very good relationship with President Putin." Now, this I believe.

In an astounding bid to waste more taxpayer money, Trump is considering sending military troops to guard the border where he intends on building a wall. 

For those who fucking hate EPA Chief Scott Pruitt, rejoice! Because he's the latest administration official currently in Trump's crosshairs.




Sorry Libs but it's perfectly ethical for a lobbyist to gift the EPA director a free mansion in return for the right to dump a million tons of flaming nuclear garbage in Lake Erie. Read the Constitution

Today is the 50th anniversary of the assassination of Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.—and the four days that followed his death changed America forever.




50 years ago today, I learned the painful news that my friend, my mentor, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. had been assassinated in Memphis, TN. He was my brother, my leader—that day it felt like something died in all of us. pic.twitter.com/WkjkxJvXTC

BECAUSE GUNS KEEP US SAFER: "A woman with a gun opened fire Tuesday at YouTube’s headquarters, shooting three other people and then turning the handgun on herself and committing suicide in an outburst of violence that sent terrified employees fleeing to the streets, officials said."

Police have identified the YouTube attacker as Nasim Najafi Aghdam of Southern California, and the NYT added this disturbing sidenote: "While the police have not provided a possible motive, Ms. Aghdam had alleged that YouTube and Google, which owns it, took measures to hurt her website in search results and reduce the number of views on her videos."




The YouTube HQ shooting is proof that this is NOT just schools. Our country has a GUN problem. End of story.— Jaclyn Corin (@JaclynCorin) April 3, 2018

Sinclair Broadcast Group’s Executive Chairman David Smith had this to say about print media: “The print media is so left wing as to be meaningless dribble which accounts for why the industry is and will fade away. Just no credibility.” Says the man who forces his employees to spout embarrassing screeds about "fake news."

Hollywood power couple Channing and Jenna Dewan Tatum have announced their separation in a treacly-worded press release GROSS.




Please separate Roseanne, the character, from the real-life Roseanne, the person who inspired the character, and believes all the same things as the character, also named Roseanne pic.twitter.com/D6dhy4NSmt

Now let's ponder the WEATHER: Light showers with a high of 58 kicks off a wet end to the week!

And finally, the theme song from The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air is improved exponentially when rapped in Italian. END OF DISCUSSION!!

Sign up for the latest news and to win free tickets to events

Buy tickets to events around Portland

Great deals on local businesses

Print Archives


            
              All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204
            
          


            Contact
            |
            Privacy Policy
            |
            Terms of Use
            |
            Takedown Policy
          


          
            All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204
          
        


          
            Contact |
            Privacy Policy |
            Terms of Use |
            Takedown Policy
          
        