The push to expand detention space shows how the Trump administration is not solely focused on undocumented immigrants crossing the southwest border with Mexico.


The most likely candidates to land any new contracts are the two prison REITs that have dominated the market and donated heavily to Trump.


We are maintaining a BUY and of course, we believe that investors can profit from this prison REIT.

“Abolish ICE” has become the new rallying cry of the left, which is trying to turn the fury Americans are feeling about the horrors at the Mexican border on the little-understood agency known as U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

ICE was created in 2003 as part of a government reorganization that took place in the wake of 9/11 and part of its role in the new Department of Homeland Security was to run enforcement of immigration law in the interior, combining some of the functions of the old Immigration and Naturalization Service and the U.S. Customs Service. Washington Post columnist, Karen Tumulty explains



“There are fair criticisms that ICE has become unwieldy and that its reputation sometimes interferes with its ability to do its job. Detention and deportation, which grew sharply under President Barack Obama, have also become more common since ICE’s creation.

But ICE is not responsible for what we’ve seen at the border in the past few months, particularly the heinous practice of separating parents from their children.”



Photo Source

It’s the U.S. Customs and Border Protection agency that manages access to the U.S. borders and ICE is responsible for enforcing immigration laws within the country. ICE also engages in anti-smuggling efforts, money laundering investigations and arresting criminal illegal aliens.

Jason Nichols writes this opinion on Fox:

“While abolition of ICE has been the recent rallying cry for some, the better description of what’s needed for ICE is restructuring. We want ICE or whatever comes after it to protect us from cyber criminals, human traffickers, gunrunners, and international drug cartels – not farm workers, day laborers, college students and children.”

According to Carl Takei, a staff attorney with the ACLU's National Prison Project:

“The Obama administration focused heavily on apprehending people on the border, but the Trump administration is targeting people in U.S. communities very far from the border. And because they are targeting cities far from the border, they are looking for detention space in areas where historically they haven’t had as much detention space."

He went on to say:

“To me, this is a signal that ICE wants to be ready, pen in hand, to sign new detention contracts as soon as Congress appropriates more money for detention.”

The push to expand detention space shows how the Trump administration is not solely focused on undocumented immigrants crossing the southwest border with Mexico. Last Fall ICE conducted a nationwide sweep dubbed "Operation Safe City" that resulted in more than 450 arrests of people living in Baltimore, Chicago, Denver, New York, Philadelphia, Seattle, Washington, D.C. and Massachusetts.

The most likely candidates to land any new contracts are the two prison REITs that have dominated the market and donated heavily to Trump. According to USA Today:

“Florida-based GEO Group donated at least $475,000 to Trump's inauguration festivities and a Super PAC that supported Trump's presidential campaign. Tennessee-based CoreCivic, the other major private prison contractor in the U.S., gave $250,000 to support Trump’s inauguration.”

The federal government announced that it had awarded a $457 million contract to GEO Group (GEO) to build and operate the 1,000-bed immigration detention center outside of Houston. According to this Seeking Alpha article:

“GEO expects to aggregate everything under a 10-year contract with ICE, inclusive of renewal option periods. The project is expected to generate around $44 million in annual revenues, a return on investment consistent with GEO's other company-owned facilities. Over the ten-year length of this contract, GEO will be booking $440 million of additional revenue.”

During 2017, GEO continued to expand its portfolio of diversified correctional, detention, and community reentry facilities and services by activating a company-owned, 780-bed Folkston ICE Processing Center during the first quarter under a five-year intergovernmental service agreement between Charlton County, Georgia and U.S. Immigration and ICE.

This facility activation was followed by a ten-year contract award from ICE for the development and operation of a new 1,000-bed ICE Processing Center in Montgomery County, Texas. The new company-owned center is scheduled for activation in Q3-18. As George C. Zoley, CEO of GEO explains:

“We are proud of our extensive record of helping meet ICE’s needs with facilities that are highly rated and provide high-quality, cost effective services in safe, secure, and humane residential environments.”





As you know, the concept of investing in the prison system is somewhat controversial, because the motives for profit encourage incarceration.

So, while I will attempt to examine the fundamentals of GEO, I do not encourage or discourage investors to participate in the selection of a prison-based REIT. Personally, I view the sector like any investment and I recommend that each investor conduct his or her own due diligence before purchasing shares.

In fact, investing in prisons can be quite lucrative, considering that many States are grappling with budget deficits and higher spending. According to Investopedia:

“These budget issues are compounded when adding in the fact that we love to lock-up inmates in America. Currently, the U.S. has the highest incarceration rate of any developed nation.”

According to Bureau of Justice Statistics, the United States sends roughly 754 per 100,000 people to jail. The U.S. only represents about 5% of the total global population, but its inmate population is nearly a quarter of all those incarcerated around the world.

More importantly, that inmate population is growing at a 5% annual rate. As such, state prisons currently have a 96% occupancy rate, while federal prisons are at 140% of capacity. In some areas, prisons are so overcrowded that criminals are being released early. Source: Investopedia

All in all, these two tailwinds benefit private prison operators GEO and CoreCivic (CXW) (formerly Correction Corporation of America).

Together, these REITs currently operate around 75% of the for-profit prison market in the United States.

On January 8th we initiated a BUY on GEO citing “(that) growing inmate populations have created the need for additional capacity. I am encouraged by GEO’s focus on improved rehabilitation and community re-entry programs (also in line with efforts undertaken by government agencies to invest a meaningful rehabilitation and recidivism reduction programs). This 8% dividend is relatively safe and the opportunity for enhanced share price appreciation is obvious.”





Since my BUY upgrade

The GEO Group was established in 1984. The Boca Raton-based REIT provides secure corrections and detention management services as well as secure transportation services to government customers in the US and internationally. GEO Corrections &amp; Detention oversees the operation and management of correctional and detention facilities in the United States, Australia, South Africa, and the United Kingdom. The company listed on the NYSE in 1996 and converted to a REIT in 2013.





Source: Yahoo Finance

GEO’s U.S. Corrections &amp; Detention division oversees the operation and management of approximately 75,000 beds in 64 correctional and detention facilities providing services on behalf of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, U.S. Marshals Service, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement as well as 10 state correctional customers and various local jurisdictions.

The daily oversight of GEO’s U.S. Corrections &amp; Detention facilities is coordinated from three regional offices located in Charlotte, North Carolina; San Antonio, Texas; and Los Angeles, California.

Each regional operating structure is headed by a Regional Vice President who oversees approximately two dozen experts in security, medical, financial, contract compliance, human resources, and other support services. This regional operating structure enables GEO to implement superior quality controls, develop personalized professional relationships, and ensure the delivery of a full complement of high quality services.





GEO’s International Services division provides correctional and detention services for government agencies in the United Kingdom, Australia, and South Africa managing seven correctional and detention facilities encompassing approximately 8,000 beds, including projects under development. Through wholly-owned subsidiary and joint-venture companies, GEO’s International Services division provides correctional solutions that are fully customizable and tailored to each government customer’s requirements and standards.





GEO’s in-house transportation division, GEO Transport, Inc., provides secure transportation to federal, state, and local government customers in the US and internationally. With the flexibility and resources to provide both ground and air transfer services, GTI helps government agencies meet their increasing need for secure transportation.

GTI employs approximately 450 licensed transportation officers and operates a fleet of approximately 380 customized and U.S. Department of Transportation compliant vehicles. GTI provides support services, including strategically located transportation centers nationwide; proprietary GPS satellite tracking software (GEOTrack); two-way communications, in-vehicle recording, and continuous vehicle monitoring; constant communication link with all service vehicles; and ground support to book and re-route vehicles.





GEO operates as both a REIT and a TRS (Taxable REIT Subsidiary) that allows the TRS to offer more services to the tenants than the REIT. The reason the TRS structure is advantageous is that it does not require the company to technically have a change of control - it can stay one entity. As of Q1-18, the REIT owned 103 facilities (62,042 beds) and the TRS managed 38 facilities (34,149 beds).





Here's a map illustrating GEO’s US operations:





Here’s a map of GEO’s International operations:





As part of a broader political move to focus on prison reform, there's a growing governmental shift on rehabilitation. By also growing the halfway house business, GEO should mitigate some of the headwinds associated with the previously mentioned "incarceration for profit" argument.

GEO Care oversees the ‘GEO Continuum of Care’ division, GEO’s community re-entry centers, day reporting programs, and youth services facilities along with the provision of electronic and location monitoring services to governmental agencies across the US.





Through the delivery of high-quality, innovative, and effective programs, GEO Care has established itself as the premier provider of diversified community re-entry and rehabilitation services.

GEO Care’s diversified business divisions have leading market positions in the operation of community based re-entry programs; rehabilitation services for youthful offenders; and supervision services for individuals in the community through cutting-edge electronic monitoring technologies.

GEO Reentry provides individuals with the resources necessary to productively transition back into society. Through approximately 50 reentry centers, GEO Reentry provides federal and state parolees and probationers with temporary housing, employment assistance, rehabilitation, substance abuse counseling, and vocational and education programs.

GEO Reentry also offers services through evidence-based cognitive behavioral treatment programs at more than 60 non-residential reentry centers nationwide, which have the capacity to serve more than 5,000 parolees and probationers on behalf of state and local government agencies. Through these services, parolees and probationers are provided behavioral assessments, treatment, supervision, and education.





For more than four decades, GEO Care’s Abraxas division has provided residential, shelter care, and alternative education programs specifically designed to address the needs of individuals within the juvenile justice system with programs tailored to young individuals in need of mental health, behavioral health, and drug and alcohol treatment.





Abraxas oversees more than 1,200 youth services beds spanning a dozen residential facilities and additional non-residential programs, which serve a diverse base of state and local government agencies that rely on this network of facilities to treat the young individuals in their care.

Through its wholly-owned subsidiary, BI Incorporated (founded in 1978), GEO Care is the leading provider of community supervision and electronic monitoring services to federal, state, and local government agencies with a presence across all 50 states.

BI monitors approximately 123,000 individuals through electronic monitoring technologies, in addition to providing case management services to another 43,500 individuals. Through the Intensive Supervision and Appearance Program, a core component of the Department of Homeland Security’s Alternatives to Detention program, BI is the sole provider of community supervision and monitoring services for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.





BI offers government agencies a combination of leading proprietary electronic monitoring products and superior customer service:

GEO Group has taken significant steps to strengthen its position as the world’s leading provider of evidence-based rehabilitation programs both in-custody and post-release. What started as an innovative concept a few years back is now being implemented at more than a dozen GEO facilities around the country. The ‘GEO Continuum of Care’ integrates enhanced in-custody rehabilitation programs including evidence-based treatment with post-release support services.

GEO owns and/or operates approximately 18 million square feet that generates around ~70%+ of NOI through owned/leased facilities.

According to the company website, the economic useful life of an asset is around 75 years, and there are very low CapEx requirements (~5% of NOI). One key opportunity for the GEO is to capitalize on the high barriers to entry and offer development services. The GEO prison portfolio is significantly younger than the states where the company operates. Land and buildings comprise around 90% of GEO's fixed assets.

GEO has financed and developed dozens of facilities since the mid-1980s. The real estate portfolio consists of around 53,000 owned/leased beds at 74 facilities. The high barriers to entry attributes include (1) difficult permitting and zoning, (2) long development lead times, (3) high capital intensity, and (4) supply shortage. Here's a snapshot of GEO's revenues:



Here's a snapshot of the diversified customer base (44% Federal Government) and top 10 customers:





Here’s a snapshot of GEO’s managed customer base:



With the acquisition of CEC, GEO is now fully integrated with approximately 96,000 beds worldwide, which makes the company the largest private corrections and detention provider in the private sector and the fifth largest among all unified corrections organizations in the world.





GEO has approximately $500 million in available capacity under its revolving credit facility, in addition to an accordion feature of $450 million (under the credit facility).

In terms of our uses of cash, GEO’s growth Cap-Ex is expected to be approximately $120 million in 2018, of which approximately $39 million was spent during Q1-18. GEO also has approximately $10 million in scheduled annual principal payments of debt.





GEO is rated BB- by S&amp;P (CXW is rated BB) and the company’s continued strong performance of its diversified business units has allowed it to increase its quarterly dividend payment. In April, GEO declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.47 per share, or $1.88 per share annualized. The dividend payment is well within its guided payout ratio of 75% to 80% of AFFO and is supported by stable and predictable operational cash flows.





In Q1-18 GEO reported net income of $0.29 per diluted share and AFFO of $0.57 per diluted share on quarterly revenues of approximately $565 million. Compared to Q1-17 GEO’s results reflect several items including a year-over-year increase of approximately $3.7 million in net interest expense attributable to higher interest rates, as well as higher overall outstanding debt balances.

GEO updated full-year guidance and has issued guidance for Q2-18: The company expects full-year net income to be in a range of the $1.27 to $1.35 and adjusted net income to be in a range of $1.30 per diluted share to $1.38 per diluted share on revenue of approximately $2.3 billion. GEO expects full year AFFO to be in a range of $2.45 per diluted share to $2.53 per diluted share.





The full-year guidance for 2018 does not presently assume the reactivation of any of GEO’s approximately 7,000 idle or underutilized beds, which will presents upside to the forecast.





For Q2-18 GEO expects total revenues to be in a range of $571 million to $576 million. The company expects Q2-18 net income to be in a range of $0.30 to $0.32 and adjusted net income to be in a range of $0.31 per diluted share to $0.33 per diluted share. GEO expects the AFFO for the second quarter 2018 to be between $0.59 per diluted share and $0.61 per diluted share.

In the states where GEO operates, the average age of state prisons range from approximately 30 years to 60 years.

The State of Kansas recently awarded a contract for the development of a new 2,400-bed facility to replace the state’s oldest present facility.

The State of Wisconsin has discussed the potential development of new facilities to replace one or more of the state’s oldest prisons.

The State of Vermont has discussed a privately developed and financed option for a new 1,000-bed correctional facility.

As referenced above, GEI is developing a new 1,000 bed ICE processing center in the Houston area under a new 10-year contract awarded by ICE last year. The new center is expected to cost approximately $120 million and will be completed at the end of Q3-18 with the expected annualized revenues of $44 million. David Donahue, GEO’s president, explains,

“…During the first quarter we experienced a steady increase in the utilization rates across our ICE facilities. We are also awaiting an award decision on a pending procurement for the management of a government-owned 700-bed Florence, Arizona processing center. ICE also has a pending solicitation for secure transportation services in the San Antonio, Texas area, proposals were submitted last year and we are currently awaiting an award decision.”

In May, the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate approved an omnibus appropriations bill funding the federal government through September 30th.The omnibus bill included an increase of approximately $82 million in funding for the U.S. Marshals Service and an increase of approximately $105 million in funding for the BOP. The bill also included an increase in funding for enforcement detention and removal operations under ICE including funding to support approximately 40,500 detention beds.

Looking forward to the federal government’s fiscal year 2019, which begins October 1st, earlier this year, the President released his budget request. The President’s proposed budget for fiscal year 2019 includes a funding request for ICE to support the hiring of 2,000 additional ICE law enforcement officers and 750 border patrol agents, as well as a total of 52,000 detention beds.

Now let’s compare GEO’s valuation, starting with the dividend yield:





Now let’s review the P/FFO multiple:





Now let’s compare the year-to-date Total Return performance:





How to play it: GEO is continuing to generate reliable and predictable earnings growth, and we expect the company to outperform in 2018 and 2019 (data: FAST Graphs).





As viewed below, GEO has maintained strong occupancy levels and the focus on improved rehabilitation and recidivism reduction programs is in-line with criminal justice and prison reform efforts being undertaken in the U.S. and internationally. GEO expects these efforts to generate new revenue synergies and quality growth opportunities across the diversified Geo-care divisions.





We are maintaining a BUY and of course, we believe that investors can profit from this prison REIT:



All Strong Buy picks can be viewed in my Marketplace service (The Intelligent REIT Investor). We recently announced our first subscriber-only call with Brad Thomas. Join Brad every Friday at 2:00 PM ET. Subscribe NOW.

Note: Brad Thomas is a Wall Street writer, and that means he is not always right with his predictions or recommendations. That also applies to his grammar. Please excuse any typos, and be assured that he will do his best to correct any errors, if they are overlooked.

Finally, this article is free, and the sole purpose for writing it is to assist with research, while also providing a forum for second-level thinking. If you have not followed him, please take five seconds and click his name above (top of the page).

Sources: F.A.S.T. Graphs and GEO Investor Presentation.

Disclosure: I am/we are long ACC, AVB, BHR, BRX, BPY, BXMT, CCI, CHCT, CIO, CLDT, CONE, CORR, CTRE, CUBE, DEA, DLR, DOC, EPR, EXR, FRT, GEO, GMRE, GPT, HASI, HT, HTA, INN, IRET, IRM, JCAP, KIM, KRG, LADR, LAND, LMRK, LTC, MNR, NNN, NXRT, O, OFC, OHI, OUT, PEB, PEI, PK, PSB, PTTTS, QTS, REG, RHP, ROIC, SBRA, SKT, SPG, STAG, STOR, TCO, TRTX, UBA, UMH, UNIT, VER, VNO, VNQ, VTR, WPC. 

I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.