
              William Strampel appears on a monitor during his video arraignment, Tuesday, March 27, 2018, in East Lansing, Mich. Strampel, a Michigan State University official who oversaw Larry Nassar, was arrested Monday amid an investigation into the handling of complaints against the former sport doctor, who is in prison for sexually assaulting patients under the guise of treatment. (AP Photo/Paul Sancya)
            


              William Strampel, left, appears during his video arraignment, with Judge Richard D. Ball, right, Tuesday, March 27, 2018, in East Lansing, Mich. Strampel, a Michigan State University official who oversaw Larry Nassar, was arrested Monday amid an investigation into the handling of complaints against the former sport doctor, who is in prison for sexually assaulting patients under the guise of treatment. (AP Photo/Paul Sancya)
            


              Judge Richard D. Ball listens to William Strampel during his video arraignment, Tuesday, March 27, 2018, in East Lansing, Mich. Strampel, a Michigan State University official who oversaw Larry Nassar, was arrested Monday amid an investigation into the handling of complaints against the former sport doctor, who is in prison for sexually assaulting patients under the guise of treatment. (AP Photo/Paul Sancya)
            


              A court officer works in the courtroom as William Strampel, left, appears during his video arraignment with Judge Richard D. Ball, Tuesday, March 27, 2018, in East Lansing, Mich. Strampel, a Michigan State University official who oversaw Larry Nassar, was arrested Monday amid an investigation into the handling of complaints against the former sport doctor, who is in prison for sexually assaulting patients under the guise of treatment. (AP Photo/Paul Sancya)
            


              William Strampel, left, on monitor, appears during his video arraignment with Judge Richard D. Ball, left, Tuesday, March 27, 2018, in East Lansing, Mich. Strampel, a Michigan State University official who oversaw Larry Nassar, was arrested Monday amid an investigation into the handling of complaints against the former sport doctor, who is in prison for sexually assaulting patients under the guise of treatment. (AP Photo/Paul Sancya)
            

EAST LANSING, Mich. (AP) — The Latest on the Larry Nassar sexual abuse case (all times local):

7:10 p.m.

Lawyers for Michigan State University and more than 200 girls and women say they're restarting talks that could lead to a settlement in civil lawsuits related to sexual abuse by former sports doctor Larry Nassar.

In a court filing Tuesday, the parties say they're scheduling mediation with Layn Phillips, a former federal judge in Oklahoma.

Michigan State, campus officials, USA Gymnastics and a Lansing-area gymnastics club are being sued. Nassar's victims say complaints about the doctor were ignored for years.

The court filing was made on the same day that Nassar's former boss, ex-medical school Dean William Strampel, was charged with crimes. He's accused of failing to properly supervise Nassar and committing his own sexual misconduct.


___

3:15 p.m.

The attorney for a Michigan State University official is denying that his client ever inappropriately touched medical students or received sexual favors in exchange for boosting their standing in school.

William Strampel, who was a supervisor of disgraced former sports doctor Larry Nassar, was arraigned Tuesday by video from jail on four charges. His lawyer, John Dakmak, told reporters that Strampel instructed Nassar of protocols to adhere to in 2014 after a patient complained, and that Strampel "followed up" with Nassar.

Dakmak says he expects to prevail on all charges, and "we look forward to our day in court."

East Lansing District Judge Richard Ball set a $25,000 personal recognizance bond and determined that Strampel is not a flight risk.

___

12:40 p.m.

A prosecutor says a Michigan State University official failed to supervise Larry Nassar at a critical time when the sports doctor was facing allegations of sexual misconduct in 2014.

Bill Forsyth announced charges Tuesday against William Strampel, who was dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine until December. He's accused of willful neglect of duty in his dealings with Nassar. He's also charged with groping female medical students.

Forsyth says the neglect-of-duty charges are "somewhat nebulous" or not as well-defined as other crimes. He says there was a "lack of supervision" over Nassar when the doctor was ordered to have another person in the room during certain exams.

Nassar is serving decades in prison for sexual abuse and possessing child pornography.


___

9:45 a.m.

A Michigan State University official who oversaw a clinic where former sports doctor Larry Nassar worked is facing criminal charges for allegedly inappropriately touching a student and storing nude photos of female students on his work computer.

William Strampel, who was dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine until late last year, was charged Tuesday with a felony, a high court misdemeanor and two misdemeanors. He is due to be arraigned in the afternoon.

The complaint charges Strampel with fourth-degree criminal sexual conduct, neglect of duty and misconduct of a public official.

The 70-year-old Strampel told police last year he never followed up after ordering Nassar in 2014 to have a third person present when providing treatment to "anything close to a sensitive area."

Nassar will spend his life in prison for molesting patients under the guise of treatment.

___

9 a.m.

A Michigan State University official is facing four charges in an investigation into the handling of complaints against the former sports doctor Larry Nassar, who was convicted of molesting women and girls in his care.

William Strampel, who was dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine until late last year, was charged Tuesday with a felony, a high court misdemeanor and two misdemeanors. After a judge authorized the charges, a state police detective declined to tell reporters what charges Strampel is facing, saying a news conference is scheduled for later.

Strampel is due to be arraigned in the afternoon.

The 70-year-old Strampel told police last year he never followed up after ordering Nassar in 2014 to have a third person present when providing treatment to "anything close to a sensitive area."

Nassar will spend his life in prison for molesting patients under the guise of treatment.

___

1:50 a.m.

A Michigan State University official who oversaw Larry Nassar is facing criminal charges amid an investigation into the handling of complaints against the former sport doctor, who sexually assaulted patients under the guise of treatment.

William Strampel, who was dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine until December, will be arraigned Tuesday after his arrest Monday.

Ingham County Sheriff Scott Wriggelsworth told The Associated Press that Strampel was in custody. He declined to say what charges Strampel is facing because the probe is being led by the Michigan attorney general's office.

A news conference is scheduled for Tuesday.

Strampel told police last year he never followed up after ordering Nassar in 2014 to have a third person present when providing treatment to "anything close to a sensitive area."