Your inside source on North Carolina politics and government

By Dan Kane



                                            dkane@newsobserver.com
                                        


                        
                            March 15, 2018 03:52 PM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

Over the past four years, the North Carolina affiliate of the ACLU has queried the state’s sheriffs for public records to determine if teenaged inmates are being protected from sexual assault and how many people are locked up for failing to pay court fees.

It is a difficult task just reaching out to the sheriffs, given there are 100 of them from Murphy to Manteo. But some of those sheriffs have made these queries even more arduous by telling the ACLU if they want the records, they have to visit their departments to get them.

That’s because North Carolina’s public records law doesn’t require state and local agencies to mail records either electronically or via a delivery service at a reasonable cost to the requester. It gives agencies that option, or to simply make the records available on site.

“Upon your inspection of any such records at our office, and upon your request, we will be glad to provide copies of any public records that you are permitted by law to inspect,” Anson County Sheriff Landric Reid wrote to the ACLU in a letter dated Jan. 30.

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

In 2014, that meant ACLU lawyers drove hours to places far from Raleigh, where the ACLU’s chapter is located, to obtain records regarding the jails’ procedures for the protection of teenagers. They picked up records as far away as Transylvania County in the North Carolina mountains. Now, it’s likely to mean many more miles on the road to find out whether recent laws that have upped court fees are turning jails into debtors prisons.

“Obviously the practical impact of that is it makes it exceptionally difficult for any organization in the state to do any statewide public records requests,” said Chris Brook, the legal director of the state ACLU.

In both cases, some sheriffs were acting on the guidance of the North Carolina Sheriffs’ Association, which gave them memos advising them they could choose to provide access to the records or send them along. The word “access” is underlined in the memos.

“In response to the ACLU-NCLF request for records, the obligation under the law is to provide access to the records,” wrote Eddie Caldwell, the association’s executive vice president and general counsel in the most recent memo.

Caldwell said he’s providing sheriffs legal advice based on the state public records statutes.

“We don’t advise sheriffs on what they ought to do,” he said. “We just advise them if they have a legal question -- what’s the statute and what we know about it.”

His memos also noted that “some law enforcement legal advisors have interpreted our public records law to mean that you have an obligation to provide (including sending them via U.S. Mail) copies of records without requiring the (ACLU) representative to come to your office and sort through the relevant documents for themselves first.”

Brook said sheriffs in Chatham, Forsyth and Halifax counties were “exemplars” in providing records without requiring he or his staff to pick them up.

Jonathan Jones, director of the North Carolina Open Government Coalition and Sunshine Center at Elon University, said Caldwell is right on the law, and lawmakers ought to take a look at fixing it.

“They can say, ‘We’ve prepared your records, come pick them up,’ and that can be really unreasonable,” Jones said. “I’ve seen some state agencies do this to folks in the mountains, and say, ‘It’s ready, come get them in Raleigh.’”

Brook said that approach may reflect the letter of the law, but not the spirit, which is to make records readily available to the public. He said the ACLU chapter has not seen this approach taken by other local governmental entities, such as school districts.

He said finding out how many people are being jailed for unpaid fines or fees is an important criminal justice issue. 

“We know that this is a problem in our state, we know that North Carolinians are being locked up because they don’t have the money to pay court costs and fees,” he said. “We need to solve that problem and part of solving the problem is being able to document its scope and breadth.”

He identified Lincoln county’s sheriff department among those who told the ACLU they had to pick up records four years ago, and is now telling the ACLU it will have to come and inspect records this time, too.

Lincoln County Sheriff David Carpenter said he can’t recall what happened in 2014, but this year he said his department doesn’t have an easy way to identify how many inmates were serving time in jail over an unpaid fee or fine. That information is in court orders the department has that provide a reason for an inmate’s stay, but that reason is not logged into the department’s electronic data system.

But he said his department is not averse to collecting and sending records.

“The bottom line is if we have the information and it’s available to be sent, we’re happy to do that,” he said.

Dan Kane: 919-829-4861, @dankanenando


Inmate death information


Last year, The News &amp; Observer requested inmate death information from all 100 sheriffs for its Jailed to Death series. Roughly two-thirds of the sheriffs responded, providing copies of state-mandated death reports and disclosing any court awards or settlements paid involving inmate deaths since 2005. Some counties reported no deaths or payouts.


The N&amp;O saw no indication of a response from many of the rest. In some cases, officials said they were aware of the request but provided no information. Buncombe County, for example, did not respond to two emailed requests for information on Feb. 1 and 23. After an N&amp;O reporter called the department, a spokeswoman contacted an editor at the newspaper to ask about the request.


The editor and reporter confirmed the request to the spokeswoman, Natalie Bailey. That was roughly three months after the initial request. The N&amp;O could find no indication of records being provided. The N&amp;O ended up identifying deaths in Buncombe’s jail through a records request to the state Department of Health and Human Services’ Construction Section, which investigates deaths.


In October, the state cited the jail for a lack of supervision regarding the death of Michele Quantele Smiley, 34. She had admitted ingesting methamphetamine before her arrest on Oct. 6, and should have been on a four times per hour watch, the state said. More than half an hour had passed before her last check, when she was found in distress. She later died at a hospital. Her family has told The Asheville Citizen-Times they are taking legal action.


                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    