Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Sunny. High 94F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low 71F. Winds E at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

ST. LOUIS • A former husband and wife team who helped operate an illegal sports betting business in the St. Louis area for years was sentenced to 366 days in prison this week.

U.S. District Judge Henry Autrey sentenced Carol Jean “CJ” Hazer, 61, of Farmington, on Wednesday and Samuel Douglas “Doug” Hazer, 63, of Alabama, on Tuesday. Autrey also ordered CJ Hazer to pay $57,500 to the IRS and banned her from gambling.

The Hazers and Joseph Mahfood, 59, of St. Louis County, earned nearly $500,000 by taking bets on various games, including college and professional football games from 2008-2014, prosecutors said.

Prosecutors say CJ Hazer and Mahfood also lied on tax returns for years, failing to declare gambling-related income.

In court, CJ Hazer's lawyer, Doug Forsyth, said gambling drove her to participate, and cost her the bulk of the proceeds of the crime.

Samuel Hazer pleaded guilty in September to five counts: running an illegal gambling business, money laundering and other gambling-related charges.

CJ Hazer pleaded guilty the same day to two gambling charges, one money laundering charge and four charges of filing a false tax return.

Mahfood pleaded guilty in August to gambling charges, filing a false tax return and money laundering and received probation at his sentencing in November. He was also ordered to pay the IRS $147,450.

Robert Patrick is a reporter for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.


                                    
                                        Whenever Robert Patrick posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.



Get breaking news delivered to your inbox as it develops.