

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

When King County Sheriff's detectives identified the person they 
believe killed a man in Shoreline Saturday, they found he was already in
 jail -- he was arrested nine hours after the slaying on a separate 
crime.


When King County Sheriff's detectives identified the person they believe killed a man in Shoreline Saturday, they found he was already in jail -- he was arrested nine hours after the slaying on a separate


The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County communities compare in terms of fatal shootings.


The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click through for a look at how King County’s communities compare.


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click


Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s
as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related
deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from gunshots,
including accidents and suicides. Click through for a look at how King County
communities compare.





Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from


14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

When King County Sheriff's detectives identified the person they believe killed a man in Shoreline Saturday, they found he was already in jail -- he was arrested nine hours after the slaying on a separate crime.

A 17-year-old was re-booked at King County Jail Friday morning for investigation of first-degree murder and first-degree robbery. Seattle police had already arrested him on an illegal firearm possession accusation.

RELATED: Police: Teen killed girlfriend, left her for dead in Kent park

A 47-year-old man was fatally shot in his vehicle Saturday and the shooter had escaped before deputies arrived. Officers found a cell phone and shell casings in the man's vehicle.

The King County Medical Examiner's Office has not yet publicly identified the victim.

Seattle police arrested the 17-year-old nine hours later for alleged gun possession and booked him into jail.

Testing confirmed that the gun the 17-year-old carried was the same weapon that fired the shell casings in the victim's car, according to the sheriff's office.

RELATED: Charge: Man tried to kidnap teen girl in Auburn

A check on the cell phones of the victim and the 17-year-old showed that they called each other multiple times in the days leading up to the murder, as well as the day of the murder, but calls from the 17-year-old stopped after the victim was killed, reports say.

Surveillance footage also shows that just after the slaying, a male is allegedly captured running from the victim's car with a large backpack he wasn't carrying before entering the victim's car.

Cell phone communications in the hours before the killing also indicated that the victim expected to gain "a lot of money" that day. A photo recovered from the teen's cell phone, taken 44 minutes after the man's death showed the teen with "a large amount of narcotics," the sheriff's office says.

SeattlePI reporter Lynsi Burton can be reached at 206-448-8381 or lynsiburton@seattlepi.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LynsiBurton_PI. Find more from Lynsi here.