(Fremont Police Department)

Corine Audiat, a 32-year-old former California gym teacher, has pleaded no contest to having sex with a minor in 2016. Audiat could avoid serving jail time as a part of her deal.

Audiat, a former gym teacher in the Fremont Unified School District in California, pleaded no contest on December 19 to two felony charges, including statutory rape and oral copulation of a person under 18, in exchange for the dismissal of five other charges, four of which were felonies. The felonies, three charges of contacting a minor for sex and one of sending harmful material to a minor with sexual intent, were dropped.

Audiat was arrested back in 2016 after police launched an investigation following a tip that the former Washington High School physical education teacher was involved with a male student. She was arrested and booked but later released after posting bail.

via Mercury News:

Audiat agreed to a deal with the Alameda County District Attorney’s Office last month in which she pleaded no contest to two felony charges in exchange for the dismissal of five other charges, according to court records.

She will be placed on probation and could face other penalties, said Teresa Drenick, a spokeswoman for the District Attorney’s Office. Audiat was arrested in late 2016 for allegedly having sex with a student who attended Washington High School, where she had been a teacher since 2012.

According to the plea deal announced in court Dec. 19, Audiat did not contest charges of having unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor, commonly known as statutory rape, and oral copulation of a person under 18, in the summer of 2016; both are felonies.

Audiat is scheduled to be sentenced on Feb. 9. As part of the plea deal, she may serve 180 days in county jail. But the judge instead could allow her to serve that time electronically monitored outside jail. She also faces three to five years of probation and will have to register as a sex offender in California and surrender her teaching credential, which was suspended following her arrest, Drenick said.

Audiat still faces up to five years’ probation and will be forced to register as a sex offender in California. Furthermore, according to the plea deal, Audiat will need to serve 150 hours of community service, turn in DNA samples, stay away from her victim for 10 years, and complete one year of sex offender counseling.

This is the latest in a string of teacher/student sex scandals over the last couple of years. In November, Tennessee teacher Janet Smothers was arrested. Former nutrition teacher LaToya Parker was also arrested for a relationship with a student. Florida teacher Caroline Lawson was charged with sexual assault. 26-year-old Allyson Moran was also arrested for similar crimes. The 23-year-old high school teacher Katherine Ross Ridenhour was also arrested for an inappropriate relationship.

Furthermore, Hunter Day, 22, was also arrested after a sting operation. Megan Kotarski was also arrested on similar charges. Michelle Schiffer, a 23-year-old history teacher in Texas, was also charged and arrested for allegedly having sex with a teenage student. 29-year-old Alyssia Marie Reddy was arrested in Maryland for her crimes in New Jersey. Samantha Fitzgerland, a 28-year-old, was most recently arrested and charged. Jordan Ondish was arrested for her inappropriate relationship with a 19-year-old, while 28-year-old Samantha Fitzpatrick was arrested on similar charges.

Nicole Marie Andrews was arrested as well. 32-year-old Jessica Langford was arrested and charged with sexual assault-related crimes as well. A teacher from Oregon, Andrea Baber, was accused of having a sexual relationship with a student.  Robin Dunlap, a teacher in Florida, was arrested for sending illicit photos to a 15-year-old boy in Texas. Teacher and tennis coach Jennifer Olajire-Aro was also charged. 42-year-old Heather Butts of California was arrested on a second-degree felony charge. Nancy Leigh Ann Brann, a former Christian school teacher, was arrested for having sex with a student.


						© 						COED MEDIA Group LLC.
						 All Rights Reserved.


						Powered By 						Wordpress.com VIP
					