

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

A 24-year-old man was sentenced to 22 years in prison Friday for two 
separate shootings in South Seattle, including a 2015 slaying outside 
the Sodo Salvation Army and a 2016 homeless camp shooting.

A 24-year-old man was sentenced to 22 years in prison Friday for two separate shootings in South Seattle, including a 2015 slaying outside the Sodo Salvation Army and a 2016 homeless camp shooting.

The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County communities compare in terms of fatal shootings.


The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click through for a look at how King County’s communities compare.


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click


Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s
as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related
deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from gunshots,
including accidents and suicides. Click through for a look at how King County
communities compare.





Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from


14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

A 24-year-old man was sentenced to 22 years in prison Friday for two separate shootings in South Seattle, including a 2015 slaying outside the Sodo Salvation Army and a 2016 homeless camp shooting.

Nathan Wilson pleaded guilty to second-degree murder and first-degree assault in March. Judge Helen Halpert ordered he serve consecutive terms on each case, adding up to the 22 years.

Wilson killed Damon Brown outside the Fourth Avenue South Salvation Army early the morning of Oct. 9, 2015, incident reports say.

Several witnesses staying at the Salvation Army treatment center reported hearing multiple gunshots outside the building at about 4 a.m. Police arrived to find Brown with a gunshot wound to his back. The King County Medical Examiner's Office determined Brown was shot in the upper left back and appeared to have been hit while bending over or ducking and moving away from a shooter.

RELATED: Man charged in Seattle homeless camp shooting now accused of Sodo slaying

A King County Jail inmate who lived in the same homeless camp as Wilson said Wilson suspected Brown of stealing money from him, reports indicate. After the shooting, Wilson and a man known as "Skitzo" excitedly rode on their bikes back to camp and headed for their tents, according to court documents. They reportedly told other people at the campsite about the shooting.

Brown wasn't arrested until July 2016, but that was for a separate shooting at "The Field," a homeless camp near Airport Way South and South Royal Brougham Way, just west of the notorious encampment known as "The Jungle."

RELATED: 'Part of us died that day': Man sentenced after killing, dumping teen's body

In that incident, Wilson and a woman reportedly argued over money and Wilson shot her in the abdomen. He allegedly pointed the gun at her face and pulled the trigger, but the gun didn't fire, so he re-racked the gun and fired again. The woman was taken to Harborview Medical Center with life-threatening injuries, but ultimately survived.

The murder charge came after that arrest.

A separate second-degree attempted robbery charge from 2015 was since dismissed as part of the plea deal.

SeattlePI reporter Lynsi Burton can be reached at 206-448-8381 or lynsiburton@seattlepi.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LynsiBurton_PI. Find more from Lynsi here on her author page.