By

Minyvonne Burke For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  17:37 EDT, 4 January 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  18:18 EDT, 4 January 2018









View  comments

Corine Audiat (pictured), a high school teacher from California, may avoid jail time for having sex with a student as part of a plea deal

A married high school gym teacher arrested for having sex with an underage student in the summer of 2016 may avoid jail time as part of her plea deal.


Corine Audiat, 32, pleaded no contest to charges of having unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor and oral copulation of a person under 18. Both charges are felonies.


The former physical education teacher, who taught at Washington High School in Fremont, California, was arrested in late 2016 for having sex with a male student. 


The victim, who was 16 at the time, has since graduated.


Audiat, also known as Audiat-Gee, entered her plea in exchange for the dismissal of five other charges, four of which were felonies.


Those charges included three contacting a minor for sex and one of sending harmful material to a minor with sexual intent, according to the Mercury News. A misdemeanor charge of child molestation was also dropped.


Under Audiat's agreement, she may serve 180 days in a county jail but the judge instead could allow her to serve her time at home while being electronically monitored. 


Her sentencing is scheduled for February 9.


According to court records, Audiat faces three to five years of probation and will have to register as a sex offender in California. She also has to surrender her teaching license, which has been suspended up until this point.


Audiat was a gym teacher at Washington High School (pictured) in Fremont, California

The former teacher, pictured on her wedding day in October 2014, faces three to five years of probation, will have to register as a sex offender and has to surrender her teaching license

In addition, the former educator will serve 150 hours of community service, is prohibited from going near the victim for 10 years, has to submit DNA samples to law enforcement and has to complete a year of sex offender counseling.


Audiat is also not allowed unsupervised contact with anyone under 18 while she's on probation, Mercury News reports.


Teresa Drenick, a spokeswoman with the District Attorney's Office, said Audiat may also face other 'fees, fines, and restitution as determined by the judge'.


Police began investigating the former teacher in November 2016 'after receiving a report of an alleged sexual misconduct' involving her and a 'juvenile male'.


'Officers learned the suspect was a Physical Education teacher at Washington High School in Fremont and the victim was a student,' police said.


According to authorities, Audiat began speaking with the victim at the start of 2016. The conversations became more explicit, leading up to when they had 'unlawful sex'.


Audiat will serve 150 hours of community service, is prohibited from going near the victim for 10 years and has to complete a year of sex offender counseling

She was arrested in November 2016, and booked into the Santa Rita Jail.


Audiat, who got married in October 2014, had been a teacher at Washington High School since 2012. She had worked in the Fremont Unified School District since 2008.


She was also employed as a swim coach at Mission San Jose High School in Fremont and a coach for an Easy Bay Swim League in Fremont called the Glenmoor Stingrays.


Following her arrest, Washington High School announced that she had been fired and was removed from the school's online directory.


A lawsuit was filed earlier this year against the school district on behalf of the victim, according to East Bay Times.


The suit accused Audiat of 'grooming' her students and enticing them with flirtation, text messages and open displays of affection, such as hugs.


The suit states that in May 2016 she texted the victim that she wanted to take him into the gym equipment room and kiss him. Things became sexual the following month.


San Jose-based attorney B. Robert Allard, who is representing the student, said the teen was ashamed that his first time having sex was with a teacher he trusted and that the memory of what happened would forever be etched in his mind.


 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group