

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

Merle Charles "Chucky" Buchanan, 26, has been charged with two counts of second-degree murder for the death of two men outside a White Center bar in January.

Merle Charles "Chucky" Buchanan, 26, has been charged with two counts of second-degree murder for the death of two men outside a White Center bar in January.

Merle Charles "Chucky" Buchanan, 26, has been charged with two counts of 
second-degree murder for the death of two men outside a White Center bar
 in January.

Merle Charles "Chucky" Buchanan, 26, has been charged with two counts of second-degree murder for the death of two men outside a White Center bar in January.

The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County communities compare in terms of fatal shootings.


The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click through for a look at how King County’s communities compare.


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click


Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s
as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related
deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from gunshots,
including accidents and suicides. Click through for a look at how King County
communities compare.





Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from


14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

Prosecutors charged a 26-year-old man with two counts of murder Monday for a double slaying that occurred outside a White Center bar in January.

Merle Charles "Chucky" Buchanan is accused of shooting 51-year-old Jose Angel Garcia and 45-year-old Paul Victor Tapia in the head early on the morning of Jan. 6. Though authorities identified him two days after the incident, Buchanan was not arrested until Friday afternoon, according to the jail roster.

King County sheriff's deputies were sent about 1 a.m. on Jan. 6 to Taradise Cafe, located at 9808 16th Ave. S.W.

Deputies found Garcia and Tapia with gunshot wounds to the head, reports indicate.

RELATED: Police hunting for suspect in Seattle-area double slaying

Garcia was pronounced dead at the scene. Medics took Tapia to Harborview Medical Center, but he died the next day, according to the Sheriff's Office.

Tapia and Garcia were co-workers who arrived at the bar together about 12:23 a.m. Buchanan was known to be a "semi-regular" customer who "keeps to himself," bar staff reportedly told detectives.

Buchanan had arrived at the bar about 11:13 p.m. Jan. 5, about an hour before the victims. Surveillance footage indicates he went in and out of the bar to smoke cigarettes and use the phone that night.

Bar staff reportedly tossed Tapia from the club due to his intoxication level, according to the incident report. Outside the bar, Tapia encountered Buchanan and the two talked for several minutes. Reports say Tapia began to walk with Buchanan to Buchanan's car in the parking lot, a 1997 maroon Toyota Camry. Garcia later left the bar and headed to Buchanan's vehicle, standing around and waiting for Tapia, according to the Sheriff's Office.

Buchanan then suddenly shot Tapia once in the face, then turned to Garcia and shot him in the head, court records indicate. Buchanan allegedly got into his car and drove away.

Detectives used an AutoZone receipt recovered from the parking lot to identify Buchanan as the suspect.

RELATED: Sheriff's Office hopes new images can help solve '91 murder

Investigators spotted Buchanan leaving his home in the Camry on Jan. 8 with a woman in the passenger seat. They later found the woman, identified as Buchanan's estranged girlfriend, driving the car, reports say. She allegedly told authorities that when Buchanan spotted a patrol car earlier that day, he parked the car in a driveway and ran away.

Buchanan was prohibited from possessing a gun due to a previous domestic violence conviction, according to King County prosecutors. He allegedly violated a no-contact order hours before the slayings.

King County Sheriff's Office spokesman Ryan Abbott said Buchanan turned himself in Friday.

He remains jailed on $1 million for two counts of second-degree murder and one count of illegal firearm possession.

SeattlePI reporter Lynsi Burton can be reached at 206-448-8381 or lynsiburton@seattlepi.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LynsiBurton_PI. Find more from Lynsi here on her author page.