

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

Kent police believe that the 18-year-old woman found with a gunshot wound Saturday in a Kent park was killed by her boyfriend.

Kent police believe that the 18-year-old woman found with a gunshot wound Saturday in a Kent park was killed by her boyfriend.

The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County communities compare in terms of fatal shootings.


The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click through for a look at how King County’s communities compare.


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click


Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s
as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related
deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from gunshots,
including accidents and suicides. Click through for a look at how King County
communities compare.





Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from


14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

Kent police believe that the 18-year-old woman found with a gunshot wound Saturday in a Kent park was killed by her boyfriend.

The boyfriend, 19, was arrested early Wednesday morning after a police chase through Des Moines.

A woman found Karyme Berrato-Sabalza lying in a wooded area of Salt Air Vista Park with her face covered by a scarf, breathing heavily and drooling, according to the incident report released Thursday.

RELATED: Police make Kent homicide arrest after car chase

The woman did not have a cell phone with her, so she knocked on the doors of nearby houses until she found someone who let her call 911.

Police arrived to find Berrato-Sabalza with a single gunshot wound to her head. First responders attempted to revive her, but medics ultimately pronounced her dead at the scene.

One witness told police that she spotted a couple walking toward the wooded area of the park from her house. She heard a loud "boom" and watched the man in the couple leaving the park alone.

Additional witnesses spotted a white Nissan Altima, which investigators determined was registered to Berrato-Sabalza's father, leaving after hearing the bang.

Another witness told cops that the brother of someone he knew probably fired the shot. He saw the man board the Nissan Altima and the driver pulled up to him and spoke to him, asking if he "heard that," according to Kent police. When the witness asked, "Wait, was that you?" the driver rolled up the window and drove away.

Family members and co-workers of Berrato-Sabalza both attested to seeing her with her boyfriend the day before and the day of her death.

A detective called the boyfriend on the phone Tuesday morning. The 19-year-old allegedly admitted he was dating Berrato-Sabalza and acknowledged her death. He claimed she was killed by another man who had a problem with him and was trying to get back at him. The detective arranged an in-person interview with the boyfriend, but he never showed up, reports say.

RELATED: Attorneys: Seattle cop who killed Charleena Lyles lied about shooting

Investigators learned the boyfriend also told other people that this other man killed his girlfriend.

Another detective tracked the man's phone to a house on Rainier Avenue South in Seattle Tuesday night. Officers arrived to find him leaving the house in Berrato-Sabalza's white Altima. When they tried to follow him, the driver initiated a chase that ultimately wound through Des Moines.

Cops ultimately installed a spike strip and used a PIT maneuver to stop the car and arrest the man.

He gave several different accounts of what happened to his girlfriend before claiming he wanted to tell the truth and accusing his brother of killing her, court records say.

Police booked him into King County Jail in Kent for investigation of homicide. His bail has yet to be determined and he is not yet charged with a crime.

SeattlePI reporter Lynsi Burton can be reached at 206-448-8381 or lynsiburton@seattlepi.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LynsiBurton_PI. Find more from Lynsi here.