Scattered showers and thunderstorms. High 92F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 69F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 11:54 am

The entrance to Riverside Regional Jail, a Prince George County facility that serves seven localities.

The entrance to Riverside Regional Jail, a Prince George County facility that serves seven localities.

Four people have died so far this year while in the custody of Riverside Regional Jail, a number that is among the highest in Virginia for a local or regional jail.

Although Riverside officials notified news outlets about an apparent suicide Tuesday, they did not previously disclose that three other inmates had died this year while in the custody of the facility in Prince George County. The Richmond Times-Dispatch learned of the earlier deaths by reviewing Virginia Department of Corrections records and obtaining additional details from Prince George police.

With the four deaths, the jail has recorded six inmate deaths in the past 14 months, and 14 deaths since June 1, 2013, according to Virginia Department of Corrections records.

On Wednesday, Riverside jail officials issued a news release announcing the death of Alex Tripp, 32, who was found unresponsive in his cell at 5:14 p.m. Tuesday. Prince George police, who were called to assist in the death investigation, said Thursday that it appeared Tripp died by hanging.

Police said they had not yet received the official cause and manner of death from the state medical examiner’s office.

Tripp had been booked into the jail less than a day earlier — at 2:21 p.m. Monday — on charges of petit larceny and obtaining money under false pretenses, as well as two narcotics offenses. He was being held for Chesterfield County without bail.

On Wednesday, a Riverside jail spokeswoman said in an email that she would respond Thursday to a Times-Dispatch inquiry about whether additional inmates — aside from the three known to the newspaper at that time — had died in custody during the past 14 months. But the jail did not respond Thursday.

According to Corrections Department records and Prince George police, the other inmates and their dates of death are:

Wilburn was being held for Colonial Heights after he was convicted Feb. 27 of assaulting a family member, according to court records. Details on why Dale and Gardner were being held could not immediately be determined.

Two other inmates died at Riverside Regional Jail in the final four months of 2016:

According to Department of Corrections records, only the Hampton Roads Regional Jail in Portsmouth and the Fairfax County Adult Detention Center have had as many in-custody deaths this year as Riverside Regional. Hampton Roads Regional has come under intense state scrutiny in recent years for the quality of the jail’s medical care after two highly publicized inmate deaths.

The 2015 death of Jamycheal Mitchell at Hampton Roads Regional Jail remains under active criminal investigation. The medical examiner found that Mitchell, who was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, essentially wasted away in plain sight over a 101-day stay at the facility. He remained incarcerated after efforts to secure him court-ordered mental health treatment had fallen through.

Hampton Roads Regional and the Fairfax County facility reported four deaths each through Sept. 2 — the most recent data available — although one of the Hampton Roads Regional deaths occurred while the inmate was released on furlough. Updated DOC records from Sept. 3 through Nov. 2 were not immediately available.

The Richmond City Justice Center reported two inmate deaths through Sept. 2, and the Henrico Regional Jail-West reported one death.

Richmond Sheriff C.T. Woody Jr. has said previously that deaths in jails are inevitable when people arrive with complex mental and physical health conditions.

mbowes@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6450

An inmate died two days after arriving at the Riverside Regional Jail, the fifth death at the facility this year and possibly the fourth inmat…


                                    
                                        Whenever Mark Bowes posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




