A Youngstown businessman who was taken into custody by Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents Tuesday in Brooklyn Heights might soon get a stay in deportation.

Amer “Al Adi” Othman thought he was meeting with officials, but was instead arrested by ICE agents and taken to the Geauga County Jail to be deported back to Jordan.

Amer has lived in the United States for nearly four decades, owns a successful business in downtown Youngstown, and has been married to a U.S. citizen for 30 years. Together, they have 4 children.

Congressman Tim Ryan 13th District (D) announced tonight that the Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security passed a measure that requests the Department of Homeland Security review Amer Othman’s case.



Amer has been fighting deportation since 2013.

The government claims his first marriage was fraudulent and therefore so was his green card.

Something Amer, his lawyer and Rep. Ryan adamantly deny. “His ex-wife said it was not a sham marriage; they were legitimately married. That aspect of the case has not been thoroughly reviewed by the proper immigration judge or any judge,” said Ryan. “He deserves to have his case heard in court.”

Ryan says Othman’s case underscores the need for immigration reform that doesn’t lump contributing members of society in with common criminals. “We need a comprehensive system that takes into account all people who are in similar situations as Amer and his family.”

Ryan is hopeful Othman will get a six-month stay in deportation and a court hearing to explain his situation.

Othman has been on a hunger strike in jail, but is said to be in good spirits.

On Friday, Tim Ryan's office told FOX 8 News that Othman has been moved to the Northeast Ohio Correctional Center in Youngstown.

**Note: this story was updated on January 19 to reflect new information that Othman had been moved.

 

Filed in: News 


Topics: deportation 




Get your animal fix with FOX 8’s Pet Place!


		Online Public File		  • 
		

				Terms of Service •
		Privacy Policy  •
		5800 South Marginal Road, Cleveland, OH 44103  •
		Copyright © 2018, WJW		 • A Tribune Broadcasting Station •
		Powered by WordPress.com VIP		