
    
        
            By Shane Dixon Kavanaugh


                     The Oregonian/OregonLive
                    

A peeved Pokemon Go player faces assault charges after police say he wielded a tire iron against a group of game rivals in a Vancouver park.

Stephen Jolly wildly swung the lug wrench at his three opponents, smashed a public picnic table and later used his fists to pummel one of the men, police and court records allege.

"I came at them in an aggressive manner," Jolly told police after the March 12 incident at Burnt Bridge Creek Trail, according to the probable cause affidavit.

The suspected attack was first reported by KATU News.

Records show Jolly is 59 years old, 6-foot-1 and 240 pounds. The three men he is accused of violently confronting are between the ages of 19 and 21.  

Using GPS software and cameras on mobile devices, Pokemon Go players can hunt cartoon critters or square-off against one another in the real world.

The augmented reality game came to physical blows last week after one of the men, Grayson Hagstrom, 21, told police he bested Jolly in a so-called "Pokemon battle."

The young man and his two friends said Jolly rolled up in a car soon after and started yelling at them, according to the police report.

Jolly then got out with a tire iron and started smashing a table where the three men were seated, causing $400 in property damage, the police report alleges.

Grayson told police he attempted to snatch the tire iron away from Jolly. The weapon-wielding gamesman responded by repeatedly punching Grayson, the younger man said.

Grayson later wrestled Jolly to the ground and subdued him, Grayson's friends told police.

Police later arrested Jolly, and he remains in Clark County Jail, records show. He was arraigned last week on charges of fourth-degree assault and third-degree malicious mischief.

A Clark County judge last week also granted a restraining order against Jolly by an ex-girlfriend, court records show.

Pokemon Go became a global phenomenon after it launched in 2015 and has since been downloaded more than 752 million times.

The game has also spawned an array of bizarre and concerning episodes.

Players have accidentally fallen off of cliffs, illegally crossed borders between countries, and stumbled upon dead bodies and crimes in progress, according to news reports. A study last year claimed the game caused more than 100,000 traffic accidents.

In 2016, a Forest Grove man said he was stabbed while walking to a convenience store and playing Pokemon Go. The attack, however, did not deter Michael Baker from completing his late-night beer run.

"I continued my mission to Plaid Pantry for my mission for chips and beer," Baker told KPTV at the time.

Baker also said he refused to put down the game after he was stabbed. "I gotta basically catch them all," he said. 

-- Shane Dixon Kavanaughskavanaugh@oregonian.com503-294-7632 || @shanedkavanaugh


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        