Gallery: Immigration Rally


    
        
            By Karen Yi

kyi@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

NEWARK -- Immigrant advocates, emboldened by Gov.-elect Phil Murphy's strong pro-immigrant stance, called on Essex County Thursday to end its agreement with federal immigration agents to house more than 800 detainees. 

About a dozen gathered on the steps of the Hall of Records chanting, "shut it down" and calling for the Board of Chosen Freeholders to immediately sever its contract with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) that allows the agency to place immigrant detainees inside the Essex County Correctional Facility on Doremus Ave in Newark. 

"Here in Newark they claim we are a sanctuary city," said Jay Arena, part of a loose coalition of groups called Stop Immigrant Detention in Essex County. "The newly elected governor talks about a sanctuary state, we say that is a farce as long as we have this ICE detention facility."

Arena said the county renewed its contract with ICE last year for 10 years, agreeing to provide about 800 beds at the county jail. 

Cities across the state, including Newark, have declared themselves so-called "sanctuary cities," and although there's no clear definition for the term, it generally means a jurisdiction will limit its cooperation with federal immigration agents. 



In practice, that usually means local law enforcement declining to hold undocumented immigrants arrested locally on behalf of ICE under what's called a detainer request without a judicial warrant.

Under the contract with Essex County, ICE conducts its enforcement actions but houses some of its detainees at the jail. 

Other municipalities, in the face of increased targeting of undocumented immigrants by the Trump Administration, have proclaimed they are welcoming communities that embrace all immigrants. 

"This anti-immigrant hysteria is being whipped up specifically to divide and concur," said Branden Rippey, of the Newark Education Caucus Workers and a teacher at Science Park High.   

Advocates on Thursday said housing immigrant detainees in the city flew in the face of what the city -- and its leadership -- stood for. 

"These contracts and these prisons that detain immigrants who are working hard to contribute to the economy must stop," said Alejandro Jaramillo from Cosecha, an immigrant rights group. 

The groups presented their demands to the Freeholders on Thursday. 

Karen Yi may be reached at kyi@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter at @karen_yi or on Facebook. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        