
    
        
            By Taylor Tiamoyo Harris

tharris@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Police arrested a 24-year-old Newark man Wednesday for the killing Saturday of a Hillside man, prosecutors said.

Jevon Pittman has been charged with murder and related weapons offenses in the death of 29-year-old Hillside resident Kevin Hall. Pittman was arrested on Warren Street in Newark, according to the Union County Prosecutor's Office.

Pittman was identified as a suspect through a joint investigation by the Homicide Task Force, Hillside Police Department, and Union County Sheriff's Office Crime Scene Unit.

On Dec. 2, Hall was found by members of the Union County Homicide Task Force on the 100 block of Summer Street at 9 p.m. with multiple gunshot wounds, acting Union County Prosecutor Thomas Isenhour said Sunday.

"Nothing can bring him back, but I hope this arrest brings a small measure of relief to his family," said Hillside Police Chief Vincent Ricciardi.  "I want to assure our community that the Hillside Police Department continues to take every measure to protect their safety."

This is the first homicide of the year in Hillside, Mayor Angela Garretson posted on her Facebook page. 

"In spite of the incident, the Township is safe and is being patrolled by one of the most effective police departments in the State of New Jersey," Garretson said in the post.

The police department's "efforts have maintained a low crime rate in Hillside for years even as we border municipalities that regularly experience higher instances of violent crimes,"  Garretson added.

Pittman will remain in the Union County Jail until his first appearance in Superior Court. If convicted Pittman faces 30 years to life in state prison. 

Anyone with information about the shooting is being urged to contact Homicide Task Force Sgt. Jose Vendas at 908-358-3048 or Detective Rich Acosta at 908-347-0404. 

Taylor Tiamoyo Harris may be reached at tharris@njadvancemedia.com. 

Follow her on Twitter @ladytiamoyo.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        