If you are a subscriber: Simply log in for unlimited access. 
                            If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now. 
                            Check out your options: tulsaworld.com/subscribe.-->
                            

If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Journalism worth your time and money. Join us for only 99 cents.

Sunny to partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 98F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:53 am

Iron Gate board Chairman Shane Saunders speaks during a news conference Wednesday. The nonprofit will build its new facility just west of the Tulsa Day Center for the Homeless. KEVIN CANFIELD/Tulsa World

Iron Gate is interested in building its new soup kitchen on this 1.7 acres of land at the northeast corner of Lawton and Archer on the northwest side of downtown. The land is west of the Day Center for the Homeless and east of I-244. JOHN CLANTON/Tulsa World

Iron Gate has been operating out of Trinity Episcopal Church, 501 S. Cincinnati Ave., since its inception in 1978. Tulsa World file

Iron Gate board Chairman Shane Saunders speaks during a news conference Wednesday. The nonprofit will build its new facility just west of the Tulsa Day Center for the Homeless. KEVIN CANFIELD/Tulsa World

Iron Gate is interested in building its new soup kitchen on this 1.7 acres of land at the northeast corner of Lawton and Archer on the northwest side of downtown. The land is west of the Day Center for the Homeless and east of I-244. JOHN CLANTON/Tulsa World

Iron Gate has been operating out of Trinity Episcopal Church, 501 S. Cincinnati Ave., since its inception in 1978. Tulsa World file

After three years of looking, Iron Gate finally has a new home.

Local officials gathered at the Tulsa Press Club on Wednesday morning to announce the nonprofit will build its new soup kitchen and food pantry on a 1.77-acre lot just west of Tulsa Day Center for the Homeless on Archer Street.

Construction of the new facility is expected to begin in the summer and take at least a year to complete. The facility is expected to cost $3.6 million to construct and will be funded through private donations.

Tulsa World journalism makes a difference. Be part of the story. Join us. Start a digital subscription for only 99¢. 





“We have been fortunate to operate for 40 years out of the basement of Trinity Episcopal Church,” said Shane Saunders, chairman of the Iron Gate board. “They have been phenomenal partners of ours, and frankly, we have just outgrown our parents’ basement. It is time for us to get our own place.”

After considering several sites, Iron Gate announced last year that it planned to open its new facility on 1.5 acres between Seventh and Eighth streets and Elgin and Kenosha avenues. But that move was blocked by the city of Tulsa’s Board of Adjustment, leading to a court battle from which the city has since withdrawn.

The new 18,000-square-foot facility will include space to store food as well as room for a kitchen, dining hall and administrative offices. An enclosed courtyard where people would be able to wait to get into the building also is part of the plan.

County Commissioner Karen Keith said the new facility will be a “warm, inviting, nurturing” place whose proximity to the county’s soon-to-be-constructed Family Center for Juvenile Justice would help lift up the area.

The Family Center for Juvenile Justice is being built on the 7.5-acre Storey Wrecker Service property at 10 N. Elwood Ave. It will replace the Tulsa County Juvenile Bureau, 315 S. Gilcrease Museum Road.

“Today what we have is a shovel-ready lot for Iron Gate to build their new home while also providing revenue to Tulsa County,” Keith said.

Iron Gate’s 99-year lease with the county calls for the organization to pay $300,000 in the first year and $300,000 in the second year, with no payments thereafter. Keith said the funds would be used to help the county build a landscaped parking area for the Family Center for Juvenile Justice.

In 2017, Iron Gate served 209,991 meals and provided groceries to 11,936 households and 14,143 kids packs, according to information provided by the nonprofit.

Approximately 56 percent of Iron Gate’s guests annually are one-time users of the facility, Saunders said.

“We serve people who are not all that different from the people gathered in this room,” he said. “We serve families. We serve the working poor. We serve seniors. We serve teachers. We serve professionals.”



Services provided: meals, groceries and kids packs


56 - Percentage of pantry guests that visited only once in 12 months


1,370 - Number of people who volunteered at Iron Gate


8,316 - Number of volunteer hours


11,936 - Number of households that received emergency groceries


14,143 - Number of Kids Packs given to kids who visit Iron Gate


17,846 - Number of unduplicated guests


32,751 - Number of people fed by emergency grocery pantry


209,991 - Number of meals served during community meal


Source: Iron Gate

Kevin Canfield has covered local government in Tulsa for nearly two decades. He also has reported on downtown development, zoning and community planning.


                                    
                                        Whenever Staff Writer Kevin Canfield posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.