Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low 66F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 40%..

Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low 66F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:15 pm

BRISTOL, Tenn. – Sullivan County Commissioner Sherry Grubb and her niece, Brook Morrell, were found guilty of election law violation while Bluff City Alderman John Harrison was acquitted of the crime on Monday.


Johnson County General Sessions Court Judge William Bliss Hawkins gave Grubb a 30-day suspended sentence with no jail time and fined her $50. Morrell, who pleaded no contest, was also found guilty, given a 30-day suspended sentence with no jail time and fined $50 for the misdemeanor in three separate hearings that took place in Sullivan County General Sessions Court.


Hawkins presided over the hearings to prevent a conflict of interest during the trial because two of the defendants were elected Sullivan County officials.


Earlier this year Grubb, Morrell and Harrison signed statements admitting they entered Bluff City Town Hall during election hours on May 16 for reasons other than to cast a ballot or assist another qualified voter in doing so, according to criminal affidavits. The Town Hall was a designated polling place.


Bluff City resident Carol Keith who was running for Alderwoman when the incident took place said she’s still in question about the outcome of the election.


“I’m thankful the truth is coming out,” she said by phone Monday. “But what hurts is people in leadership should set an example, and this has put a black mark on election process in Bluff City. This hurt the election, I hope people’s trust can be restored but I’m not sure I’ll ever want to vote in Bluff City again.”


Sullivan County Administrator of Elections Jason Booher, who was a witness for the state in Monday’s hearings, said it’s the mission of the Sullivan County Election Commission to conduct honest, fair and accurate elections in a manner that exceeds expectations.


“I have never questioned the outcome of the Bluff City Municipal elections,” Booher said. “It’s my job to conduct elections and any time there are allegations they are reported to the district attorney – just as it was in this case. The judge ruled on the matter today and it has been resolved.”


According to criminal affidavits, several concerned citizens contacted Booher in person and by phone from May 18-July 10 to report illegal entry into the polling place by people who were prohibited to enter by state law. Booher reported the allegations to Sullivan County District Attorney General Barry Staubus.


In June Staubus asked the TBI to investigate the accusations, which resulted in the case being turned over to a grand jury. The TBI later referred charges to the General Sessions Court.


Keith said she was thankful for the job TBI did.


“Any time there is a crime there needs to be an investigation,” she said.


Bluff City Alderwoman Sandra Madison said she’s angry about the outcome.


“I wanted John’s resignation when this came out and I still want John’s resignation,” she said by phone.


This story published Monday on page A-1 contained a reporter’s error. Sullivan County Commissioner Sherry Grubb and her niece, Brook Morrell, were found guilty of election law violation.

2010 Tennessee Code


Title 2 - Elections


Chapter 7 - Procedure at the Polling Place


2-7-103 - Persons allowed in polling place.


2-7-103. Persons allowed in polling place.


(a) No person may be admitted to a polling place while the procedures required by this chapter are being carried out except election officials, voters, persons properly assisting voters, the press, poll watchers appointed under § 2-7-104 and others bearing written authorization from the county election commission.


(b) Candidates may be present after the polls close.


(c) No police or other law enforcement officer may come nearer to the entrance to a polling place than ten feet (10¢) or enter the polling place except at the request of the officer of elections or the county election commission or to make an arrest or to vote.


(d) No person may go into a voting machine or a voting booth while it is occupied by a voter except as expressly authorized by this title.


(e) In addition to persons authorized to be admitted to the polling place in subsection (a), a child under seventeen (17) years of age may accompany the child's parent or legal guardian into the polling place. Such child may also enter the voting machine or voting booth with such parent or guardian to observe the voting process.


[Acts 1972, ch. 740, § 1; T.C.A., § 2-703; Acts 1995, ch. 393, § 1.]

Sign up for a digital subscription to The Bristol Herald Courier now and get your first month for just $2.95. 


Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
