Kristen Gober cried as she consulted with her public defender in front of a judge Monday morning.


The 33-year-old pleaded not guilty to two counts of neglect of a dependent resulting in death, neglect of a dependent and possession of marijuana. Two of Gober's children, Khristopher Gober, 4, and Kailani Gober, 2, died March 25 in a Gary apartment building fire.


Judge Diane Boswell lowered Gober's bond further Monday morning from $200,000 to $125,000, which the father of one of the children who died in the fire said he found disappointing.


"I would've liked for no bond," Christopher Hardin, father of Khristopher, said outside the courthouse in Crown Point after the hearing.


Hardin fought back tears as he spoke about how "he will never get see (Kristopher) again."


"It's not just my child. It's my heart," he said.


Added security was put in place for Gober's formal appearance Monday. After going through the usual measures going of metal detectors and bag searches when entering the courthouse, people going in Boswell's court were patted down and had their bags searched again.


T. Edward Page, Gober's public defender, asked that his client's bond be lowered to what he said would be more standard for her charges, suggesting $122,500.

Gober's case was initially filed without bail and at an initial hearing last week, a judge reset her bail to $200,000, court records show.


While Page said his client is "not anticipating" to be able to post bond even if it was lowered, he was "just asking for us to follow our own rules and not allow our emotions to deviate" from what would be standard.


"We're dealing with a mother who has lost two small children," Page said as Gober wept again.


Gober is receiving counseling in Lake County Jail, and the negligence case "cuts all the more deep" with her grief, he said.


"We vehemently object to that request," prosecuting attorney Maureen Koonce said.


Koonce argued that "not only is she a flight risk, she's a danger to her own children and she's a danger to the community."


Gober is "essentially homeless now because of her actions," and there would be nowhere for authorities to look for her if she did not show up for court, Koonce said.


The fire "displaced countless other people" who lived in Lakeshore Dunes complex on Forest Court, according to Koonce. An 8-year-old child had to jump to safety from the fourth floor onto a blanket held by neighbors, officials said.


Gober's 6-year-old son, who also made it out of the fire, is now living with an uncle, Page said. Child Protective Services had prior contacts with Gober, according to court records.


Gober also has an ongoing conversion case in Lake Station court in which a failure to appear warrant was issued in October 2017, according to Koonce.


Boswell decided to set Gober's bond at $125,000. She is scheduled to appear in court again May 21, court records show.


Gober said she had "left the children alone" sleeping in her apartment March 24 into March 25 while she did laundry and went to the maintenance employee's apartment for a couple of hours, the affidavit states, which she said she had done "on multiple occasions," according to the affidavit.


While the mother was out of the apartment, her children "were playing with the stove" and put a blanket inside that "caught fire," according to the 6-year-old in the probable cause affidavit.


Gary Fire Department Chief of Operations Mark Jones previously said the fire, which began on the fourth floor and displaced 113 residents, appeared accidental with no foul play suspected.


Khristopher and Kailani Gober suffered from smoke inhalation and burns, Jones said. Their cause and manner of death were still pending with the Lake County coroner's office Wednesday.


Gober said "she was in a state of shock" and "could not bear to watch the fire so she started walking away when someone picked her up" and took her to McDonald's, according to court documents.


"Ms. Gober said that everyone knew that the children were inside and said it was a lost cause to tell the firemen about the children at that point," the affidavit states.


rejacobs@post-trib.com


Twitter @ruthyjacobs