How much gold did the two largest mining countries produce in history? 

Since the PBOC began to actively devalue the yuan versus the dollar four weeks ago, the price of COMEX gold has tracked the yuan nearly tick-for tick.

An ancient Babylonian code of law may hold some insight into fixing the rampant greed and corruption that presently exist in our financial industry.

You don't have to look around too hard to realize that the "political swamp" in America stretches from sea to shining sea and from the highest offices in Washington D.C. to the lowliest of city halls on Main Streets all across the country.  


The latest evidence of such comes to us from New York City where a Mayor Bill de Blasio donor-turned-felon testified in extraordinary detail yesterday that he and his businessman pals wrote the book on city corruption — buying off the Mayor’s Office and the Police Department using brazen pay-to-play tactics.  As the New York Post details today, 34-year-old Jona Rechnitz went into staggering detail in his testimony about political favors he received from City Hall for a small $100,000 donation.


“We’re going to become significant contributors, but we want access,” Jona Rechnitz, 34, testified telling de Blasio fundraiser Ross Offinger after Hizzoner clinched the Democratic nod for mayor in 2013.


 


De Blasio soon paid Rechnitz a visit in his office, the disgraced businessman told jurors in Manhattan federal court.


 


De Blasio — who last year called his relationship with Rechnitz “not a particularly close’’ one — handed the wheeler-dealer his private cellphone number and email address, the witness said.


 


The pair then began chatting “at least” once a week about “different issues in the city” — as Rechnitz funneled about $160,000 to de Blasio’s campaign and pet political projects, said the government witness.




Rechnitz appeared as the star witness in the bribery trial of former city corrections union chief Norman Seabrook. He is accused of bribing Seabrook to get him to invest $20 million in union pension money in a pal’s ailing hedge fund.  But testimony quickly veered toward de Blasio, as Rechnitz was questioned about his ties to the ­administration.


Rechnitz said he had high hopes for the kinds of favors he could potentially receive.


“My mind was limitless,” he said.


 


Business pal “Jeremy [Reichberg] had told me in the days of Giuliani, people made a fortune.


 


“I was focused on making money, getting my name out there, becoming a big player in town. So I figured maybe I’ll buy an office building, and I’ll get the city as a tenant. Maybe I’ll need to get special permits to make residential developments.”


 


Rechnitz and Borough Park businessman Reichberg initially targeted the NYPD in their pay-to-play scheme, doling out gifts and cash to cops in return for favors. Then they set their sights on City Hall, Rechnitz said. “We had the police going for us — and now it was time to get into politics,’’ he testified.


 


Rechnitz started calling Offinger every time he needed a favor — including one involving a friend’s massive water bill and violations Rechnitz faced for a tenant subletting a residence on Airbnb.

Rechnitz even admitted to using "straw donors" to circumvent caps on individual political contributions, a scam which he says De Blasio's fundraisers were privy to.


In 2014, Rechnitz donated another $102,300 toward a failed effort led by de Blasio to help Democrats wrest control of the state Senate.


 


Rechnitz said some of the dough was from straw donors, which is illegal.


 


“A couple of people in my office, I had them write checks, because I wasn’t allowed to give more than $4,950. And I reimbursed them for those donations,’’ Rechnitz said.


 


Rechnitz said he promised Offinger to hit target donations — and the fundraiser would stop by his office to check on the fundraising.“I had a lot of pressure from him to bring that amount in,” Rechnitz said of the pledged amount.

But it wasn't just De Blasio's office where Rechnitz attempted to buy political favors as he admitted that his pay-to-play scams stretched north to the affluent suburbs of Westchester County and involved County Executive Rob Astorino.  


During his hourlong testimony, Rechnitz said the corruption even extended beyond the Big Apple.


 


Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino gave him and Reich­berg positions as police chaplains in exchange for their ­financial contributions — even though neither of them is a rabbi or a priest, Rechnitz said.


 


“It meant that I got my parking placard,” said Rechnitz, whose firm JSR Capital donated $15,000 to ­Astorino’s campaign in June 2013.


 


He said Astorino once approached him with a picture of a Rolex watch and asked for help in procuring it.


 


“I told him I’m happy to give it to him; he doesn’t have to buy it,” Rechnitz testified.


 


“He told me that he couldn’t take it as a gift. He had to pay something because that wouldn’t be allowed. It was a $7,000 to $10,000 watch, if I remember correctly.”


 


In the end, Astorino agreed to pay $1,000 to $2,000 — and Rechnitz covered the rest, he said.

Not surprisingly, De Blasio's office dismissed Rechnitz' testimony saying "the administration has never and will never make government decisions based on campaign contributions"...clearly just more attempts to "criminalize behavior that is normal."

Drumpf played this game all his life in NY Real estate. What's your point ?

C O M P E DOMPED

In reply to Drumpf played this game all by onwisconsinbadger

DaBlaz is cheap. It sticks out all over him like a form of leprosy.

In reply to C O M P E D
O
M
P
E
D by EmployedMillenial

And why on earth is he hangin' out with Tai Lopez?

In reply to DaBlaz is cheap. It sticks by JRobby

I think the onus is on you, you're are making the accusation, go get a DA and make your case bitch.

In reply to Drumpf played this game all by onwisconsinbadger

She's still bleeding from her...whatever because her heroette lost...BIG TIME...and continues to a little more each day.I have no doubt she still believes that colusion occurred between (((THE RUSSIANS))) and the Donald.(I still don't know if that would have broken any laws)#Winning!

In reply to I think the onus is on you, by booboo

However, with each electroshock treatment she remembers and believes less and less.

In reply to She's still bleeding from by YourAverageJoe

"Drumpf"  Honestly, is that the best you can do?  My 4th grader comes up with better burns than that.   Beyond that, are you suggesting (even if you had evidence that Trump played this game... beyond your ideologue driven opinion) that two wrongs make a right?

In reply to Drumpf played this game all by onwisconsinbadger

onwisconsinbadger has no clue what NYC was like in the 70's.  The city NEEDED a developer with vision to fix things. http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-ptt1MRWkm4s/UhsiiCHtl1I/AAAAAAAALow/5F2RTFD7C…

In reply to "Drumpf"  Honestly, is that by Pokeys Pissed

Does Trump really deserve more than 1/10th of a second? Fuck no. 

In reply to "Drumpf"  Honestly, is that by Pokeys Pissed

President Trump went to Manhattan, beat all of the real estate jews at their own game, became a celebrity/house-hold name billionaire, and then POTUS.  The Christ-killers never forgave this big goy for out-jewing them and doing it all better than them.  One man against a regular jew zombie army.

In reply to Drumpf played this game all by onwisconsinbadger

Yeah.... that is why his whore daughter is a WILLING JEW? And yes Trump "won" all of that through corruption, you stated it well enough, he was or is more corrupt thant those jew rats, that is how he beat them at their game right?

In reply to President Trump went to by Drop-Hammer

Are you from Slinger Wi? 

In reply to Drumpf played this game all by onwisconsinbadger

Hillary?  Is that you?

In reply to Drumpf played this game all by onwisconsinbadger

Communist mayors have always been cheap whores ;-)

'Shocking'?To whom?

In reply to Communist mayors have always by nmewn

The guy before me did it this way and no one said anything...

LOL!

if memory serves DeBlase was elected with less than 300K votes in a city of 8m people...the labor unions and the (((interested parties))) selected him to carry on the legacy of Bllomberg/Giuliani https://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/new-york-primary-elections

Just another day in Himeytown.

Shitshowville

In reply to Just another day in by RumpleShitzkin

Burn it down.

In reply to Just another day in by RumpleShitzkin

that fucking kike would sell his mother to make a few bucks,still doesn't excuse De Blahhzio

You've had your mother working the street corners since 1991.  Can't you get her some new teeth?Hurry up, you're late for your mental midget mafia meeting.   

In reply to that fucking kike would sell by Squid Viscous

The quality of .gov-paid trolls is pretty damned abysmal these days. Then again, they work for .gov, so they're not smart enough to make it on their own in the real world, and too fucking ugly to be good-earning whores.

In reply to You've had your mother by Dickguzinya

Whoa, this jew is upset.  

In reply to You've had your mother by Dickguzinya

It is self hatred. All Jews hate themselves, most will deny it and will claim some sort of pride, which is BS, no one is proud of being a Jew, this is why saying Jew with disdain to a Jew, can be worse than calling him a worthless Jew rat.

In reply to Whoa, this jew is upset.   by Drop-Hammer

Now Germany won’t take him.

NY politics is a cesspool

Scrub the NY and you nailed it...

In reply to NY politics is a cesspool by DontWorry

SWAMP

In reply to Scrub the NY and you nailed by SRV

Another wookie from Endor in the news.

I hear in a rural County, a $10K donation buys one an aura of immunity from the county prosecutor. I think a similar donation to the County Sheriff is also part of a balanced business plan.

(((Reichnitz))), (((Reichberg))), (((Offinger))).It's how they roll. 

Bullshit. Media tryna smear De Blasio now.

"You snooze you lose to the Jews." - Sarah Silverman

I’m on a budget; how much for an alderman?

Of course, kikes.  Kikes, kikes, and more kikes.  Oy vey!  It is a regular jew-fest.

Jew York City. Jew York. JewSA.

well said

In reply to Jew York City. Jew York. by Seasmoke

DaBlaz is a prostitute. He sold his influence like a cheap ass crack whore!

Ol' Jona gonna get the boner from all the other Jews that bought Deblasio.He just cheapened their return potential.He'll be shunned as if he admitted to buying retail.

(((Rechnitz))) (((Reichberg))) 'nuff said.

Always with the Jooze.  You just gotta clean house over there ...  just go door to door.  Seriously, you need to start throwing them out of America.

In reply to (((Rechnitz))) by nicxios

Always with the Jooze.  You just gotta clean house over there ...  just go door to door.  Seriously, you need to start throwing them out of America.

In reply to (((Rechnitz))) by nicxios

'Always with the Jooze.  You just gotta clean house over there ...  just go door to door.  Seriously, you need to start throwing them out of America.'And leave the Muslims behind?

In reply to Always with the Jooze.  You by tnuctipun

seems legit

How about a big Fuck NYC !!!!

$100,000? Sure, but the alien creep isn't worth shit. HA HA Burn! https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t4fDCwDiWJQ

Awesome..... the Rainbow over the stage is interesting, as Blackmores next band was called Rainbow.... 1976 I think.... 

In reply to $100,000? Sure, but the alien by Rex Andrus

I was oblivious to this taking place under Giuliani.  Campaign donations should be illegal. It's that simple. There is no reason that honest and intelligent people with all of the social media and standard print, internet, tv, and radio media whose job it is to cover elections, although they have failed miserably to cover third party candidates as a repugnant disservice to our country. America needs to clean up its act. The crime is killing the  economy, businesses, government, people, and our sovereignty.Its a do or die situation at this point. It can't go on.

Tips: tips@zerohedge.com

General: info@zerohedge.com

Legal: legal@zerohedge.com

Advertising: ads@zerohedge.com

Abuse/Complaints: abuse@zerohedge.com

Advertise With Us

Make sure to read our "How To [Read/Tip Off] Zero Hedge Without Attracting The Interest Of [Human Resources/The Treasury/Black Helicopters]" Guide

It would be very wise of you to study our disclaimer, our privacy policy and our (non)policy on conflicts / full disclosure. Here's our Cookie Policy. 

 

How to report offensive comments

Notice on Racial Discrimination. 