Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Misty George and her boyfriend, Michael Welch, are charged with human trafficking, accused of keeping the victim in a shed at their Macomb mobile home

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Michael Welch, left, and Misty George are facing human trafficking charges for allegedly keeping a disabled woman in a shed and selling her to men who sexually assaulted her.
(Photo: Macomb County Sheriff's Office)

She was disabled, housed in a shed and sold online for sex.


She wasn't even allowed to use the bathroom in her friend's mobile home just feet away.


Somehow, authorities said, the 29-year-old woman with mental and physical disabilities got away from the Macomb Township couple accused of keeping her in the shed, taking her support money and selling her services through online ads.


And neighbors  said they didn't have a clue about what was going on.


"I just don't even understand. I feel like I fell for something. I feel guilty because I didn't see this," said Colleen Budzynski, 41, who lives across the street from the couple and the shed where Macomb County authorities allege the incident took place. "It's shocking."


Shock, disbelief, even embarrassment were sentiments from neighbors today, a day after Misty George, 30, and her boyfriend, Michael Welch, 38, were charged with human trafficking-forced labor and prostitution/accepting earnings. George also was charged with using a computer to commit a crime, according to the county sheriff's office.


"It freaked me out," neighbor Lou Ann Boylan said of the allegations.


“Instead of helping this profoundly special-needs person, (the couple) took her support money, forced her to live rough in an outside shed, and sold her as a prostitute. As your heart breaks for this vulnerable woman, your conscience is shocked by the abusive cruelty one human being is capable of showing to another," Prosecutor Eric Smith said in a release announcing the charges.


Welch was arraigned today on a separate escape charge filed after he allegedly fled from authorities as he was being loaded into a sheriff's transport vehicle after arraignment Tuesday. He is being held on a total bond of $100,000, while George is being held on a $50,000 bond, according to 41-A District Court in Shelby Township.


George's father, who asked not to be named, told the Free Press that he doesn't know if his daughter "is innocent or guilty." But he doesn't believe his daughter would keep a woman in a shed.


He said his daughter has never been in trouble until she met Welch, whom he called a "clown" and "low-life piece of trash as far as I'm concerned."


Welch has been in prison four times from 2001 though 2010, being discharged from Michigan Department of Corrections supervision in 2011, spokeswoman Holly Kramer said. She said Welch's sentences were for probation or parole violations and walking way from a corrections center and escaping the Otsego County Jail.


Neighbors said he cut their lawns and recently got hired at a nearby Target store.


Kramer had no prison record for George, and there were no records in Macomb County Circuit Court for her. Neighbors said she was on disability and that they saw her get around on a motorized scooter or wheelchair.


Welch and George, who live together, initially allowed the victim to stay in their home at the Westbridge Manor mobile home community near 21 Mile and Heydenreich. But she was eventually moved to a nearby shed after she could not afford to pay the rent that the suspects demanded, the sheriff's office said.


The sign for Westbridge Manor mobile home community in Macomb Township where Macomb County Sheriff's officials said Misty George and her boyfriend, Michael Welch, are accused of keeping a disabled woman in a shed and selling her online for sex. (Photo: Christina Hall, Detroit Free Press)

The victim wasn't allowed in the home to use the restroom or shower, investigators said.


Welch and George set up date advertisements for the victim through a website, according to the sheriff's office. Several men responded to the ads and paid money to the couple for sexual services from the victim.


Neighbors said this is the Macomb Township mobile home and shed where Misty George and her boyfriend, Michael Welch, are accused of keeping a disabled woman, who Macomb County authorities said Oct. 3, 2017 was sold online for sex. (Photo: Christina Hall, Detroit Free Press)

When the victim left the mobile home park, her family members found out what happened and contacted authorities Sept. 12.


"This whole incident spanned over a couple-month period," including the time she was staying in the home, Sheriff's Sgt. Renee Yax said.


She said the victim and the suspects were high school acquaintances and that investigators are not releasing many specifics about the case, including how long the woman was in the shed.


George's father said his daughter was friends with the victim and her ex-husband when his family lived in Mt. Pleasant. He said he was told the victim called his daughter saying she had no place to live. He said his daughter took the woman in, but told her she had to leave when George saw her performing sex on a man in a vehicle in the driveway.


Neighbors said they didn't hear or see anything unusual at the couple's mobile home.


Two neighbors said they saw a woman, who may be the victim, at the residence.  Budzynski said when she saw the woman, she never appeared in distress. 


"It didn't look like anything weird was going on," said Budzynski, who on Saturday drove the couple to a nearby IHOP, where they said they were going to use a gift certificate for their five-year anniversary together. "None of it makes sense to me."


Next-door neighbor Marquita Ferguson said the couple was welcoming to her when she moved in in August, with Welch mowing their lawn. They took them out for dinner at the Golden Corral on Friday.


"If there was a third person, it was like a friend or family, nothing odd," she said.


Kim Farrar, another neighbor who used to live next-door to the couple before they moved about a handful of mobile homes away, said that about a month ago, George said in a casual conversation that the couple had the woman sleep in the shed one time to teach her a lesson to appreciate what they did for her.


Farrar said she often let what George said go in one ear and out the other, adding about the comment that she thought George "was rambling" and described the couple as "very odd." She said George told her about two weeks ago that the woman didn't live with the couple anymore.


Neighbors said George and Welch have a daughter who is about 4 years old. George's father said his granddaughter is staying with him and his wife.


RELATED:


Macomb Township couple charged with selling disabled woman for sex


Feds: Drugged women forced into prostitution at Detroit motel


 


Contact Christina Hall: chall99@freepress.com. Follow her on Twitter: @challreporter. Staff writer Ann Zaniewski contributed to this report.
