Scattered showers and thunderstorms. High 92F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 69F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:54 pm

James E. Balsley

James Elwood Balsley, 60, of Goochland, went to be with the Lord on March 14, 2018. Son of the late Billy Elwood Balsey and Arvonna Eye Balsley. He was preceded in death by his parents Billy and Arvonna Balsley, two siblings Cynthia B. Proffitt and Barry S. Balsley. “Jamie”, “Moose”, “Bo-Bo” or “Heavy” as he was affectionately known by those who loved him, loved life, hunting, fishing, family and his beloved four-legged friend Ruffy. Jamie worked for the Department of Corrections and Virginia Department of Transportation for over 40 years. Jamie leaves to cherish his memory and mourn his passing, his devoted wife of 16 years Linda W. Balsley, three sons Justin Balsley, Jeffrey McCallister and Bryan McCallister, one grandson Andrew McCallister, two granddaughters, Kailyn McCallister and Angelina Presti, three sisters, Donna Morrison, Nancy Trice (Stu), Wynita “Nita” Breedlove (Jamie), one brother, Alan Balsley (Sherrie); host nieces and nephews and host great-nieces and nephews. A celebration of Jamie’s life will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, March 24, at at Perkins Baptist Church. After the memorial service the family will receive friends and family in the fellowship hall for refreshments and time of sharing.

Ned S. Creasey

The Hon. Ned S. Creasey, 74, Goochland County District 3 Supervisor, departed this life and went home to be with his Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, on Saturday, March 10, 2018. He is survived by his loving wife, Diana Crandall Creasey; his beloved five children, Teresa (Chris) Wilkinson, Shawn (Lisa) Creasey, Scott (Karen) Creasey, Tonia (Gene) Shevnin, Steven (Grace) Creasey; nine grandchildren, Brandi (Buck) Pettit, Denver (Jamie) Creasey, Kendall (Kris) Hutchinson, John, Lauron, Logan, Sarah, Alexander and Ellie; five great-grandchildren, Mason, Brayden, Kaylee, Sydney and Sadie; his sister, Janet (Steven) Sowers and her children, Aron, Mindy and Holly, and their families; as well as an innumerable number of dearly loved family and friends. He was preceded in death by his father, Vilasco Weldon Creasey; and his mother, Betty Jane (Wotring) Creasey. Born in Cumberland, Maryland, Ned grew up in Colchester, Illinois. After graduating from Colchester High School in 1962, Ned joined the United States Navy and served his country as a Communications Technician while stationed in Karamursel, Turkey. Following his time in the Navy, Ned served as a police officer for the Macomb Police Department in Macomb, Illinois and then began his lifelong career in construction. After working as a foreman on the John Hancock building in Chicago, Illinois, Ned joined the construction firm of Whiting-Turner and was transferred to Baltimore, Maryland, where he studied at the Maryland School of Art. In the early ‘70s, Ned moved his family to Goochland County and managed several construction projects in the Richmond area for companies like DuPont, Philip Morris and the Bank of Virginia. Later on, he started his own contracting company and constructed residential, commercial and government properties throughout the state of Virginia. Throughout his life, Ned worked tirelessly to build a better world for his family and his community. He was a lifetime member of the American Legion and a former deacon of Salem Baptist Church. Ned was an avid amateur extra class radio operator and a member of the Navy Amateur Radio Club, where he served as Commander and Vice Commander. He was active in the ARES-Radio Emergency Services and was a huge proponent for emergency preparedness. He worked with various organizations and residents to create and implement a county-wide Emergency Disaster Response System. After his Lord, his family and his country, Ned loved Goochland County and its residents dearly. He was a lifetime member (30-plus years) of the Goochland County Volunteer Fire/Rescue Association and he served on the Board of Directors for 14 years. At a time in his life when he should have been looking forward to retirement, Ned answered the call of friends and neighbors imploring him to run for District 3 Supervisor. Over the past 10-plus years, Ned had selflessly spent his life working on behalf of his constituents and the citizens of Goochland County. He took his responsibility seriously and refused to let anything hinder him from being the best Supervisor he could possibly be. He was a man on a mission to improve and strengthen his community and he persistently fought through cancer, illness and pain to fulfill his duties. Ned’s list of accomplishments and contributions is as long as his heart was big. He will be exceedingly missed by his family, friends, and all those who knew and loved him. Family received visitors on Thursday, March 15, at Salem Baptist Church in Crozier, and funeral services were held on Saturday, March 17, at Goochland County High School. A graveside service was held following the funeral at Greenwood Memorial Gardens. In lieu of flowers, donations in Ned’s memory can be made to the Goochland County Volunteer Fire/Rescue Association, P.O. Box 247, Goochland, Va. 23063.

Louise Glover

Our beloved Louise Glover, age 97, daughter of the late Lanxton and Nettie Glover, slipped away to Glory on Saturday, March 10, 2018. Louise was preceded in death by her parents; seven siblings, David, Willie, Susie, Janie, Lloyd, Warren and Hoover; and her grandson, Termon III “Tee.” She leaves to cherish her memory three children, Barbara Athy (Calvin), Linda Minor (Termon) and Jerome Glover (Bonita); eight grandchildren, seven great-grandchildren, four great-great-grandchildren, two sisters-in-law and many nieces, nephews and cousins. Her remains rested at the Robert Mealy Funeral Home in Goochland, where the family received friends on Thursday, March 15. Funeral services were held on Friday, March 16, at County Line Baptist Church.

Ronnie L. Gray

Mr. Ronnie L. Gray, 60, of Goochland, departed this life suddenly Thursday, March 8, 2018, at Henrico Doctors’ Hospital. He is survived by a loving family. His remains rested at the Robert Mealy Funeral Home in Goochland. Funeral services were held on March 17, at Chief Cornerstone Baptist Church, Rev. Adlai Allen officiating. Interment church cemetery.

Freddie M. Tyler

Staff Sergeant Freddie M. Tyler, 85, of Goochland, departed this life on March 8, 2018. He was originally from Covington, and retired from the U.S. Army and the Department Of Corrections. He is survived by his wife of 65 years, Frances Gray Tyler; four children, Maurice Tyler (Jewnita), Qpys-Edrow Faulkner (Paul), Freddie W. Tyler and Connie Creasy-Lewis (Bruce); six grandchildren, Gregory and Brian Tyler, Aseelah Smith, Jordan Shelton, and Wakee and Wantel Creasy; four great-grandchildren, Jayla Tyler, Tristan and Alijah Smith, and Messias Creasy; sister, Edrow Tyler; brother, John Tyler (Rose); sister-in-law, Betty Overton; and devoted caregiver, Brenda Martin. His remains rested at the Robert Mealy Funeral Home. Funeral services were held on March 15, at Fauquier Baptist Church. Rev. Melvin Woodson officiating. Interment church cemetery.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.


