
    
        
            By Martin Slagter

mslagter@mlive.com

YPSILANTI, MI - Eastern Michigan students expressed surprise and disappointment on Tuesday, Oct. 24, to the arrest and arraignment of a former student in connection with racist vandalism found on campus.

Eddie Curlin, 29, was arraigned in Washtenaw County District Court on three counts of malicious destruction of property, four counts of identity theft and one count of using computers to commit a crime in connection with the vandalism incidents that took place on campus beginning in fall 2016.

The racist messages targeted the black community at Eastern. Curlin is a black man and police believe his motive was personal.

EMU junior Lauren McDonald said she grew impatient with the investigation after nobody was found responsible in the months after the incidents, but she was happy EMU police remained diligent.

McDonald, who is black, felt the vandalism was intended to stir things up on campus.

"I just think that he was just trying to create problems, because it doesn't make any sense," she said.

Eastern Michigan racist graffiti suspect arraigned

Curlin attended EMU from 2014 to early 2016, and was not a student at the time the incidents took place last fall and spring. He currently is in custody of the Michigan Department of Corrections serving a one-to-five year sentence on an unrelated charge of receiving and concealing stolen property.

The new charges stem from incidents that took place in September 2016 at King Hall, in which a hate message that read "Leave N******" was found spray painted on an exterior wall; an October 2016 incident in which a racist message was discovered spray painted on an exterior wall of Ford Hall, and a third incident that took place last spring in which a racist message was found in a men's restroom stall in Sherzer Hall.

Students responded to the incidents last fall and winter by protesting, including marching through the street to the president's home following the incident in September 2016 and a sit-in at the EMU student center in November, in which many students stayed inside the building past hours of operation.

EMU Police Chief Robert Heighes said after investigation that race was not a motivating factor in the incidents, and believes the man charged was the only perpetrator of the vandalism.

"As far as motivation for this, it was totally self-serving," Heighes said during a press conference Monday. "It was not driven by politics, it was not driven by race. It was an individual item done by one individual for all three of the major graffiti incidents on our campus."

EMU police chief says racist vandalism suspect 'not motivated by race'

EMU student Brennan Robertson said he was shocked to learn Curlin had been arraigned.

"When it comes to that, I would like to know the motivation behind it," he said.

Robertson doesn't think the arraignment of Curlin will change the dynamic of race relations among the university community because there are so many factors that happen outside of campus that go into how people view the world.

He was happy, however, to see that EMU police continued to investigate the incidents to provide students and the campus community with some closure, although Curlin will still have his day in court.

"I'm just glad, in general, that it was taken care of and not forgotten about," Robertson said. "That's probably the most important thing - if somebody does do something like this, that it is dealt with and not forgotten about. So I'm grateful for that.

"When it comes to this campus, most people want (other) people to live their lives how they want to live their lives and not have any problems," he added. "When you have somebody like that who is doing this - this isn't what we stand for - so we can all (rally) around that."

EMU sophomore Samantha Tello said she believes the protests and tension the incidents of vandalism caused were divisive in some respects, but also uniting in how students rallied agains the messages of hate, despite what is known about the alleged suspect now.

"(I'd like to know) what happened in his life or what he went through to have him be at that point," Tello said of the suspect.

"It kind of divided us, because you knew there were people like that out there, but I think it also brought people together so they could fight against it," she added.

EMU freshman Samuel Lovely said he was shocked to learn Curlin's identity after hearing about the incidents while taking a visit to the college last fall.

"I don't understand, if you're a former student, why you're coming back to the school to say something like that," Lovely said. "That's crazy. I would never think it was a black person, but hate is hate.

"I have no idea why somebody would try to do that, unless they were just trying to spread that kind of hate," he said.

Curlin was returned to the custody of the Michigan Department of Corrections following his arraignment Monday.

He is scheduled for a preliminary exam on Nov. 9.

Newspaper | Digital Editions | eNewsletters


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        