By

Snejana Farberov For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  12:29 EDT, 10 January 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  14:11 EDT, 10 January 2018







          80

View  comments

Friends of the Texas mother who killed her husband and two young sons before turning the gun on herself at a Galveston hotel this week say she had been struggling with depression and mental illness for many years - and at one time had sought treatment in a psychiatric ward.


Police said Flor de Maria Pineda, 37, also known as Flor Canas, fatally shot her husband, 39-year-old Mauricio Morales Canas, their two sons - 10-year-old Mauricio Jr and five-year-old Daniel - and then herself at the upscale San Luis Resort on Monday morning.


The suspected murder weapon, a 9mm handgun, was found next to Mrs Pineda, who was still alive by the time police responded to the scene, along with her eldest son. Both later died at a hospital.


Emotional battle: Flor de Maria Pineda, 37, pictured with husband Mauricio, had been struggling with depression for years. On Monday, she killed her husband, their sons and herself 

Bloody scene: Police were called to San Luis Resort in Galveston, Texas, on Monday and discovered the family of four suffering from fatal gunshot wounds after a murder-suicide

Friends and neighbors of Flor Pineda in Baytown described her as a hard-working and doting mother to her sons and a devout Christian, but those who knew her particularly well were aware that the 37-year-old woman had long been battling depression.


Leonia Olivares, who runs a ministry at the Baytown church Iglesia Chriso Viene, told KHOU11 that her friend Flor would openly discuss her struggles with fellow parishioners.


'We were just in shock and I think a lot of us are still in denial because this is someone that was always seeking the word of God,' she said.


Pedro Echegoyen, who worshipped at the same church as the slain family and had been friends with Flor Pineda from the time they were children growing up in their native El Salvador, revealed to Chron.com that he last saw the couple and their sons during a Sunday service last weekend, less than 24 before the carnage in Galveston.


Echegoyen said Flor she did not seem unhappy during their final encounter, and there was nothing to suggest that she might harm her family or herself.


The childhood friend said, however, that a year ago Flor checked herself into a mental institution.


Leonia Olivares (right), who runs a ministry at the Baytown church Iglesia Chriso Viene, says her friend Flor (left) would openly discuss her struggles with fellow parishioners

Self-aware: A childhood friend of Flor's said a year ago she checked herself into a psychiatric ward, saying she was doing it so she would not harm anyone 

‘She told us, “I'm coming here because I don't want to hurt nobody and I don't want to hurt myself,"’ Echegoyen said.


According to the friend, after her treatment Flor seemed to be getting better, but he noted that in recent weeks she appeared more withdrawn than usual.


It was around that time, he revealed, that the mother-of-two went out and bought the 9mm handgun.


Law enforcement officials in the family's hometown and in Harris County said they had no previous interactions with Flor Pineda, who had clean records with the sheriff's office, the Baytown Police Department and Child Protective Services.


Flor and Mauricio had been married for 12 years and lived in a residential development in Baytown, where they bought a home in 2008.


The woman was employed at her brother-in-law's trucking company and her husband worked as a warehouse supervisor.


Their eldest son, Mauricio Jr, attended fifth grade and his younger brother, Daniel, was in kindergarten at Goose Creek Independent School District.


Neighbors said Flor was a loving mother who always kept a watchful eye on her sons whenever they played outside.


Mauricio Sr enjoyed gardening in his free time and spending time with his kids on the weekends.


Echegoyen, the childhood friend, said he wishes Flor had told him the family were heading to Galveston on Sunday night, suggesting that perhaps he could have prevented the tragedy.   


Galveston Police Capt. Josh Schirard said the shootings were reported at around 4.30am on Monday at the four-star San Luis Resort, Spa and Conference Center .


According to Schirard, guests reported hearing gunshots from a nearby room on the eighth floor and called the police.


Mauricio Morales Canas, was shot dead by his wife of 12 years while in bed, along with their two boys, ages 10 and 5

It's believed that the wife and mother, Flor de Maria Pineda, shot her husband Mauricio Morales, dead in his bed along with their two sons while they both slept soundly at the hotel

Officers heard faint moaning and forced their way into the locked room, Schirard revealed at a press conference.


Inside, they found Morales and his two sons bleeding to death from gunshot wounds.


His wife was found mortally wounded on the floor in the room.


Schirard said the husband and the youngest child were pronounced dead at the scene, but the wife and the older child were still alive and were rushed to University of Texas Medical Branch, where both later succumbed to their injuries.


Guests at the resort reported hearing gunshots coming from a room on the 8th floor

Police said that based on physical evidence at the scene, the mother was the one who opened fire on her family from her 9mm handgun, which was recovered from the scene.   


The family-of-four had checked into the resort in Galveston at around 7pm the night before. 





A representative of San Luis Resort's parent company released a statement to KHOU on Monday afternoon confirming that the incident 'appears to have been a murder-suicide amongst a family in their room.' 





'Our thoughts are with the victims and their family members during this difficult time. We are still gathering information about this isolated incident, however it appears to have been a murder-suicide amongst a family in their room.


'We are fully cooperating with the police department during their investigation and will assist them in any way we can.'

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group