Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Chris Irvine, Fox News


		
		
		
		
	


									June 13, 2018 | 9:49pm
											| Updated June 13, 2018 | 10:12pm
												

A 17-year-old Las Vegas boy died during a game of “Russian roulette,” according to police.

Matthew Minkler’s body was found late Friday in an abandoned house in Henderson, Nev., roughly 16 miles from Las Vegas.

Jaiden Caruso, 16, is facing a charge of murder with a deadly weapon, while another teenager, Kody Harlan, 17, is facing charges of accessory to murder after the fact and destroying evidence, police confirmed.

Minkler’s body was apparently dragged to a downstairs closet after he was shot dead in the kitchen, according to the probable cause arrest report for Caruso and Harlan.

The report offered a chillingly simple explanation of the game: “Russian roulette is known to be a deadly game of loading a single bullet into a revolver, spinning the cylinder and then pulling the trigger.”

It is unclear how the three boys knew one another.

The pair are being charged as adults and are being held at Clark County Detention Center after initially being booked into the county’s juvenile detention center.

Police said a homicide investigation began earlier on Friday after officers tried to pull over a vehicle that was being driven recklessly near East Sunset Road and Green Valley Parkway.

The vehicle drove through a red light and crashed at the intersection, at which point several teenagers attempted to flee.

When they were taken into custody, at least one of them revealed information about the homicide. Minkler’s body was subsequently found in the abandoned house on Cool Lilac Avenue.

Minkler’s parents have yet to comment, but a GoFundMe set up by his cousin Leah Robbins-Golden has raised more than $6,400.

She wrote on the website: “We are beyond devastated and hurting more than imaginable. We will never get to see that beautiful smile or get those loving Matt hugs that just brighten our days.”

In a post on Facebook, she added: “RIP my lil big cuz. I’ll never ever be the same without you. I love you more than anything Matthew.”


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump praises 'tough guy' Kim, downplays 'bad things' he's...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump praises 'tough guy' Kim, downplays 'bad things' he's...			
		

Share Selection

71,101

47,112

46,666

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters