Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


BRUSSELS (AP) — U.S. first lady Melania Trump returned to the international stage Wednesday as she mingled with the spouses of America's closest allies over classical music, fashion and chocolate. 

MOSCOW — Mario Mandzukic’s goal four minutes into the second overtime Wednesday capped a wild comeback and sent Croatia into Sunday’s World Cup final with a 2-1 win over England. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Emilio Zavala

Emilio Zavala

McALLEN — A Hidalgo County Sheriff’s deputy was arrested Saturday morning for alleged injury to a child, a state jail felony.


Emilio Zavala was arrested on a warrant issued by the McAllen Police Department, according to a statement Sheriff J.E. “Eddie” Guerra posted to Facebook.


Zavala was released later the same day on a $5,000 bond.

“I hold my employees to a high standard of public service and representation to this office, both on and off duty, which is why I am greatly concerned at the reported arrest of one of my deputies,” Guerra’s statement read.


Zavala, who joined the Hidalgo County Sheriff's Office in February 2017, has been placed on administrative leave pending further investigation of the incident, which Guerra said “is not related to his duties for the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office.”


“We will thoroughly investigate any and all allegations of employee malfeasance to maintain accountability and transparency to you the citizens we serve,” his statement read.

If found guilty, Zavala could face 180 days to two years in jail, in addition to a possible $10,000 fine.


msmith@themonitor.com



Emilio Zavala


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.