Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN FRANCISCO (AP) — The first black female mayor of San Francisco made history Wednesday as she took the oath of office, vowing to help drug users and the homeless in a city that has come to embody extreme wealth and poverty. 

Safety Earl Thomas remains a holdout in Seattle, and the speculation that he’ll eventually join the Dallas Cowboys continues to be a topic of speculation. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Elizabeth Guerrero sits in a wheelchair as she is charged with murder during her arraignment at the Hidalgo County Detention Center on Saturday, Nov. 11, 2017, in Edinburg.

Elizabeth Guerrero sits in a wheelchair as she is charged with murder during her arraignment at the Hidalgo County Detention Center on Saturday, Nov. 11, 2017, in Edinburg.

EDINBURG — A woman who allegedly fatally struck her granddaughter’s former common-law husband with an SUV faced a justice of the peace Saturday afternoon at the Hidalgo County jail to hear the charge against her.


Elizabeth Guerrero, 68, of Donna, appeared before Justice of the Peace Jaime “Jerry” Muñoz in a wheelchair. She bowed her head as she was wheeled in to the jail’s small arraignment room and turned her head away from the television cameras present as Muñoz informed her of her rights.

Guerrero was charged with the murder of Gilberto Gaytan, 20, and Muñoz set her bond at $1 million.


Guerreo, who did not have legal representation, requested a court-appointed attorney.

Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office investigators believe Guerrero struck Gaytan with her vehicle in rural Mission on Thursday morning after a custody dispute arose between Gaytan and her granddaughter, Elizabeth Morales, 22. Guerrero and Morales subsequently fled the scene with Gaytan and Morales’ 2-year-old daughter.


As of press time, Guerrero and Morales remain in jail, the latter on a previous possession of a controlled substance charge. The toddler is in Child Protective Services custody.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.