Lots of sunshine. High 96F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

A clear sky. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


COLUMBUS, Ohio--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jul 11, 2018--Aimee Kennedy, Battelle’s Senior Vice President of Philanthropy and Education since 2013, has been named to a new advisory panel created to encourage U.S. scientific and technological innovations in education, as authorized by the American Innov…

MOSCOW (AP) — The Latest on Wednesday at the World Cup (all times local): 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

Gregory Alexander Ortega

Gregory Alexander Ortega

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

PHARR — A man was arraigned on multiple charges Sunday in connection with the murder of a man a few days before who police have yet to identify.


Gregory Alexander Ortega, 29, appeared before Pharr Municipal Court Judge Marissa Hernandez who read the four charges against him, which include murder, evidence tampering, unlawful possession of a firearm and engaging in organized criminal activity.


Hernandez set Ortega’s total bond at $1.4 million, and he was transferred to the Hidalgo County jail shortly after the arraignment.

Few details have been released about the circumstances surrounding Ortega’s charges.


Police responded Friday afternoon to a call regarding an unresponsive male inside a residence in the 1000 block of Tulip Drive. Police subsequently launched a criminal death investigation after it was discovered that the man had “sustained injuries to his body,” according to Sgt. Michael Mendoza, spokesman for the Pharr Police Department.


It is unknown how long the man had been dead.

If convicted of murder — the most serious charge — Ortega could face up to 99 years in prison.


msmith@themonitor.com



Gregory Alexander Ortega


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.