
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A South Orange felon charged with threatening to kill a stranger with a knife on a bus in Union City was ordered detained through the course of his prosecution this morning.

Gabrian Hidalgo, 38, of Irvington Avenue, is charged with aggravated assault and weapons offenses related to a kitchen knife in connection to the incident that occurred on Wednesday, the criminal complaint says.

The alleged victim flagged down a police officer saying that after an argument with a stranger on the bus, the armed man threatened to kill him, the complaint says, adding that police also received a 911 call.

Hidalgo was arrested the same day and made his first court appearance on the charges Thursday via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny. The state moved to detain him at the hearing.

Hidalgo has convictions for robbery and assault, Hudson County Superior Court Judge Nelson noted at Hidalgo's detention hearing this morning in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.



The defendant's public safety assessment lists him at the highest possible level of being a risk of committing an new offense and for failing to appear for court hearings if released pending trial. The PSA also lists him as being a risk of violence, said Nelson, who ordered Hidalgo detained. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        