Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


BRUSSELS (AP) — U.S. first lady Melania Trump returned to the international stage Wednesday as she mingled with the spouses of America's closest allies over classical music, fashion and chocolate. 

MOSCOW (AP) — The Latest on Wednesday at the World Cup (all times local): 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Texas Department of Public Safety troopers will be on the lookout Thursday and Friday for Rio Grande Valley drivers who don’t move over or slow down for vehicles stopped along the road with their emergency lights on.


The DPS will carry out additional enforcement of the Move Over/Slow Down law from 6 a.m. to 4 p.m. Thursday in Hidalgo, Cameron and Willacy counties; from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. Friday in Hidalgo and Cameron counties; and from 3 p.m. to 1 a.m. Friday in Willacy County, according to a news release.

The 2003 law requires drivers to get out of the lane closest to the parked emergency vehicle if they are driving on a road with multiple lanes traveling the same distance. If this is not an option, drivers are required to slow down 20 mph below the speed limit.


Emergency vehicles include police, fire, EMS, Texas Department of Transportation vehicles and tow trucks.

The law was passed to protect emergency responders from being injured or killed by drivers passing too close to them.


Violating the Move Over/Slow Down law can result in up to a $200 fine, which increases to $500 if there is property damage. If drivers cause bodily injury from violating the law, they can be charged with a Class B misdemeanor, which carries up to 180 days in a jail and a fine of up to $2,000.


DPS carries out statewide enforcement efforts of the law throughout the year.

