Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


BRUSSELS (AP) — U.S. first lady Melania Trump returned to the international stage Wednesday as she mingled with the spouses of America's closest allies over classical music, fashion and chocolate. 

MOSCOW — Mario Mandzukic’s goal four minutes into the second overtime Wednesday capped a wild comeback and sent Croatia into Sunday’s World Cup final with a 2-1 win over England. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Daniel Meza

Ismeray Rivera

Daniel Meza

Ismeray Rivera

PHARR — Officials have announced charges and released more details about the unintentional shooting at an H-E-B store Wednesday night when a shopper dropped a concealed handgun.


Sandra Gonzalez, 22, was shot “in one of her lower extremities” after Daniel Meza, 30, dropped a small purse that was carrying a firearm, according to a news release issued Saturday regarding the ongoing investigation.


The purse belonged to 30-year-old Ismeray Rivera who was shopping with Meza at the store when the purse fell to the ground causing the small-caliber pistol to discharge.

Officers were called to the scene at 1300 S. Cage Blvd. at approximately 10 p.m.


Investigators determined the two parties did not know each other. Gonzalez was transported to Rio Grande Regional Hospital for treatment and has since been released.


A warrant for Meza’s arrest was issued on charges of unlawfully carrying a weapon while Rivera was arrested and charged with failure to report a felony. Both were charged with endangering a child, though the circumstances surrounding the charge remain unclear.

Rivera was issued a $30,000 bond for child endangerment and $5,000 bond for failing to report a felony and was transported to the Hidalgo County jail.


This is the second time Meza has faced weapons charges in Hidalgo County. In 2014, he was also charged with unlawfully carrying a weapon, a Class A misdemeanor. The case was later dismissed.


Pharr police request that anyone with information call Pharr Crime Stoppers at (956) 787-8477 or (800) 648-8477.



Daniel Meza

Ismeray Rivera

‘A long way to go’ 

Who’s safe any more? 