Sunny. High 96F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Generally clear skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


COLUMBUS, Ohio--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jul 11, 2018--Aimee Kennedy, Battelle’s Senior Vice President of Philanthropy and Education since 2013, has been named to a new advisory panel created to encourage U.S. scientific and technological innovations in education, as authorized by the American Innov…

MOSCOW (AP) — The Latest on Wednesday at the World Cup (all times local): 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Nanette Yvonne Alejandre, 42, was arrested Wednesday on an intoxication manslaughter charge for her role in a fatal accident earlier this month that occurred after her car veered into oncoming traffic and struck a semitrailer in Progreso.


Alejandre was released from jail the same day after posting $10,000 bond, according to Hidalgo County jail records.

The Feb. 1 accident occurred on U.S. Highway 281 one mile east of Farm-to-Market 1015 around 6 p.m., according to her arrest warrant affidavit. She told Texas Department of Public Safety troopers she “lost control of the vehicle” while arguing with her passenger, 44-year-old Heliodoro Alejandre, who was killed when her car struck a tractor trailer.


She also told investigators she had previously drank two margaritas in Nuevo Progreso, Mexico, and that at one point during the argument, Heliodoro “attempted to exit the vehicle by opening the front passenger door,” which caused her to brake hard and ultimately lose control of the car.

Her blood alcohol level measured .100 an hour after the crash, the affidavit stated. The legal limit is .08.


If convicted of the intoxication manslaughter charge, a second-degree felony, Alejandre faces up to 20 years in prison and up to a $10,000 fine.

