Intervals of clouds and sunshine. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 11:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


The U.S. Small Business Administration and the IRS both announced Tuesday that they are joining efforts to help local victims of the June flooding recover from the disaster. 

HOUSTON — It was all setting up perfectly for the Oakland A’s. They had just completed another late-inning comeback to take the lead in extra innings, giving way to their automatic All-Star closer. It was similar to the movie we’ve seen plenty of times this season. But this one had a twist ending. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Stop the courthouse project and fund drainage upgrades 

WESLACO — Police here arrested a Sullivan City woman accused of drunkenly crashing into a parked vehicle, killing a passenger, early Wednesday morning.


Franshely Ahaida Salinas, 28, was charged with intoxication manslaughter and intoxication assault with a motor vehicle. A municipal judge set her bond at $250,000 for both charges and she was booked into the Hidalgo County jail Wednesday evening.

Salinas swerved out of her lane at approximately 1:30 a.m. and struck a vehicle parked on the shoulder in the 800 block of Interstate 2, according to officer Eric Hernandez.


The 28-year-old passenger of the parked vehicle, who was not wearing his seatbelt, was ejected and died at the scene. Police had not released his identity as of Wednesday night. The driver was transported to a hospital with unknown injuries, Hernandez said.

The parked vehicle did not have its lights on and police do not yet know why the driver had pulled over to the shoulder.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.