Zeenit Bibi, 36, told in a heartbreaking interview how she was controlled and beaten during her entire marriage


A wife who was kept prisoner in her home and subjected to regular beatings for 16 years has revealed how she finally escaped.

 Zeenit Bibi, 36, told how her husband Aziz Rehman, 47, controlled, beat and verbally abused her during their entire traumatic marriage . 

She was banned from seeing her own family for 16 years as she was "completely under his control" and kept a virtual prisoner in her home in Hodge Hill, Birmingham.

 Rehman even secretly hid twigs and leaves in the front door so he could determine whether or not she had left the house by if they'd moved, Birmingham Live reports. 

Rehman was jailed for three years and nine months on Tuesday after a jury at Birmingham Crown Court found him guilty of assaulting his wife and coercive control following a trial.

 And Zeenit has now courageously spoke of the breaking point in which she decided she had to leave father of her children.   When asked about some of the worst things the businessman had done to her, she seemed to struggle to pinpoint single incidents amid the many violent attacks. 

 She said: "The worst thing he did to me was the time I realised I wasn't going to stay with him anymore. I think that was when I made my decision.   "He had a dumbbell put through my head. I couldn't see so I had my face on the floor, I got hit once. Twice. So many times. 

  "And I'm thinking it's a punch, it was when I tried to pull myself out of that position that I saw the red dumbbell in his hands, so it wasn't a punch that was coming through to me, it was the dumbbell.   "I got out of that, there was chairs hit through to me on the same day. I was hit quite a bit and then I was left there.   "I think it was that night I realised I need to move, I need to get out of here." 

 Zeenit explained how she had to wait until her violent husband was out of the country before she could safely raise the alarm.   As she was only allowed out to take her children to school, that was where she sought help. 

 She explained: "I got in contact with my childrens' school, because that was the only time I was allowed out on my own.   "So I'd go in past the reception, and I knew that was my only point of contact, without him.   "I remember speaking to one of the school teachers, if he was still in the country I wouldn't dare, I couldn't have made that step. 

"He [Rehman] had gone, as far as I was aware, he was in Greece. He'd go and come back and not let us know. But I was told to stay put."

 From then she was given support from the school, social services got involved and a plan was put in place for her and her children.   Mrs Bibi explained how the abuse and control started on the second day of her marriage back in 2000.   "It started with a slap across the face, it just carried on from there.   "Slowly, slowly he just started telling me what to wear, what to do, how to sit, how to get up, who I was allowed to see, who I wasn't allowed to see, and slowly, slowly he started cutting my friends off, my family got totally cut off." 