Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Elizabeth Rosner


		
		
		
		
	


									April 16, 2018 | 7:06pm
											| Updated May 14, 2018 | 5:36pm
												

Prosecutors Monday recounted the horrific injuries suffered by two children who were butchered by their nanny, saying “every stab, every lash” had a purpose — and that their murders were intentional.

Yoselyn Ortega carefully planned the deaths of Lucia Krim 6, and her brother Leo, 2, who’s bloody bodies were found stacked inside a bathtub in their Upper West Side apartment in 2012, prosecutor Stuart Silberg told jurors in Manhattan Supreme Court.




“Just looking at her plans for the day and looking at what she did in that bathroom — that tells you exactly what her plans were,” Silberg said in his closing arguments. “She wasn’t coming home that day and the Krim children were going to end up dead.”

Ortega, then 55, left at home her purse with family heirlooms, as well as insurance documents, and told her sister a day before the Oct. 25, 2012 murders to take care of her son Jesus and “raise him well,” Silberg said.

“She knew she was not coming home that day, that is why she was saying those words to her sister,” he said. “She knew when she left that day what her plan was.”

Ortega has mounted an insanity defense, claiming she was suffering from a psychotic episode and was too mentally ill to understand the consequences of her actions.

But Silberg insisted Ortega plotted the murders right down to carrying them out in the bathroom of the West. 75th Street apartment — the furthest room in the house with a street-facing window, so no one could hear the children’s screams.

“This was to punish Marina, can you think of any way else of punishing a person more?” Silberg asked.

Dad Kevin Krim — who held back tears as he listened to defense deliver its summations earlier Monday — reappeared in the courtroom only after Silberg finished detailing the dozens of stab wounds Lucia and Leo suffered.

The children were discovered by their mother, Marina, just as Ortega plunged the knife into her own throat.

“She knew Marina would be outside the door because it’s exactly as she planned,” Silberg said, as Kevin Krim glowered from the front of the galley. “Mental illness is not an excuse. It does not excuse responsibility for murder.”

A red-faced Kevin Krim sat in anguished silence as defense lawyer Valerie Van Leer-Greenberg told jurors that Ortega “loved” the family she tore apart and heard voices telling her to kill the children.

“She was coming apart at the seams,” Van Leer-Greenberg said. “Her mind and her body separated metaphysically.”

She challenged prosecutors’ notion that Ortega was driven to kill because she was envious of mom Marina’s picture-perfect life.

“If the defendant bore so much hate for Marina and was waiting for her ‘til she got home holding at 13-inch knife, then why not stab Marina was well?” Van Leer-Greenberg asked. “The defendant had already stabbed herself twice.”

But in her closings, Silberg strongly rebutted that point.

“She never talked about loving Marina, or liking Marina. This was to punish Marina, can you think of any way else of punishing a person more?

“Her plan was to hurt Marina, murder the children and even though she said, ‘I have four children and loved them all’ — the Krim children got murdered.

“All this professed love, wasn’t. If she loved them she wouldn’t kill them. Not knowing why does not excuse the conduct, all it means you don’t have a good answer … For all of eternity they [Krims] won’t have a good answer.

“She was suppose to take care of them and protect them, she waited till she was alone in the apartment to murder them.”


			Read Next
		


			
				State senate votes to stiffen unlicensed driving penalties			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				State senate votes to stiffen unlicensed driving penalties			
		

Share Selection

82,223

58,098

54,520

32,049

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters