Lots of sunshine. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

A clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN FRANCISCO (AP) — London Breed will make history Wednesday as the first black female mayor of San Francisco when she is sworn into office in the city that has come to embody extreme wealth and poverty in the modern age. 

TOKYO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jul 11, 2018--Castem Co., Ltd., a metal cast manufacturer, will commence pre-sales from July 15, 2018, of a cast made out of the left fist of legendary six-time former world boxing champion and Senator of the Philippines, Manny Pacquiao. Utilizing technology developed…

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Stop the courthouse project and fund drainage upgrades 

RAYMONDVILLE — Police have a suspect in the hit-and-run accident that critically injured a cyclist.


Investigators were preparing a probable cause affidavit to request a judge issue an arrest warrant, Police Chief Uvaldo Zamora said yesterday.


“Everything they’ve found they’re putting together to present to a judge to prove there’s probable cause to issue an arrest warrant,” Zamora said.

Zamora said investigators have identified the driver of a light-colored SUV believed to be the vehicle that struck Ruben Serna, 56, as he rode a bicycle Nov. 18.


Serna remains in critical condition at Valley Baptist Medical Center in Harlingen, hospital spokeswoman Teri Retana said late yesterday afternoon.


The suspect is the man whose photograph was captured by a local Stripes convenience store camera after the accident, Zamora said.

Police, he said, have matched witnesses’ descriptions of a vehicle pulling a boat believed to have struck Serna as he rode his bicycle on the shoulder of the road in front of the Otis Klar Head Start center on East FM 186 about 7 a.m. Nov. 18.


Serna, believed to be from Houston, was living in Raymondville, where he is believed to have been working at an area ranch, Zamora said.


fdelvalle@valleystar.com



Police are requesting anyone with information about the accident to call the Raymondville Police Department at (956) 689-2441.