Sunny. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mainly clear. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 9:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


Weslaco native Benita Valdez became the newest member of Tropical Texas Behavioral Health’s board of trustees after she was appointed and sworn in last week by county officials. 

HONOLULU--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jul 11, 2018--Kamu Grugier-Hill, linebacker from the reigning Super Bowl championship football team the Philadelphia Eagles, has joined together with professional athletes from Hawai‘i who are with the National Football League (NFL), Major League Baseball (MLB) and…

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Jaquelne Chacon, sits on the couch with her brothers Ricardo Chacon, 12, and Lalo Chacon, 14, center, in their home Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

Jaquelyne Chacon shows a picture of her father Eduardo Chacon before his deportation by immigration last year on Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

Jaquelyne Chacon, who lives with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, rest on the couch with her family Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

Jennifer Chacon, 18, holds her hair that she had cut off she hope to donate to patients dealing with cancer who have lost their hair in her home Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

Jaquelne Chacon, sits on the couch with her brothers Ricardo Chacon, 12, and Lalo Chacon, 14, center, in their home Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

Jaquelyne Chacon shows a picture of her father Eduardo Chacon before his deportation by immigration last year on Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

Jaquelyne Chacon, who lives with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, rest on the couch with her family Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

Jennifer Chacon, 18, holds her hair that she had cut off she hope to donate to patients dealing with cancer who have lost their hair in her home Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, in Donna.

DONNA — Jaquelyne Chacon had been taken to the emergency room at Knapp Medical Center in Weslaco because of an overwhelming pain in her joints and extreme fatigue on Oct. 5. She was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia the following day.


Her two brothers, sister and their mother gathered in the living room of their one bedroom home last week. It was nearly a year since their father had been deported to Mexico.


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers had knocked on the door of their small trailer home and asked him to step outside, said Jaquelyne Chacon. He complied.

“They didn’t ask him anything,” Chacon recalled. “They just took him.”


Eduardo Chacon had entered the United States through Mexico without authorization and is not eligible to return for at least 10 years. The last time they saw him in the U.S. was during a visitation at the Port Isabel Detention Center.


They found out their father was safe in Rio Bravo on Thanksgiving Day in 2016. This year, though, the situation had become even more burdensome.


The Chacons lost the land their trailer sat on because of their inability to make payments following their father’s deportation. So, they moved it onto neighboring property before selling it and moving to the home they live in now.


The two sisters received Medicaid benefits until losing insurance coverage within the past two years, they said.


Chacon, a 2016 graduate of Donna North High School, has undergone two rounds of chemotherapy. She had to temporarily leave her part-time job at JC Penney while being treated for cancer for at least six months.


“I didn’t know how to react when the doctor told me,” Chacon said. “(It was) the next day or two days later, when I realized that it was bad.”


The family did not have enough money last week to pay the hospital for a third chemotherapy session — $1,500 solely for admittance to receive treatment.


None of the siblings or their mother have health insurance.


Jaquelyne Chacon’s doctor recommended she apply for health insurance through the insurance marketplace created under former President Barack Obama’s health care law.


The 2014 law shields patients with pre-existing conditions from being denied health insurance coverage, according to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.


Sergio Elizondo, a health insurance agent with Elizondo Financial Solutions LLC in Harlingen, helped her select a plan that kicks in Jan. 1. Elizondo recommended that Jaquelyne Chacon apply for disability benefits, and in two years she may qualify for Medicare.


For now, though, Chacon is uninsured, unable to work and fighting the cancer affecting white blood cells in her body.


Her sister Jennifer Chacon, an 18-year-old senior at Donna North High School, is the only one in the family with a stable job.


The cross country athlete takes their only car to work part-time at JC Penney for about four days a week. The money she earns goes toward paying for rent and her sister’s chemotherapy treatment.


The family occasionally travels to Mexico to visit their father who works as a welder to send money back home.


“We’re just hoping that everything will pass,” Jennifer Chacon said, “and it’s even harder because my dad’s not here.”


The siblings’ resilience is evident in their speech and commitment to overcoming the unforeseen struggles. They often smiled while talking candidly about their lives.


Jennifer Chacon was even more talkative when asked about school. The senior varsity athlete was the only girl to make it to the state cross country meet in Round Rock earlier this month where she cut 20 inches off her hair to donate to an organization benefiting cancer patients.


“This year is my first year taking college classes,” Jennifer Chacon said. “I’m taking pre-cal … and physics.”


She plans to graduate on the distinguished plan from Donna North High School in June.

Chacon helped the family while her sister was in the hospital for 21 days but had to miss school.


The 18-year-old has her eye on scholarships which would give her the opportunity to leave the Rio Grande Valley for a few years.


“If I go off to college, I’m going to give them a better future,” she said referring to her family.


She’s committed to going to a college that offers her the best opportunity.


“I’ve been getting offers from colleges,” Chacon said. “So, I would really, really love to run at the college level.”


Jaquelyne Chacon wore a beanie to cover up hair loss and often smiled while her sister spoke about her goals and achievements.


Her mother recalled having “everything” when her husband and their children lived in the trailer. The family now shares the one bedroom packed with three beds.


“When they deported him, we lost a lot of what we had,” she said in Spanish, adding that the family had to essentially start over.


The soft-spoken mother held back tears, attributing her strength to love of her four children. She said she will remain positive while her eldest child receives cancer treatment for two years.


“I do care, but I’m not going to get depressed,” Jaquelyne Chacon said.


cgarcia@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Cristina Garcia posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.