
                                WILLIAM CUMMINGS
                            


                            
                            Last updated 16:50, June 22 2018
                            

 Migrant children suffered physical abuse, including forced injections of psychotropic drugs, at private youth shelters contracted by the US government to house undocumented minors, according to a lawsuit filed in federal court by a human rights organisation.


The lawsuit alleges that the Department of Health and Human Services' Office of Refugee Resettlement "routinely" places migrant children on psychotropic drugs without parental consent and without telling the kids about the medication "in utter disregard of state laws."


The lawsuit against Attorney General Jeff Sessions was filed April 16 in US District Court in California by the Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law after Sessions announced the administration's "zero tolerance" policy on undocumented immigrants. But many of the allegations in the filing date back to unaccompanied minors who crossed the southern border during the Obama administration, long before immigration officials began systematically separating migrant families.

Immigrant children walk in a line outside the Homestead Temporary Shelter for Unaccompanied Children, a former Job Corps site that now houses them, in Homestead, Florida.

Children said they were given as many as 18 pills a day and often were not told what the medication was for. Included among the drugs administered to the children were antidepressant, anti-anxiety, antipsychotic medications such as Clonazepam, Divalproex, Duloxetine, Lithium and Geodon.


READ MORE: * Melania Trump wore an 'I really don't care' jacket to meet migrant children * Young immigrants detained in US centre allege abuse * Separations: States sue Trump


If the children refused the medications they would be punished or physically forced to take them, according to the lawsuit.

Immigrant children as young as 14 were housed at the Shenandoah Valley Juvenile Center.

Julio, a boy who was held at the Shiloh Treatment Center in Texas, which specialises in treating kids with behavioral or emotional problems, said he saw staff members hold another child down, pry his mouth open and force pills into his mouth. Julio said he was told that the only way to be released from the facility was to take the medication. Julio also said he was handcuffed, locked in a cell and pepper sprayed by staff members at Shiloh.


"Sometimes they give me forced injections," a girl named Rosa was quoted as saying in the lawsuit. "One or two staff members hold my arms and the nurse gives me an injection."


The Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law said without proper oversight, there was a risk that the medications could be used as "chemical straight-jackets."

 "In adults, psychotropic drugs can have serious and sometimes irreversible side effects, including psychosis, seizures, irreversible movement disorders, suicidal ideation, weight gain, and organ damage," the lawsuit says. "Comparatively little is known about the effects of psychotropic drugs on children and adolescents."


"You don't have to be a rocket scientist here; it looks like they're trying to control agitation and aggressive behaviour with antipsychotic drugs," forensic psychiatrist Mark. J. Mills told the Center for Investigative Reporting. "You don't need to administer these kinds of drugs unless someone is plucking out their eyeball or some such. The facility should not use these drugs to control behaviour. That's not what antipsychotics should be used for. That's like the old Soviet Union used to do."


According to a report published on the Center for Investigative Reporting's website Reveal, the government has paid Shiloh more than $25 million since 2013 to house migrant children. The report said a 16-year-old girl died at the facility in 2001 after being restrained and two other children died while being restrained at facilities tied to Shiloh's founder, the most recent in 2010.

Children kept at the Shenandoah Valley Juvenile Center in Virginia described being shackled for days on end.

In 2014, Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Texas, called for HHS to end its contract with Shiloh and for the Texas state government to shut it down after a report appeared in the Houston Chronicle documenting the alleged abuses at the facility.


The Center for Investigative Reporting found 71 companies contracted by the government to house migrant children, including the more than 2,000 children taken from their parents in recent weeks under the administration's "zero tolerance" policy.


The center's investigation found that half of the $3.4 billion in taxpayer funds paid to house those kids over the past four years "went to homes with serious allegations of mistreating children."


Children kept at the Shenandoah Valley Juvenile Center in Virginia described being shackled for days on end, having their clothes and bedding taken away, and being strapped to chairs with bags placed over their heads.


"They are going to suffocate me," one child thought when forced to wear one of the bags.


- USA Today


The story behind the girl in the recording begging for her aunt

World Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        How musk moved in on the cave
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        The will to live: New cave rescue details
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Remarkable Thai cave survivor
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Trump lashes out at Nato allies
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys salute from hospital
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescues that gripped the world
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Why we care for the Thai boys
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Urged suicide 'free speech'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescue almost went horribly wrong
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Hero cave doctor's tragic loss
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Amid the Brexit turmoil
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys given sedative
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave casualty 'hero in my heart'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Coach, three boys 'stateless'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys were extraordinary
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            