
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

03/15/2018 07:20 AM EDT

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

City Council Speaker Corey Johnson got a lesson in Cuomo-de Blasio triangulation this week after traveling up to Albany to meet with the governor about the city’s problems at NYCHA. That meeting yielded a lengthy letter from Andrew Cuomo’s counsel, Alphonso David, laying out the matters on which Johnson and other Council members had reached an agreement with the governor. As our Gloria Pazmino reports, Johnson was forced to disavow David’s comments in his own letter Wednesday night, in which he declared that the agreement David wrote of — which stated that Johnson had agreed to add hundreds of millions of dollars in city funding for the MTA and would support hiring an independent contractor to oversee repairs at NYCHA — did not exist. 


Story Continued Below

 “We did not come to any substantive agreement with you on any of the matters that we discussed other than to further consider everything you put on the table,” Johnson wrote Wednesday.

Johnson and the City Council, already promising to serve as more of a check on Mayor Bill de Blasio than the last speaker, are finding themselves in a position of potential power in the feud between the mayor and governor. But they’ll have to think strategically to ward off becoming pawns in Cuomo’s war against de Blasio. 

Before this week’s meeting, Cuomo said publicly he would defer to the Council’s judgment on what the state should do to help improve NYCHA, where mold, lead paint and crumbling infrastructure have become a health emergency for tenants. “I would like an answer from the City Council: what they want the state to do specifically,” Cuomo said earlier this week. “I will be guided by the Council. ... I’ve been talking to the mayor’s office about this, but I want to know from the City Council what they want to do to fix it.”

A member who spoke with POLITICO last night said the reverse turned out to be true: Cuomo apparently saw the meeting as an opportunity to guide the Council and make it look like the proposals he sought were their idea. “Cuomo was saying this was an opportunity to take action where there was inaction — meaning the mayor. So he’s planting all these ideas about what the Council could be doing,” the member said. “The warning sign came when he started taking notes and reading it back to us. He recited it back to us and said he was going to send a letter.”

When David’s letter went out publicly, “The mayor flipped out and the council was caught off guard,” a Council member said. Lesson learned. 

IT’S THURSDAY. BEWARE the Ides of March. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? In New York City with no announced public schedule.

WHERE’S BlLL? Holding a press conference in Park Slope on new legislation that would take dangerous drivers off the road.

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “BETRAYED”— Daily News: “MURDERED BY DADDY” — See Them

More Tabloids: — Newsday:”MANGANOS AND VENDITTO: OPENING ARGUMENTS” — El Diario New York: “NY grita: ‘Alto a las armas’”— See Them

The Free Papers: — Metro New York: “ENOUGH”— AM New York: “‘WE DON’T FEEL SAFE’” — See Them

The Broadsheets:— New York Times: — 1 col., above the fold: “DEMOCRAT’S WIN ON TRUMP’S TURF OFFERS ROAD MAP” — 2 col., above the fold: “Thousands Walk Out of Class, Urging Action on Gun Control”— 4 col., below the fold; ‘C.E.O. Who Promised Health in a Pinprick Is Charged With Fraud”— Wall Street Journal: — 1 col., above the fold: ‘Theranos And CEO Punished In Fraud”— 4 col., above the fold: “Trump Firm Tied to Silencing Deal” — See Them

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “Personal sad SHOCK-FAMILY, 2 young daughters … Viol everyth ADM Believes, Not who we R.” ~ Cuomo’s notes on how to react to the Percoco verdict

MARCH MADNESS #PLAYBOOKPOOL– BEAT THE BUZZER! You have until noon ET today to fill out your bracket for the 2nd Annual Playbook Pool and compete against your friends, top Playbookers, political insiders and VIPs to win prizes including Apple Watches, Airpods, Go Pros, Google Home—not to mention some pretty legit bragging rights. Among the participants this year: White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders, CNN's Brianna Keilar &amp; Phil Mattingly, ABC’s Jonathan Karl, and HLN’s SE Cupp have sent in their picks. In the Senate, Thom Tillis (R-NC), James Lankford (R-OK), David Perdue (R-GA) and Jerry Moran (R-KS) are in it to win it. And in the House, Speaker Paul Ryan (R-WI) and our very own Democratic Caucus Chairman Joe Crowley (D-NY) lead a host of members who’ve submitted their brackets. Governors are going all in as well, including Larry Hogan (R-MD), Roy Cooper (D-NC), Steve Bullock (D-MT), Chris Sununu (R-NH), Phil Murphy (D-NJ), Kate Brown (D-OR) Jay Inslee (D-WA) Pete Ricketts (R-NE), Bruce Rauner (R-IL) and BOTH Walkers, Scott and Bill (WI and AK). On the home front, Brooklyn Borough President Eric L. Adams, and NYC Public Advocate Letitia James have each turned in their brackets. You can check out our VIP Board and get your bracket in now by clicking HERE!

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

UNITED BUT APART — Cuomo, de Blasio march separately against gun violence in wake of Parkland — POLITICO New York’s Eliza Shapiro and Gloria Pazmino: Shortly after 10 a.m. Wednesday, Gov. Andrew Cuomo eased himself onto the pavement of Zuccotti Park and lay down next to American Federation of Teachers President Randi Weingarten. He held his head slightly above the ground as he and about 200 students from the Leadership and Public Service High School in Lower Manhattan participated in a "die-in." A borough away, Mayor Bill de Blasio stood outside the gates of Edward Murrow High School in Midwood as hundreds of students streamed out of the school. The governor and the mayor were both marking the National School Walkout, a nationwide student protest against gun violence. The walkout was planned a month to the day after the mass shooting in Parkland, Fla., that left 17 dead. Packs of students and teachers could be seen marching up and down the sidewalks of the city Wednesday morning bearing homemade signs and chanting "Protect our kids, not your guns."

In Manhattan, Cuomo stood alongside Weingarten and United Federation of Teachers President Michael Mulgrew. Holding a student’s hand aloft, he chanted “Together we stand!” and “Enough is enough!” but did not participate in a “No more guns” chant. That Cuomo marched alongside the leaders of the city and country’s most prominent teachers unions in the same park where the Occupy Wall Street movement erupted was a clear demonstration of the governor’s eagerness to burnish his progressive credentials. The governor’s relationships with Weingarten and Mulgrew have transformed over the last three years. After proposing an aggressive education reform agenda that would have crippled the teachers unions, those unions revolted. Cuomo quickly backed away from his plans and left the promise of teacher evaluation and tenure reform unfulfilled, much to the unions’ delight. The governor and Mulgrew may have a better relationship now even than de Blasio does with the UFT — the union has put increasing distance between its leaders and City Hall in recent years. Read more here. 

SEE IT — Cuomo, seeming hesitant, joins a die-in: http://bit.ly/2FTshFv

— “During a school walkout in Brooklyn, even the garrulous mayor found brevity Wednesday, with young women from a Brooklyn high school’s activist club dominating the microphone.”

DE BLASIO IN THE HOT SEAT — New York Post’s Lorena Mongelli and Bruce Golding: “Mayor de Blasio may have to testify at the corruption trial of former Nassau County Executive Ed Mangano, a defense lawyer revealed following opening statements today. Marc Agnifilo, who represents co-defendant and ex-Oyster Bay Town Supervisor John Venditto, said he could call de Blasio to the witness stand to answer questions about the prosecution’s star witness, crooked ex-restaurant owner Harendra Singh. ‘We’ll see what Singh testifies to, in terms of [de Blasio], and probably make a decision from there,’ Agnifilo said. During a closed court appearance in 2016, Singh admitted bribing de Blasio with tens of thousands of dollars in campaign contributions so the mayor and other officials would arrange a “favorable” renewal of the lease on his since-shuttered Water’s Edge restaurant in Queens. De Blasio has vehemently denied Singh’s claim, saying: ‘This guy, to save his own skin, struck a plea deal with the federal prosecutors …he agreed to certain charges for his own self-preservation.’ When told about Agnifilo’s remarks, mayoral spokesman Eric Phillips said: ’The mayor’s got nothing to do with that case and we don’t know anything about what the lawyer’s saying.’” Read it here 

CASE AGAINST WEINSTEIN STILL IN THE WORKS, VANCE SAYS — New York Post’s Reuven Fenton: “Manhattan DA Cy Vance said Wednesday that his office is still working on the Harvey Weinstein sex-assault probe, though the prosecutor gave no hint if an indictment was imminent. ‘I’ve spoken with the police and I can tell you we are working very hard with them to complete the investigation,’ Vance said. ‘We’ll take the time it will take to get it done right.’ At least two women have accused the disgraced movie executive of forcing himself on them in 2004 and 2010. When asked about the case against Weinstein last week, NYPD Chief of Detectives Robert Boyce pointed the finger at the Manhattan district attorney to explain why the accused rapist still hasn’t been arrested.‘We are still accumulating evidence. It’s going very, very well. We have people who are getting ready to go to grand jury,’ said Boyce. ‘Ask [DA Cy Vance].’” Read it here.

REVOLVING DOOR — Daily News’s James Fanelli: “A mainstay in former Mayor Rudy Giuliani’s administration who once gave a sweetheart contract to his pal and suspended the license of a cabbie who got into a dispute with his lover is back on the city payroll — even though he claimed to be disabled for a decade. Christopher Lynn was hired by his longtime friend Councilman Ruben Diaz Sr. in January to act as his counsel. The City Council is paying Lynn, 67, a $50,000 salary for the part-time job, records show. Six years ago, insurance company AXA Equitable accused Lynn of fraudulently claiming he was totally disabled to collect on a $3,000-a-month policy, according to court records.” Read it here. 

BREWER V. DOLAN — Daily News’s Jillian Jorgensen: “Manhattan Borough president is calling a foul on Madison Square Garden’s decision to boot the New York Liberty to the ’burbs. The team is owned by MSG, and has played there for years. But as the company seeks to sell the Liberty, it announced this season’s home games will be at the tiny Westchester County Center. ‘In doing so, you have turned ‘the World’s Most Famous Arena’ into the world’s most famous stage for unfairly benching women athletes,’ Gale Brewer wrote to MSG honcho James Dolan. And, she warned, the company could be endangering its tax abatement, which saves the company $50 million a year and will be up for renewal in a few years.” Read it here. 

A MODEST PROPOSAL — De Blasio rolls out a modest congestion plan — and meets opposition, by POLITICO’s Dana Rubinstein: With the prospects of state approval for congestion pricing in New York City looking ever dicier, Mayor Bill de Blasio on Monday will move forward with a congestion-fighting scheme of a more modest sort. The pilot program essentially limits parking, drop-offs and deliveries on certain busy stretches of city road. But in a measure of the political peril accompanying any change to New York City’s gridlocked streetscape, even de Blasio’s incremental congestion fighting plan is engendering angry pushback. In a joint statement shared with POLITICO, several New York City stakeholders called on de Blasio “to re-evaluate” the plan and replace it with one “that addresses congestion in a more meaningful way.” Read more here. 

— PAROLE CONTROVERSY FOR CONVICTED COP KILLER — AP’s Jennifer Peltz: “A former member of a black radical group who was convicted in the 1971 killings of two police officers has been granted parole after 44 years behind bars for a crime that crystalized an era when militant groups declared war on authorities. Herman Bell’s supporters, including relatives of one of the slain officers, said the 70-year-old was a model inmate who deserved freedom. But the other officer’s family, the New York police union and some lawmakers called Bell’s parole an affront to police who sacrificed their lives for public safety. Bell had been denied parole seven times before. But in a decision released Wednesday, a parole board said Bell’s “debt has been paid to society” after he admitted his crime, was productive in prison and amassed supporters including relatives of one of the slain officers.” Read it here 

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— PERCOCO JUST DID ‘TRANSITION’ WORK — New York Times’ Vivian Wang: “In his first public appearance after the corruption conviction of a former top aide, Cuomo acknowledged he had known that the aide was using government offices while working for the governor’s 2014 campaign team. The aide, Joseph Percoco, was convicted in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Tuesday of accepting more than $300,000 in bribes from executives pursuing state contracts. Prosecutors had cast Mr. Percoco as a figure of almost unmatched power, who — until the trial — flouted state ethics rules and federal laws with impunity. … ‘When he left state government, he would come back into the office to handle transition matters,’ Mr. Cuomo said of Mr. Percoco. … Edward F. Cox, the chairman of the state Republican Party, called Mr. Cuomo’s remarks an ‘Oscar-worthy performance.’ State Senator John DeFrancisco, a Republican who is seeking his party’s nomination to run against Mr. Cuomo this fall, called Mr. Cuomo’s explanation of Mr. Percoco’s presence in the office ‘preposterous’ and ‘an insult to the intelligence of New Yorkers.’” Read more here

— Cuomo falsely said his name "was never mentioned" during the corruption trial.

— The Daily News took a picture of Cuomo’s handwritten talking points Read more here.

— While the case will be remembered for the conviction of Cuomo's longtime right-hand man, testimony and evidence also revealed other legal lines that may have been skirted by the Cuomo administration but were not the subject of the prosecution.

— The New York Post calls Cuomo’s denials over Percoco’s actions “disgraceful.”

— The New York Daily News said the conviction “leaves a ghastly stain on Gov. Cuomo as he runs for reelection in November. It might come out — but only if Cuomo stops talking about cleaning up his government and starts scrubbing as hard as humanly possible.”

— Onondaga County Executive Joanie Mahoney said she was bewildered by the felony conviction of Syracuse-area business executive Steven Aiello, who she said has shown integrity as a local developer.

— MOLINARO SPEAKS — Gannett’s Jon Campbell: “Dutchess County Executive Marc Molinaro said Wednesday his about-face decision to enter the governor's race was caused by an ‘outpouring’ from supporters encouraging him to reconsider. Molinaro, a Republican, will publicly launch his campaign for governor on April 2, according to his campaign. Despite announcing in January he wouldn't run, Molinaro spent recent weeks courting enough support from GOP leaders to nearly lock up the party's nomination to challenge Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo this fall. In an interview Wednesday with the USA TODAY Network's Albany Bureau, Molinaro chalked up his change of course to his supporters' encouragement, saying the conditions for a run weren't right two months ago but have since changed. ‘There are a number of variables that have changed, not the least of which being a really genuine outpouring — and I mean this with the greatest amount of sincerity — from my party and from outside my party asking me to reconsider and enter the race,’ Molinaro said. ‘That wasn't something that I could overlook.’” Read more here

— PRIME-TIME CUOMO — New York Times’ Michael Grynbaum: “CNN is turning to one of its morning anchors to shore up prime time. Chris Cuomo, the outspoken co-host of ‘New Day,’ who has gained prominence — and received some right-wing blowback — for his coverage of the Trump administration, is set to take over the network’s 9 p.m. slot on weeknights starting in the spring, CNN said on Wednesday. The move would catapult Mr. Cuomo, 47 — a son of Mario Cuomo, the former New York governor, and the brother of Andrew Cuomo, the current governor — into the highest echelon of cable news, pitting him directly against Rachel Maddow of MSNBC and Sean Hannity of Fox News. CNN has struggled recently in prime time, falling to third place behind Fox News and MSNBC, as viewers are increasingly drawn to partisan commentary. Anderson Cooper, who hosts the network’s coverage between 8 and 10 p.m., attracted about a third of Mr. Hannity’s audience last month, for instance.” Read more here

SCHNEIDERMAN DELIVERS JUSTICE FOR SNUGGIE OWNERS : ”A company that promised 'buy one, get one free' deals to entice people to buy Snuggies on TV commercials is now paying out refunds to customers. And it's not because the full-length, wearable blankets were faulty. The refunds are part of a settlement Allstar Marketing Group reached with the Federal Trade Commission, which accused the company of duping customers into paying more than they expected through hidden processing and handling fees. The FTC is now mailing out 218,254 refund checks totaling more than $7.2 million to people who bought various 'buy one get one free' products marketed by Allstar. The average check will be for about $33 and is funded from the money Allstar paid to the FTC. But wait, there’s more! The settlement also compensates some customers of the Perfect Bacon Bowl, Magic Mesh Door, Perfect Brownie Pan, Cat’s Meow, and Roto Punch products…. The FTC complaint details that customers who thought they were getting two products for “just $19.95” also got stuck with a $7.95 processing and handling fee for each item. That meant their total for the two Snuggies, for example, would soar to $35.85. Customers were not allowed to order just one item under the promotion.” Read it here. 

COMING ATTRACTIONS -- POLITICO Space is our new, free weekly briefing on the policies and personalities shaping the second space age in Washington and beyond. Sign-up today to start receiving the newsletter right at launch on April 6th. http://politi.co/2Fuh4vF

SOCIAL DATA

Tech:NYC and Turner hosted a pre-March Madness party at Bleacher Report’s new work/play offices near Times Square. The TX Southern – NC Central game played on tv screens in the background. SPOTTED: — Bloomberg’s Gerrit De Vynck and Shira Ovide, Bleacher Report’s Tyger Danger, Airbnb’s Liz Fusco, Fast Company’s Cale Weissman, Adweek’s Marty Swant, Engadget’s Devindra Hardawar, Coindesk’s Brady Dale, Shutterstock’s Niamh Hughes, and Sprinklr’s Kyle Guinta.

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Mark J. Green, former NYC public advocate, is 73 ... NYT’s Sopan Deb is 3-0 ... Jenny 8. Lee, co-founder of literary studio Plympton and NYT alum ... Edelman’s Kevin Infante is 29 ... Niambé A. Tomlinson, LC for Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand (D-N.Y.) … Hae-Lin Choi, CWA District 1 deputy political director … Chloe LaBranche ... Rahimeh Andalibian … Assemblywoman Nily Rozic … Hixny’s Eric Wohlleber.

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

TOP WSJ VIDEO EDITOR OUT OVER MISCONDUCT ALLEGATIONS: A Wall Street Journal spokesperson told The Daily Caller's Amber Athey and Joe Simonson that Chris Moran, their top video editor, was fired over allegations of sexual misconduct. "Dow Jones takes allegations of misconduct very seriously," the spokesperson said. "Following an internal review, Chris Moran is no longer employed by The Wall Street Journal." The dismissal followed an internal review of the claims, which the Journal declined to detail.

TRUMP ORG TIED TO DEAL SILENCING STORMY: The Wall Street Journal's Michael Rothfeld and Joe Palazzolo report that "documents marked 'HIGHLY CONFIDENTIAL PROCEEDING' for the first time tie President Donald Trump's flagship holding company to the continuing effort to silence" Stormy Daniels, the adult-film performer who says she had a 2006 affair with the president. Trump Organization lawyer Jill Martin "is listed as counsel in an arbitration demand for Essential Consultants LLC, a Delaware company formed by Mr. Trump's personal lawyer, [Michael Cohen], and used to pay $130,000 to [Daniels] in exchange for her silence," they report.

- "We are uncovering more and more evidence that demonstrates that the American people have not been told the truth," Daniels lawyer, Michael Avenatti, said in a statement to the Journal. "We will not stop until we get to the bottom of this."

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

 — "Impact of steel tariffs already being felt in NYC," by Crain's Joe Anuta: “The price of steel used on New York City construction sites has increased dramatically since late 2017 in anticipation of federal tariffs on foreign metals, according to several companies, adding to the already sky-high cost of construction here. The White House has proposed a 25% surcharge on steel and 10% on aluminum, though President Donald Trump said last week that Canada and Mexico would be temporarily exempted and that other countries may be spared as well. Nothing has been enacted, but the mere expectation has already shrunk foreign shipments and given domestic producers a degree of control over the market they haven’t had since similar tariffs were instituted by former President George W. Bush.” Read the story here

— Once a community blight, shuttered Bronx jail to become sprawling mixed-use site, by POLITICO New York's Sally Goldenberg: The City Council and de Blasio administration have finalized a deal to turn a former juvenile jail into a sprawling site of housing, retail and light industrial space. The Council's Land Use Committee is expected to pass the $300 million plan Thursday. The Spofford Juvenile Detention Center, which was shuttered in 2011 after years of protests from criminal justice reform activists, will be home to 740 below-market-rate housing apartments, a public plaza, local food businesses, artist workspace and ground-floor retail. Read the story here

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— Herman Bell, a 70-year-old who killed two NYPD officers, was paroled.

— Rep. Louise Slaughter, 88, fell last week at her house and is being treated for a concussion.

— The last rail cars loaded with coal arrived at a plant serving the Eastman Kodak business park in Rochester this week — a final delivery that should provide power through Sunday, officials said.

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

The Bills have decided the answer for replacing Tyrod Taylor is AJ McCarron, signing the former Bengals backup to a two-year deal.

The Giants patched a massive hole at left tackle, signing Nate Solder, previously of the Patriots.

Today in sad David Wright quotes: "I knew that things weren't going as well as I had hoped. ... It seemed like the more that we tried to put on my plate, the worse that my body was responding."

The day ahead: the Sixers come to The Garden. The Islanders host the Capitals. In men’s hoops, Buffalo, the thirteen seed, takes on Arizona in a late game. This is day one of the men’s tournament, so figure out a way to skip out of work by noon. (And yes, I’m the one who picked Penn over Kansas in the POLITICO Playbook Pool.)

#UpstateAmerica: An Erie County pizzeria made a pie meant to mimic a giant pothole.

#ZooYork: “Well-heeled New Yorkers are flocking to the Fur District”

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC