


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Vitor Pukri, a father of three who had lived in the United States for 17 years has been sent back to Albania. Now his wife could face a similar fate.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    From March 2018: The Pukri family was expecting a diversity visa, but the parents were detained. The father is in jail and the mother has to wear an ankle bracelet.
    Anne-Marie Caruso/NorthJersey.com

Neta Pukri comforts her daughter Angela, 10.
(Photo: Anne-Marie Caruso/NorthJersey.com)

A father of three who had lived in the United States for 17 years — and in Clifton since 2011 — has been deported to his native Albania, less than two months after he was detained during an interview where he thought he would be offered the chance to adjust his immigration status.


His wife, who officials said tried to interfere with his deportation at Newark Liberty International Airport, has been detained by immigration authorities and could face a similar fate.


The moves come as President Donald Trump has reverted to the hard-line stance on immigration that he adopted during his 2016 campaign. This week, he has pushed for new restrictions on legal and illegal immigration, including proposals that would make it more difficult to apply for and obtain asylum. 


Vitor Pukri, 55, was deported on March 28, said Emilio K. Dabul, a spokesman for  Immigration and Customs Enforcement in Newark. His immigration attorney, Michael DiRaimondo, said the Board of Immigration Appeals denied a stay of removal, and within hours Pukri was on a plane. 


"It’s unbelievable, it happened in record time,'' he said. "I’ve never seen someone ripped away in 24 hours."  


His wife, Neta Pukri, was taken into custody at Newark Liberty International Airport on the same day following some sort of altercation, DiRaimondo said. She is being held at the Hudson County Corrections and Rehabilitation Center in Kearny, which houses immigration detainees for the federal government. 


Their son, Mikel, 21, has also been detained, said Dabul, the ICE spokesman. He said that while ICE Enforcement and Removal Operations officers were escorting Vitor Pukri at the airport, Neta and Mikel Pukri  "attempted to interfere with the officers" near the Transportation Security Administration checkpoint. The Port Authority police arrested Neta Pukri, and Mikel Pukri fled the airport, he said. 


ICE officers "executed the removal of the detainee Vitor Pukri successfully,'' Dabul said in a statement. "Neta Pukri, who has a final order of removal and had an order of supervision in place, has since had the order of supervision revoked and was released by PAPD to ICE and placed in detention, pending her final removal from the U.S."


Mikel Pukri has since been arrested by the Port Authority police and was sent to the Essex County Correctional Facility in Newark. On Wednesday, he was listed on the ICE website as being in the agency's custody. 


Joseph Pentangelo, a Port Authority spokesman, said the arrest was made around 4 p.m. last Wednesday when two ICE agents were approaching the Terminal B checkpoint at the airport when a woman and her adult son "assaulted the agents [and] yelled obscenities at them in an apparent attempt to free someone who was in custody of the ICE agents." 


He said the "male suspect" fled the scene on foot. 


Pentangelo said Neta Pukri was arrested and charged with assault, disorderly conduct, hindering and obstruction for interfering with federal law enforcement agents.


"There was no disruption to airport operations. The two ICE agents refused medical attention,'' he said in an email.   


Mikel Pukri, who surrendered to police with his attorney on Monday, was charged with aggravated assault, disorderly conduct and obstruction charges, Pentangelo said. 


Sally Pillay, program director for First Friends of New Jersey and New York, an organization that sends volunteers to visit immigration detainees, said she has been in touch with Neta Pukri. Pillay said she told her that when she saw her husband in the airport, he was in handcuffs and shackles, and that she and Mikel were just trying to hug Vitor Pukri goodbye. 


"It breaks my heart, it brings tears to my eyes,'' Pillay said. "This is absolutely devastating, a travesty on what we are doing to families. All they wanted was a sense of saying goodbye." 


In addition to her organization, Pillay said the New York Sanctuary Coalition and American Friends Service Committee are working to help the family. 


DiRaimondo said he plans to ask the courts to release Neta Pukri from immigration detention on humanitarian grounds because she is the mother of an 11-year-old girl who is a U.S. citizen. In addition to her and Mikel, the Pukris also have a 26-year-old son, Bepin. 


The couple had applied for asylum but were denied. Their appeals were also rejected. 


The attorney said that he has requested that the couple's immigration case be reopened. "But now that he is gone, they have very little incentive to open the case,'' he said, referring to Vitor Pukri. "They had a case, and they are really scared about returning." 


More: Clifton couple thought they could adjust their legal status; instead, they were detained


More: Mother facing deportation to Bangladesh is given two-month reprieve


More: Clifton couple thought they could adjust their legal status; instead, they were detained


The couple's oldest son, Bepin, could not be reached for comment Tuesday. Both of the Pukris' sons were born in Albania but are shielded from deportation through an Obama-era policy known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, which grants temporary work permits and protection from deportation to undocumented immigrants who were brought to the United States as children.  Trump announced the end of the DACA program in September, but a pair of federal judges have since issued injunctions forcing the federal government to continue to process renewal applications. (New applications are no longer being accepted.)


Vitor, a veterinarian, and Neta, an accountant, left Albania with their sons in 2001 for various reasons, including political ones, Neta Pukri said in an interview last month. She said her husband's democratic views clashed with Albania's socialist government at the time that the family traveled on a tourist visa to Michigan, where they had relatives. The Pukris' sons have also expressed fear over family disputes known as blood feuds, which have led to killings in parts of Albania. 


"It's a scary thing,'' DiRaimondo said. "There are thousands of people in blood feuds and it's a real problem." 


Neta Pukri and her sons were also worried about being forced to live in a country that is majority Muslim. The Pukris are Christian.


Neta Pukri sits beneath a family photo with her children, from left, Angela, age 10, Mikel, 21, and Bepin, 26. (Photo: Anne-Marie Caruso/NorthJersey.com)

They had been living in the United States for less than a year when they heard that a family friend had successfully applied for a diversity immigrant visa. The couple decided that they would try to adjust their immigration status that way as well. 


The diversity visa, also known as the green card lottery, makes up to 50,000 immigrant visas available annually for people from countries with low rates of legal immigration to the United States. Most lottery winners live outside the United States and immigrate through consular processing, according to information provided on the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services website. However, each year, a small number of lottery winners are selected while living in the United States with a nonimmigrant visa or other legal status. 


Because the family had appealed their rejection for asylum status several times, Neta Pukri said they thought their application was still pending, and could apply for a diversity visa. They applied for years, and in May were notified that their application had been selected for further processing. As part of the process, the couple, and Mikel — who was 20 at the time and was included in the application — went for a biometric screening, where they submitted fingerprints, photographs and signatures to verify their identities. 


In December, they received a letter from U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services summoning them to an interview at the agency's offices in Newark on Feb. 6. 


The couple and Mikel arrived early, Neta and Mikel Pukri said last month. After waiting for several hours, they were called into an office. Within minutes, officers from Immigration and Customs Enforcement arrived and told them that there were existing orders of deportation against them and that they would be held on the spot. Mikel was told to wait outside.


They did not realize that being selected for diversity visa lottery does not automatically grant lawful immigration status and does not supersede a final order of removal.


Vitor Pukri was taken into custody that day, and  Neta Pukri was fitted with an ankle monitor and released as part of ICE's Alternatives to Detention program. She was told she would have to check in with ICE officials in a few weeks. 


She and her sons hoped that they would be able to get Vitor Pukri released before he was deported. Instead, with Vitor deported and his wife and middle child in custody, friends have set up a GoFundMe page to raise money to pay the family's legal fees and to cover other basic necessities. As of Tuesday afternoon, they had raised more than $3,000 toward their $5,000 goal.


Email: alvarado@northjersey.com


 


 
