
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Edgewater Police


Devon Drizzt Howard

Edgewater Police


Caleb Joseph Vigil

Edgewater Police


Alicia Elena Valdez




Edgewater police have arrested two men and a woman as suspects in the random robbery and fatal shooting of a 27-year-old man near Sloan’s Lake.

Caleb Joseph Vigil, 19, Devon Drizzt Howard, 20, and and Alicia Elena Valdez, 19, have been arrested in the death of Andrew Jenicek.

Vigil is being held without bond in the Jefferson County jail for investigation of first-degree murder after deliberation, second-degree murder and two counts of robbery with intent to kill or maim. Valdez is being held without bond for investigation of first-degree murder and two counts of robbery, court records indicate.

Howard was taken into custody at about 4:10 p.m. Tuesday in a Centennial apartment complex, Edgewater police said. Howard was arrested on suspicion of first-degree murder after deliberation and two counts of robbery with intent to kill or maim in connection to the shooting.

“It was a senseless act,” Edgewater Police Chief John Mackey said Tuesday. “This young man had so much to live for. He had a long-time girlfriend and a circle of family and friends living nearby. It is a beautiful family.”

Jenicek was fatally shot at 8:40 p.m. Thursday at 2001 Sheridan Blvd. after getting out of his car and walking to pick up a dinner order at a local restaurant, according to an Edgewater Police Department news release.

Mackey has said detectives have identified the suspects but have not yet determined who fired the fatal shot.

“The reality is we’re still investigating. It still very much looks like a random shooting. Andrew was in the wrong place at the wrong time,” Mackey said.

Janicek grew up in Littleton, graduated from D’Evelyn High School, and was active in several sports. He was living in Lakewood at the time of his death.


Vigil recently completed a two-month jail sentence for a misdemeanor conviction for drug possession out of Jefferson County, according to court records. He was sentenced to jail in October for the same crime in Jefferson County, records show.

He is serving a two-year probation term out of Denver for a felony conviction of attempted trespassing of an automobile with intent to commit a crime, court records show.

At the time of the shooting, Howard was on probation for a Jefferson County felony conviction of possession of a weapon by a felon. Edgewater police arrested him on June 20. Howard is also on probation for felony vehicular eluding out of Douglas County. For that crime, he served 43 days in jail.