
    
        
            By Noelle Crombie

ncrombie@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

A Portland man who died at the Jefferson County Jail in Madras had received an inheritance and appeared to be trying to deal with his decades of addiction in the months before his death, a family member said Tuesday.

Carroll Gorg said he learned of James Eugene Wippel’s death from an Oregonian/OregonLive article about two Jefferson County Sheriff’s deputies and a corporal who were indicted last week on criminally negligent homicide charges in Wippel’s death last year.



Gorg’s wife, Roberta, is Wippel’s cousin and among his few surviving relatives, Gorg said. Gorg said he and his wife want more information about the circumstances surrounding Wippel's death. He said they have not been in contact with the Sheriff's Office.

The Gorgs live in Lake Oswego and were close to Wippel’s parents, both of whom have died. Gorg, 82, a retired Portland State University professor, said Wippel, who was 59, got involved in drugs in high school.

He said Wippel was raised in Lake Oswego and attended Lakeridge High.

“Jim was a nice fellow who couldn’t shake himself away from his addiction to drugs,” Gorg wrote in an email. “Despite his troubles, we always considered him family.

Gorg said Wippel’s addiction prompted his father to cut off contact with him.

“I have sat with his father when he would be talking about it and he would just break down and cry,” Gorg said in a phone interview.

Wippel inherited $40,000 last year after the death of his stepmother, said Gorg, who was the executor of the estate. Wippel told Gorg that he got an apartment in Portland and was sober. He died shortly after that on April 26, 2017.

Gorg and his wife said the family would like Wippel’s remains returned to them.

Sheriff Jim Adkins said on Tuesday that efforts to locate Wippel's next of kin had been unsuccessful. 

A Jefferson County grand jury indicted Michael Christopher Durkan, 53, Cory Lucinda Skidgel, 42, and Anthony Joseph Hansen, 33, in Wippel’s death. The charge carries up to five years in prison upon conviction.

All three are on paid leave. Hansen and Durkan were hired in 2015. Skidgel was hired in February 2017. According to the county, Durkan’s annual salary is $56,334.24, Skidgel is paid $45,831.60 annually and Hansen is paid $56,313.36 a year.

It remains unclear what role the three played in Wippel’s death.

Wippel had been arrested April 24 by Warm Springs police on accusations of heroin possession and delivery and methamphetamine possession. He was taken to the Jefferson County Jail without incident, Adkins said at the time.

Two days later, Wippel said he wasn’t feeling well and was seen by the nursing staff, according to Adkins’ initial statement. An ambulance was called at some point, but the man died before leaving the jail.

Adkins at the time did not say what steps his staff took to address Wippel’s medical problems or how long the deputies waited to call for an ambulance.

All three will be arraigned on April 19.

-- Noelle Crombie

ncrombie@oregonian.com

503-276-7184

@noellecrombie


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        