By

Associated Press






  Published:
  15:59 EDT, 4 October 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  17:16 EDT, 4 October 2017









View  comments

Guilty: According to investigators, Edgar Daniel Johnson, a high-ranking corrections officer, used his position of power to prey on inmates, targeting their vulnerabilities and forcing them to have sex with him

 A former Georgia prison guard has pleaded guilty to sexually assaulting three female inmates and making a bomb threat.


Federal prosecutors say 51-year-old Edgar Daniel Johnson also pleaded guilty Monday to coercing the inmates at Emanuel Women's Facility in Swainsboro to help him cover up the assaults.


Prosecutors say Johnson admitted that between November 1, 2012, and September 30, 2013, he had non-consensual sex multiple times with three female inmates.


Prosecutors say he also admitted calling in a bomb threat on Elba Island near the Port of Savannah last May.


He pleaded guilty to three counts of willfully depriving the inmates of their Eighth Amendment rights under color of law; three counts of obstruction for coercing the inmates; and one count of maliciously conveying false information about explosive materials.





The Associated Press spoke to several women who say Johnson victimized them while they were inmates at Emanuel Women's Facility in Swainsboro.


They said Johnson initially seemed like someone who cared, a comfort in a scary place, said one woman who was 25 and had never been in prison when she landed at Emanuel.


Scene: Johnson also groped several women and forced three to have sex with him several times at Emanuel Women's Facility in Swainsboro, Georgia, pictured

She was jailed on charges related to an injury her son suffered while with her ex when the boy was supposed to be in her custody. Johnson said he was a pastor and recited passages from the Bible to her.


Then, she said, he started telling her how pretty she was, how a girl like her didn't belong in prison. He asked about her family. He was a captain, so he could help her get to a transitional center closer to her children, he told her.


'He got a feel for your story to see what angle he could come at you with,' she said.


Her assigned work detail included cleaning his office, but she said he'd summon her more often than needed - up to five or six times a day - sometimes having an officer wake her from a nap to go and see him.


He'd give her tasks to keep her in the office or sometimes he'd just have her sit there, she said.


He quickly started making sexual comments and brushing up against her in a way that was too familiar, she claims.


'You kind of just blocked it out, thinking: If I can just get out of his office without anything happening, I'll be fine,' she said. 'I guess after a while you just learn to deal with it.'


The comments and unwelcome touching continued for about 18 months. Then in April 2013, as she was about to be transferred to a transitional center closer to her family near Atlanta, he forced her to have sex with him five or six times, threatening to stop her transfer if she didn't.


Johnson continued to contact her for the first six months she was in the transitional center, saying he missed her and that he looked up her photo in her file every day, she said.


She never told anyone what was happening, but it was an open secret at the prison, she said. She was afraid of retaliation if she complained because he'd said repeatedly that he basically ran the place. 





The women in this case said Johnson forced them to have sex. But even consensual sex between an inmate and a prison employee is illegal.


Because inmates are vulnerable to sexual assault both by prison staff and other inmates, Congress in 2003 passed the Prison Rape Elimination Act, which calls for corrections systems to have a zero-tolerance policy on prison rape. 





The other women who spoke to the AP told similar stories, detailing how Johnson first told them he was a pastor and offered to use his influence to help them. Then came the comments, the touching and the forced sex, they said.


He identified their vulnerabilities to manipulate them, they said. One had a brother serving a life sentence at another Georgia prison and Johnson threatened to make his life miserable, she said. Another had a baby while in the county lockup before being moved to prison, and she said he told her he'd keep her away from her baby and five other kids.


After being transferred to a higher-security prison in July 2012, a woman who said she had begun challenging Johnson wrote a complaint against him and gave it to the warden at her new prison. In it, she named several other women as victims.


Johnson will soon be experiencing what life on the other side of the bars is like for himself when he is sentenced later this year.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group