Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Support

Support

Chat Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Robert Mannifield has been charged with aggravated assault and a weapons charge

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Franklin police rescued a 71-year-old Scotch Plains man from the Delaware and Raritan Canal.
    ~Courtesy of Franklin Township Police Department

A North Brunswick man has been arrested in connection with an attack outside a Rutgers off-campus party early Sunday.
(Photo: ~File)

NEW BRUNSWICK - A 20-year-old North Brunswick man has been arrested and charged with aggravated assault and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose in connection with stabbing a Rutgers University student at an off-campus fraternity party Sunday.


Robert Mannifield was arrested around 2:30 p.m. Tuesday and sent to the Middlesex County Adult Corrections Center in North Brunswick, according to Jennifer Bradshaw, New Brunswick spokesperson. The investigation is being handled by the New Brunswick Police Department.


Bradshaw could not confirm if Mannifield is a Rutgers student, but a Facebook page for a Robert Mannifield indicates he became a Rutgers student in 2015. Mannifield is being held at the county jail with no bail set, according to a jail records spokesperson. A court appearance is scheduled for Friday. 


READ:Assault at Rutgers off-campus party


READ: Lawyer: Penn State frat head unaware Piazza was in danger


READ: Piazza's dad frustrated at frat brothers' lack of remorse


Mannifield is charged with assaulting a person affiliated with Rutgers with a sharp object around 12:43 a.m. Sunday following a verbal altercation outside an off-campus party on Delafield Street between Courtland and Bristol streets, police said.


Joseph Venditto said the victim is his son, Joseph, 20, of Toms River, a junior Rutgers business student who has three large stab wounds to his abdomen, including one close to his intestines.


"He's coming along slowly," Venditto, a Lakewood dentist, said about his son.


Laurie Venditto said her son is sore, has open wounds and it's hard for him to walk as he recuperates at home. She said one wound has to heal from the inside out and she has been watching over him like a hawk.


"He's not out of danger," she said.


According to Joseph Venditto, his son went to an off-campus fraternity party. His son, who is not a fraternity member, was inside the party, then went outside and exchanged words with a man outside the party.


"And all of a sudden he was stabbed, fell down and blanked out," Venditto said.


Laurie Venditto said her son did not know the person who stabbed him. She said her son was stabbed with a type of box cutter.


She said her son and his twin sister had both gone to the off-campus fraternity house party. Her son's friend tried to join them at the party but was not allowed to enter.


She said her son then went outside to find his friend when he got into a verbal dispute with a fraternity member who was controlling entrance to the party. Her son exchanged words with the fraternity member before he was stabbed. The fraternity member then ran off, she said.


"My daughter called me immediately," said Laurie Venditto, adding that her son was bleeding from the abdomen as he was taken to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick.


Laurie Venditto said she had to notify Rutgers police about the incident.


"You send your kids to these colleges and you don't expect this from another student," she said. "It's horrendous as a parent."


Joseph Venditto said his son, a former Toms River High School North baseball player, had been at the party for a short time, but he had been drinking. Both parents are concerned about the drinking taking place on college campuses. They claim many of the students at the party had been drinking.


"Everybody's drunk. It has to be addressed," said Joseph Venditto, a 1983 Rutgers University graduate.   


"It (the drinking) has to be shut down. The drinking age is 21. You see what happened at Penn State (Timothy Piazza of Readington died after an alcohol-related fall at a fraternity house)," said Laurie Venditto, adding that her son's partying days are over and he now plans to come home on weekends.


"The rules need to be changed. You can't drink at frats. We are losing our children. We need to bring the kids in and educate them on what can happen." 


Staff Writer Suzanne Russell: 732-565-7335; srussell@mycentraljersey.com  


   
