EDITORIAL

Researchers, police officers, and doctors have long understood the challenge of so-called frequent utilizers — mentally ill or addicted people who cycle in and out of emergency rooms and jailhouses at enormous cost, with little sign of improvement.


But while the most extreme cases are easy to identify, there are plenty that go unnoticed. The problem is that individuals’ interactions with the system can be spread out over so many agencies — the police department, the community health center, the homeless shelter.


There are records here and records there. But you’d have to look at them in combination — two ambulance calls for overdoses, a police call for an attempted suicide in one town and a second call, in a neighboring town, when she was the victim of an assault — to get the full picture.


That’s the idea behind a promising new pilot program bringing together law enforcement, corrections officials, and health care providers in three jurisdictions: Long Beach, Calif., Johnson County, Iowa, and Middlesex County, a sprawling region that includes urban centers like Cambridge and Lowell and smaller towns like Concord and Groton.


Using $1.6 million in grant money from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, the sites will hire data scientists to pore over records from a variety of sources in a bid to identify people in crisis.



The hope is that the agencies interacting with those people will then step up coordination — providing urgent, targeted interventions that can change lives and relieve pressure on overburdened jails and hospitals.



The legislation fell short in failing to make bold changes on how to handle young adults.

What, exactly, those interventions will look like is not yet clear. 


But that’s another reason to watch this pilot closely — it gives officials a unique opportunity to experiment with different approaches and see what works.


There are some intriguing models out there. Here in Massachusetts, for instance, a handful of police departments have put clinicians in squad cars, riding to the scene of crises and helping to steer addicted and mentally ill people into appropriate services.


This sort of work must be managed carefully; any program that makes use of sensitive medical information has to include appropriate privacy safeguards. But the potential for life-changing reform is real.


The data revolution has not yet lived up to its promise as a social change agent. This could be a chance to improve the record. Doctors and police chiefs would be wise to keep an eye on this experiment — and if it succeeds, to replicate it.





© 2018 Boston Globe Media Partners, LLC