Mostly sunny skies during the morning hours. Scattered showers and thunderstorms developing in the afternoon. High 91F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

Variable clouds with scattered thunderstorms. Low near 70F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:54 am

Ashley and Stephen Powell wed in July; he was a cook at an Applebee’s in Henrico County.

Ashley and Stephen Powell wed in July; he was a cook at an Applebee’s in Henrico County.

A man charged with killing another man, breaking into a business and stealing a car Sunday night in eastern Henrico County appeared in court by video Tuesday and was held without bond.

A judge told Branden Dalay, a 23-year-old North Chesterfield man, that he would appoint an attorney for the defendant, according to prosecutor Matthew Ackley.

Ackley would not comment on the circumstances leading up to the shooting or why it happened. Police have also declined to discuss what led to Stephen Powell’s killing.

Powell, 33, was shot and killed late Sunday night while coming back from a convenience store at Hanover and East Nine Mile roads, according to his wife, Ashley.

Shortly before 10 p.m., police were summoned to that area for a shooting. Powell, a father of five described by relatives as a devoted family man, was found in a vehicle at Hanover Road and Hart Street, a short distance from the convenience store.

Sherry Burkett, who co-owns Al’s Auto located across from the convenience store, said Tuesday that she suspects someone came onto her lot looking for keys to vehicles parked there. Burkett said bullet holes in her business’s Plexiglas front door were spotted by a customer dropping off a vehicle for an inspection Monday morning.

Vehicles at the business were also vandalized, Burkett said. For example, the windows of a pickup truck were shot out, and a seat had been pulled out of another vehicle, she said.

“They came and did all their work where they dusted for fingerprints and looked at everything,” Burkett said about the police officers who responded.

Burkett said police did not tell her who they believe vandalized property at Al’s Auto.

No vehicles were stolen from her lot, Burkett said.

Police have charged Dalay with breaking into another business, Temp Power on East Nine Mile Road, and stealing a vehicle there around 11 p.m.

A “be on the lookout” was issued for the stolen vehicle, which officers located near Glenside Drive and Bethlehem Road, police said.

A pursuit was initiated. A tire deflation device was deployed on Interstate 64 westbound near Interstate 295 in Short Pump. The tire device worked, but the driver kept going and tried to make a U-turn to head east on I-64, police said.

Authorities said they pursued the vehicle until it ultimately crashed on I-64 in Short Pump. Police said the driver fled on foot and was taken into custody about 3:45 a.m. after he was found walking in the 13000 block of North Gayton Road.

Dalay is charged with second-degree murder, use of a firearm in a felony, burglary and grand larceny of an automobile.

The defendant, who is being held at Henrico Jail West, is declining all requests for media interviews, according to the Henrico Sheriff’s Office. No one answered the door at Dalay’s North Chesterfield home on Tuesday.

Nearly three years ago, Dalay was convicted of felony child neglect in Chesterfield County for physically abusing his then-girlfriend’s 4-month-old daughter. The child’s grandmother took the child to a hospital and physicians found extensive bruising on the infant’s face and forehead, along with healing rib fractures, court records show.

Dalay was listed as the child’s father on her birth certificate but was not her biological dad, according to court records.

Less than two months after he was sentenced in July 2015 to 10 years in prison with seven suspended, Dalay wrote the trial judge, David E. Johnson, requesting a modification of his punishment.

Dalay wrote that he was “in no way” attempting to “minimize or justify the seriousness” of his offense, adding that his actions warranted punishment. However, Dalay said, “this charge is not who I am, and I am not what I have been accused of.”

“I have to look at the part I played in these chain of events that have led to my incarceration,” Dalay told the judge. “To take ownership of my role is the beginning of growth and change.”

Dalay said his goal was to “re-direct my priorities” and “re-invent myself,” so he could “give back the son I so selfishly took from my father and mother.”

He said he regretted the “shame and embarrassment” his actions had on his parents and the “thought of letting them down and hurting them haunts me.”

“I have been raised by the best parents any 20-year-old could dream of having,” Dalay wrote, describing his mother and father as military soldiers. “Morals and values have been instilled in me from the very beginning.”

As a first-time offender, Dalay asked for a second chance and to be placed in a state-run diversion center. This would allow him to gain employment and earn money, so he could make a fresh start upon his release.

His attorney filed a motion asking the court to allow Dalay to participate in a work-release program. The judge granted the request on the condition he was deemed eligible by jail officials.

He apparently was deemed ineligible because he was transferred from jail to the state prison system on July 6, 2016, and served time in two different correctional centers before being released to supervision on July 24, 2017, according to Department of Corrections records.

A preliminary hearing in the current case was set for July 31 in Henrico General District Court.

sgorman@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6885


mbowes@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6450


Twitter: @RTDMarkBowes

A man shot to death in eastern Henrico County this weekend was a devoted father to his five children, family members said Monday. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Sean Gorman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




