Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A victim's advocate has written to Gov. Phil Murphy seeking reforms after the prior governor released a killer without notifying the victim's family.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Family members of murder victim Kevin Patrick McGowan react to the release of killer, Lisa Pyatt, whose sentence was commuted by Chris Christie days before he left office as governor.
    Doug Hood

Lisa Pyatt
(Photo: New Jersey Department of Corrections)

It’s too late to change what happened when Patrick McGowan’s killer was released early from prison, leaving the victim’s relatives to learn through social media that former Gov. Chris Christie commuted her sentence.


Now, the state’s leading victims’ advocate, citing reports in the Asbury Park Press, has reached out to the new governor in attempt to ensure something like that never happens to any crime victim’s family again.



Richard Pompelio, founder and executive director of the non-profit New Jersey Crime Victims’ Law Center, sent a letter last week to Gov. Phil Murphy apprising the new governor of the circumstances surrounding the release from prison of Lisa Pyatt and informing him he plans to draft legislation designed to avert similar situations in the future.


Pyatt, 50, was released from the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women in Clinton on Jan. 13, about six years ahead of her first possible parole date, after Christie commuted her sentenced to time served just days before he left office as governor.


More: Christie releases Point Pleasant Beach murderer who claimed to be battered woman


Pyatt was convicted of murder in 1993 in the 1991 stabbing death of McGowan, a 32-year-old fisherman from Point Pleasant Beach whom she was planning to marry. She was sentenced to 40 years in prison with a requirement that she serve 30 years before she could be considered for release on parole.
No government official informed McGowan’s surviving relatives beforehand of Pyatt’s release from prison.
“The victim’s family learned of the Governor’s action from a social media posting several days after the release,’’ Pompelio wrote in his letter to Murphy.


McGowan is shown in a family photo with his niece. Family members of murder victim Kevin Patrick McGowan react to the release of killer, Lisa Pyatt, whose sentence was commuted by Chris Christie days before he left office as governor. Family members did not want to be shown visually. Lakewood, NJFriday, February 2, 2018@dhoodhood  (Photo: Doug Hood )

Pompelio referred Murphy to articles in the Asbury Park Press about Pyatt’s release in which McGowan’s brother, Frank, said he learned about the release of his brother’s killer at his 65th birthday party. Frank McGowan said his son told him the news after he received a text message from a cousin who learned about the development from a social media post.


More: Christie released killer, and Point Pleasant Beach victim's family left in the dark


“The commutation has caused a significant upset in the victim’s rights community because after being denied on three occasions, Pyatt was granted clemency without any input from the Ocean County Prosecutor, State Parole board and most importantly, the murder victim’s family,’’ Pompelio said in the letter.
Sen. Gerald Cardinale, a Bergen County Republican, previously told the Asbury Park Press that he had been lobbying for Pyatt’s release for a number of years and finally found an ally in James DiGiulio, who was Christie’s most recent chief counsel, after three previous people in the position of chief counsel to the governor did not agree with his views that Pyatt should be let out of prison. Cardinale said he shared Pyatt’s view that she was a battered woman acting in self-defense, a belief not shared by the Ocean County jury that quickly convicted Pyatt of murder.
Cardinale told the Press that he never reached out to people in the Ocean County Prosecutor’s Office or the victim’s family while researching Pyatt’s case.


More: EDITORIAL: Who should have told the family?


“Furthermore, she was released from prison before the  prosecutor and the Parole Board were notified,’’ Pompelio’s letter to Murphy said.
“I am not asking you to take any action on the Pyatt matter,’’ Pompelio said in the letter. “That is over.’’
But Pompelio advised the governor he will be writing to Senate President Stephen M. Sweeney, a Camden County Democrat, and Sen. Loretta Weinberg and Assemblyman Gordon Johnson, both Bergen County Democrats, to propose draft legislation “that will hopefully address the failings in the current process so that no crime victim will have to encounter a similar situation in the future.’’
     
Apprised of Pompelio’s letter, Murphy spokesman Daniel Bryan did not offer immediate comment.
Pompelio, an attorney, founded the New Jersey Crime Victims’ Law Center in 1991 in response to his family’s treatment by the criminal justice system following the 1989 murder of 17-year-old son, Tony. The law center has since offered free services to more than 18,000 victims, Pompelio said.Kathleen Hopkins: 732-643-4202; Khopkins@app.com
