

Dozens of residents in Lake, Porter, Jasper and Newton counties were in the path of the Kankakee River when heavy rains began pummeling the region still covered in snow in mid-February.

When Bill Voyles looks over his flooded Ramsey Road homestead he sees more than knee-deep water destroying everything he worked to build. He sees his retirement derailed.


At 72, Voyles said, it may be too hard to rebuild the cabin-style home he constructed mostly by hand in Keener Township with reclaimed wood and hardware from old barns and buildings. Before the river crested March 4, there was a foot of water flooding the main floor. By Wednesday the water was still at least eight inches deep and surrounding the home turning it into an island.


The foundation has dropped about eight inches in the rear corner of the home and cracks threaten the second floor. The out-buildings — a garage where he keeps his woodworking supplies and collection of historical artifacts and books, and a shed with yard equipment — remain flooded. The garage and its contents are a total loss, he said.


“You try to hold it together,” he said. “Men aren’t supposed to cry.”


Voyles is among dozens of residents in Lake, Porter, Jasper and Newton counties in the path of the Kankakee River when heavy rains began pummeling the region still covered in snow in mid-February. Frozen and saturated ground left water with little place to drain. Floodwaters began breaching the river’s banks Feb. 23 in Jasper County. The situation only worsened after an initial breach estimated by officials as at least 30 feet wide on the south bank of the river was repaired the week after it gave way. Weaker spots along the river’s banks on the north side then began to fail, Porter County Commissioner Laura Blaney, D-South, said.


It remains a daily battle inspecting for breaches and reinforcing sandbags as the river remains above flood stage and is expected to remain above flood stage for days to come, resident John Peters said. Peters has lived along the river for decades and remembers other floods, especially a significant 1982 event.


“This is worse,” he said.


Low-lying farmland remained flooded and filled drainage ditches miles away from the river Wednesday and multiple roads remained closed. Once the water finally recedes county officials on both sides of the river will be facing infrastructure repairs. Sinkholes, buckled and eroded roads and washed out bridges will have to be repaired.

The Kankakee River was almost a foot above flood stage at Shelby on Thursday, washing out roads and flooding homes throughout the area.

Most residents along the leading edge of the Kankakee River in the affected area voluntarily evacuated Thursday as floodwaters threatened the area, according to...

Blaney said since the flooding only impacts the southern portion of Porter County, many do not realize the severity of the situation.


“It’s affecting our residents big time,” Blaney said.


Peters has been working with his neighbors to minimize damage to the homes there. Midweek he was busy trying to help keep a wall from caving in at one of his neighbor’s homes and inundating the property with water. Keeping the water at bay until the river finally recedes will be no easy task.


“It’s going to be touch and go,” he said.


At his own home he has been manning four pumps that are pushing 7,200 gallons of water an hour out of his yard in order to keep his structures dry, he said. So far, so good, he said. If the power goes out for any reason, that all quickly will change.


“I tested. I got seven minutes if I lose power. Seven minutes before I’m flooded out,” he said. “There’s been a lot of lost sleep.”


Along with keeping an eye on the river’s banks, he has been keeping watch on his neighbors as well. He made a trip Thursday for grocery supplies for an 89-year-old widow who remained in her home. He and Voyles helped evacuate another neighbor with an infant once they learned the mother and child were staying in their flooded home, he said.


Blaney said the recovery and eventual cleanup is a cooperative effort between the Porter and Jasper county governments and residents. She lauded the way community members like Peters have stepped up to help monitor the river and assist their neighbors.


“We really couldn’t do it without them,” she said.


Peters used his raised pickup truck to navigate the two feet of water in and out of the neighborhood, driving his wife out to dry land each morning so she could go to work. He then has been picking her up at the flood’s edge to bring her home at night.


“I haven’t been to work in 15 days,” Peters said.


While the water level finally has begun to drop, at about a half-inch a day, officials said, the neighborhood will remain flooded for another seven to 10 days. Once the water has completely pulled back, the job of cleanup can begin.


Debris and garbage float in the water everywhere. In once-flooded areas where the water has receded, a thick silt now covers the ground.


“I figured it out walking the dikes the last three nights,” Peters said. “With all the beer cans I’ll have to pick up I can probably go buy myself a real good steak dinner.”


In Shelby, the river is receding very slowly, Lake County Commissioner Jerry Tippy, R-Schererville, said. Most damage was primarily contained to two of the community’s subdivisions, Shady Shores and Wildwood Estates. A quick response and preponderance of sandbags, made with borrowed sandbagging machines, volunteers and 10 Lake County Jail inmates over the course of the first four days the river surpassed flood stage helped mitigate some of the damage.


The county conducted meetings March 2 in Schneider and Shelby to answer questions and help direct residents to available services.


The Porter County Board of Commissioners on Thursday declared a local disaster emergency because of recent flooding, making the county eligible for federal funds if President Donald Trump declares the county a disaster area.

The declaration notes that, starting on Feb. 15, heavy rains and the flooding...

Gov. Eric J. Holcomb has issued disaster declarations due to flooding in 31 Indiana counties including Lake, Porter, Newton and Jasper counties.


As flood waters recede, property damage assessments are underway throughout the state, especially in northern counties, according to the daily update from the Indiana Joint Information Center. State and local teams continue to conduct assessments and gather information, which began Feb. 28.


Teams from the American Red Cross are also assisting in damage assessment efforts. Assessments will continue in each county, until complete, at which time teams will continue to other affected counties. Indiana residents are still encouraged to report uninsured damage through the online portal located at http://bit.ly/2018rainfall.


Indiana residents impacted by flooding and in need of debris removal and sanitation assistance can contact the Red Cross, which can help citizens connect with reputable and vetted relief volunteers. All services are free, but not guaranteed due to an overwhelming need for assistance. Those needing assistance may call 888-684-1441.


Voyles appreciates the help, but it will not bring back what was lost. The devastation is most difficult to cope with at night, after everyone working has left and he is alone. His four children are grown and out of the house. His youngest, Sadie, 20, lives nearby and along with her boyfriend have been checking on him and helping where they can. His wife of more than 30 years, Kathy, is staying with a relative so she can get back and forth to work without trouble.

A self-described Kankakee River historian and longtime Voyageur re-enactor known by the nickname “Wild Bill,” Voyles practices many of the skills of the early primitive rendezvous French-Canadian Kankakee River fur-traders he emulates.


“We are trying to keep the American spirit alive,” he said.


When officials cut the gas and electricity to the area for safety reasons, Voyles used his wood-burning stove for heat and to cook, and lanterns for light. The electricity is back on now, but the wood stove still warms the living room, where he has been sleeping since the flood.


“I’m OK. I have more cookies than a man has a right to have,” Voyles said. He’s been sharing the cookies with his dog, who he must transport by row boat to high ground when the pup needs to go outside. A percolator-style pot on the wood stove has kept him in coffee.


A half a small jug of moonshine – for medicinal purposes only, he said – is also at the ready, just in case.


“I’m trying to keep a stiff upper lip, but it gets to you once in a while,” Voyles said.


Voyles, who retired from St. Catherine Hospital in East Chicago after 31 years as a mechanic in the maintenance department, envisioned himself spending his retirement working wood in his shed or telling stories with neighborhood men under the elderberry tree in his side yard.


“I should be out there, smoking my clay pipe. I’m an old guy. I should be whittling and carving,” Voyles said. “It’s just a mess. I don’t know if we’ll recover from this.”


Carrie Napoleon is a freelance reporter for the Post-Tribune.