Gallery: Asbury Park police shooting


    
        
            By Spencer Kent

skent@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

FREEHOLD -- A Woodbridge man was found not guilty of attempting to kill an Asbury Park police officer and attempting to disarm another during a struggle that led to authorities to shoot the man, according to a report.

Oswaldo Torres Quiroz, 24, was convicted by a jury on lesser charges, including aggravated assault on a law-enforcement officer, resisting arrest and unlawful possession of a knife, according to a report by APP.com.

The charge of aggravated assault on a law-enforcement officer carries a maximum prison term of 18 months, and the resisting arrest charge carries a maximum of five years in prison. He had faced up to 30 years in prison on the more serious charges.

Torres Quiroz, who has been in jail for more than three years, is scheduled to be sentenced Dec. 8 before Superior Court Judge David F. Bauman, the report said.

Police confronted Torres Quiroz in Freehold on Sept. 29, 2014 after being called by his ex-girlfriend, authorities said after his arrest.

No bail for man accused of having flame-thrower, guns, bomb-making chemicals

Torres Quiroz was brandishing an eight- to 10-inch steak knife and officers attempted to disarm him, authorities said. He stabbed one of the officers in the torso, but the officer was protected by a bulletproof vest, authorities said. The officer was cut on his wrist and finger during the struggle, authorities said.

Torres Quiroz was shot in the abdomen, authorities said.

Spencer Kent may be reached at skent@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SpencerMKent. Find the Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        