Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Grand Rapids man is being held on a $1M bond after police say he threatened to kill employees at a  business "just like they did in Vegas."

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    David Robert Seastrom is charged with making a false report or a threat of terrorism.
    WZZM

David Robert Seastrom
(Photo: Kent County Jail)

GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. — A Grand Rapids man, upset he didn’t get a job because of his criminal history, is being held on a $1 million bond after police say he threatened to kill employees at a Cascade Township business "just like they did in Vegas."


David Robert Seastrom, 36, is charged with making a false report or threat of terrorism. He has a probable cause hearing set for Wednesday, Oct. 18 in 63rd District Court on the felony charge, which is punishable by up to 20 years in prison.


He’s accused of making threats against workers at Teleperformance, a call center operator with locations in 19 states, including Michigan.


Seastrom applied for a job at the Cascade Township facility, but was denied work because of his criminal history, court records show.


More: Taylor woman charged with murder in Burlington Coat Factory shooting


Seastrom contacted the business on three occasions, beginning on Oct. 2 at 8 p.m. “He had left a message at that point of his displeasure of not receiving the job at the business,’’ a Kent County detective wrote in a probable cause affidavit.


He left a message the following morning “voicing his displeasure again of not getting the job and during this he stated in a voice threatening something to the words of ‘I will . . . kill you as you all walk out of work, just like they did in Vegas.’’


The Oct. 1 mass shooting on the Las Vegas Strip left 58 people dead and hundreds more wounded. The gunman, identified as Stephen Paddock, fired from his high-rise suite for several minutes before killing himself.


Las Vegas shooting: Warren man shot at concert is 'grateful' to be home


More: Michigander's prayer at Las Vegas concert: 'Just get us out of this'


Opinion: Can pathologists tell us what made Las Vegas shooter do it?


Seastrom ended his message by saying ‘‘you don’t even know who you’re messing with,’’ court records show.


Investigators identified Seastrom by his phone number. Employees also recognized his voice, court records show.


In addition to making a false report or threat of terrorism, Seastrom is charged with being a habitual felony offender for prior convictions in Kent and Ottawa counties.


Seastrom has an “assaultive criminal history’’ involving law enforcement officers dating back to 2011, court records show.


He has a Nov. 2011 conviction for attempted resisting/obstructing a police officer stemming from an incident at Grand Valley State University. In Sept. 2012, he was convicted of assaulting a corrections officer at the Ottawa County Jail.  


He was discharged from probation two years ago for a felonious assault conviction involving a Kent County sheriff’s deputy.


Deputies responded to a home in Byron Township in Feb. 2013 to investigate a disorderly person complaint involving Seastrom, court records show.


When deputies arrived, Seastrom, armed with a small pocketknife, approached the officers with the blade extended while screaming “shoot me,’’ court records show.


Seastrom was shot with a Taser as he continued to advance. He threw the knife at deputies and was arrested, court records show.


He pleaded no contest to felonious assault and was placed on probation for three years. He was jailed on two occasions for violating terms of probation.
