




An investigation into who supplied alcohol to teenagers who were later involved in a fatal pickup-truck crash in Perry County has resulted in the conviction of two people from New Lexington.

Tyler Sharpe, 16, a passenger in a 2002 Ford Explorer, died after being ejected in a crash off Reading Township Road 121 in Perry County early on Nov. 12, 2016, the State Highway Patrol said.

Sean Noll, 17, of New Lexington, who was driving the SUV, has pleaded guilty to a delinquency charge of aggravated vehicular homicide in connection with the crash, according to a spokeswoman for the Ohio Investigative Unit.

Another teenage boy also was a passenger.

The Ohio Investigative Unit, part of the state Department of Public Safety, investigated who supplied the alcohol to the youths, who had been at a party before the crash.

As a result, Dusty A. Starner, 28, of New Lexington, pleaded guilty in Perry County Court to a charge of furnishing alcohol. Starner worked at the HJR Newlon store at 400 S. State St. in New Lexington, where he sold alcohol to Renee M. Noll, 19, of New Lexington, an Ohio Investigative Unit release said.

Renee Noll, who is Sean's sister, recently pleaded guilty to a furnishing-alcohol charge in Perry County Court. She was sentenced to 16 days in jail, which is to be served in increments of four days around the anniversary of the crash this year and in 2018, and four days each in 2018 and 2019 around what would have been Sharpe's birthday.

The Ohio Liquor Control Commission also determined that the HJR Newlon store had sold alcohol to a person who was younger than 21 in violation of its state license. The store chose to pay an $800 fine rather than serve an eight-day suspension of sales.

jwoods@dispatch.com

@Woodnight

 


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.