May 23 (UPI) -- The second of three inmates who escaped from a South Carolina jail was arrested, the county sheriff's office said.

Members of a U.S. Marshals Service task force apprehended 27-year-old Tyshon Johnson, who was being held on a murder charge before his escape with two others, according to a statement by the Orangeburg County Sheriff's Office.


"These guys haven't learned that it doesn't matter how far you run, we're right behind you," Orangeburg County Sheriff Leroy Ravenell said.

Curtis Green, 20, also was being held on murder charges prior to the escape and was the last of the three inmates who remains at large.

Johnson, Green and 27-year-old Christopher Boltin, who was arrested Monday, escaped from the Orangeburg, S.C., detention center Saturday after using a guard's pepper spray to overpower him.

Boltin, who had been held in the detention center on charges of carjacking and possession of a stolen vehicle, was apprehended in Lexington County after law enforcement became aware he had contacts in the county.

Also on Tuesday, bond hearings were held for Boltin, who was charged with escape and had bail set at $250,000.

Boltin's father, Hoyte Boltin, was charged with one misdemeanor count of aiding an escapee.

Another man, Tyree Hillard, was charged with two counts of felony aiding an escapee for assisting both Johnson and Green. His bond was set at $15,000 for the two counts.

Ravenell said investigators were still searching for Green and encouraged anyone with information on his whereabouts to contact the sheriff's office.

United Press International is a leading provider of news, photos and information to millions of readers around the globe via UPI.com and its licensing services.
						


With a history of reliable reporting dating back to 1907, today's UPI is a credible source for the most important stories of the day, continually updated  - a one-stop site for U.S. and world news, as well as entertainment, trends, science, health and stunning photography. UPI also provides insightful reports on key topics of geopolitical importance, including energy and security.
					