By

Tariq Tahir For Mailonline






  Published:
  07:12 EDT, 7 February 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  13:48 EDT, 7 February 2018







           3

View  comments

A man suspected of the murder of a young Nebraska woman who went missing after Tinder date with his girlfriend has said he accidentally suffocated her - and deserves to did for it.


Sydney Loofe, 24, was found dead in December near Edgar, south-west of Omaha, about a month after she disappeared.


Her date Bailey Boswell and Boswell's 51-year-old boyfriend Aubrey Trail are considered to be persons of interest in the case.


Scroll down for video: 


The last time anyone heard from Loofe was on November 15 when she posted a picture of herself to online with the message:  'Ready for my date'

Aubrey Trail (left) has now revealed that he strangled Sydney in a sex game with two other women but that his girlfriend Bailey Boswell (right) was not involved 

Trail has now divulged details of what he said happened to Sydney and has said he should be executed for his part in her death.


He told Omaha World-News that Loofe, a clerk from Lincoln, was a willing participant in a sexual fantasy with himself and at least two other women in a room,


But he said Boswell, 23, with whom he lived, was wiped out on drugs and outside of the room when Loofe died.


There was something around Loofe's neck when she died, according to Trail.


'It was suffocation. It happened in Saline County. A life for a life — that's the rules in my world. I should be put to death,' he told Omaha World-News. 


Trail has been moved to the Leavenworth Detention Center, a maximum-security facility in Leavenworth, Kansas.


He recent admitted being responsible for Sydney's death and also said his girlfriend had no part in the killing.





Sydney was found dead in December near Edgar, south-west of Omaha, about a month after she disappeared

Aubrey trail has previously admitted responsibility for Sydney's death. Him and Boswell are currently facing fraud charges 

So far Boswell and Trail for an alleged fraud scheme that fleeced a Kansas couple out of more than $400,000.


The last time anyone heard from Loofe was on November 15 when she posted a picture of herself to Snapchat, captioning the image: 'Ready for my date'.


She was reported missing the following day when she failed to show up for her cashier job at home improvement store Menards in Lincoln.


According to her family, Loofe was definitely 'planning on coming home that night' after her date given she had left her car and her cat at home.


Investigators said Loofe spent the evening with Boswell and it was a second date for the pair who met on the dating app.


In a bizarre video posted on Facebook prior to their arrests, Boswell and Trail said claims they were not cooperating with the police investigation were false.


Trail said in the video that after Loofe disappeared, the pair tried to contact police but never heard back from investigators.


Boswell said she and Loofe had back-to-back dates the nights of November 14 and 15. She said she picked Loofe up at her home on both nights and they drove around smoking weed.


She said she took Loofe back to her home on the night she went missing and they smoked marijuana wax and shatter - concentrated forms of the drug.


When the date was over, Boswell claims she went to take Loofe home but she asked to be dropped off at a friend's house.


'I haven't heard from her since,' Boswell said in the video, before adding that she 'didn't have anything to do with' her disappearance. 


 




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group