Gallery: Oriental Hamlet first court appearance


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A Jersey City man charged with killing a deaf man in a crash while fleeing a sheriff's officer in a stolen SUV appeared in court on multiple charges yesterday and the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution.

Oriental J. Hamlet, 19, of Rutgers Avenue, is charged with the aggravated manslaughter of Umar King, a FedEx employee who also volunteered as a sign language teacher in Jersey City.

King, 33, was struck on Tuesday while waiting at a bus stop at Kennedy Boulevard and Communipaw Avenue at about 4:30 a.m. and he was pronounced dead a half hour later at the Jersey City Medical Center.

Hamlet was arrested Thursday afternoon. He is also charged with death by auto, leaving the scene of a fatal accident, eluding police, resisting arrest by flight and driving without a license, Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Lynne Seborowski said at yesterday's hearing in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City.

Aggravated manslaughter carries a possible sentence of 10 to 30 years upon conviction.

Hudson County Superior Court Judge Mark Nelson entered a plea of not guilty on Hamlet's behalf during the brief hearing in which the defendant appeared via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny. Hamlet sat calmly during the hearing and answered a few questions asked by Nelson.

On Tuesday morning a sheriff's officer in a marked vehicle spotted the 2005 Toyota 4-Runner speeding on Kennedy Boulevard and attempted to pull it over, but the vehicle accelerated and ran multiple red lights, officials said.

When the SUV ran the red light at Communipaw and Kennedy Boulevard, it struck a 2013 MKZ before smashing through the bus shelter where King was standing. Hamlet and two other occupants of the vehicle ran away, officials said.

One of the occupants, a 16-year-old boy, was caught a short distance away and taken to the JCMC for treatment of minor injuries before being transported to the Hudson County Prosecutor's Office for questioning. He has not been charged, officials said.

The driver of the Lincoln MKZ suffered minor injuries and was also taken to the Medical Center where he was treated and released, officials said.

Hamlet was arrested by members of the newly formed Hudson County Regional Fatal Collision Unit.

His detention hearing is scheduled for Wednesday before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        