Widely scattered showers or a thunderstorm this evening. Then partly cloudy. Low 66F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 30%..

Widely scattered showers or a thunderstorm this evening. Then partly cloudy. Low 66F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 30%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:55 pm

Diane Hayes is compiling a history of Smyth County’s black residents and would like the community’s help.

Diane Hayes is compiling a history of Smyth County’s black residents and would like the community’s help.

Marion resident Diane Hayes is the daughter of Peggy Hall Hayes Russell and Arthur Lincoln “Nappy” Hayes Jr. She has a twin sister, Debra, an older sister, Alice, and two brothers, Ted and Paul. Ted’s twin, Bobby, died at six months old. However, while her immediate family is important, Hayes wants to know about her ancestors.


Hayes loves genealogy and has devoted her life, especially since retirement, to documenting not only the history of her family, but also the history of black people in the community.


Hayes’ fascination with the community’s ancestry began when she was seven or eight. Pricie Gass Hall, Hayes’ gradmother, told her the story of Benjamin Cloyd and his wife, Melinda, who raised Hall’s mother, Margie Bailey. Bailey later took their last name.


“I would just follow Pricie around and ask questions. Pricie lived up on Iron Street where my mother was raised. At that time, we were living with her,” Hayes said. “Pricie told me her mother was born to a woman named Julia. Her grandfather was James Harris (a white landowner). Margie Bailey was owned by James Harris.”


Hayes was fascinated with the stories her grandmother told her, and, as she grew older and began working, she used that interest to begin documenting the story of her race.


For 33 years, Hayes worked at the Franklin County Public Library in Rocky Mount, a perfect place for a budding genealogist to pursue her career.


“The first thing I worked on was Sylvester Beverly and William Cuff, two free men of color who fought in the Revolutionary War. I was asked to find out about their war pensions, so I went through records at the library and books at the courthouse and found they did serve in the Revolutionary War,” Hayes said.


“Then I started asking questions of Gertrude Mann, a local historian and genealogist. I asked her why we didn’t have any black information in the library. Mann said she just didn’t get that many requests, but she wished she did,” Hayes said, adding that she started out looking for black history in general for the Rocky Mount area.


When Mann died, she donated all of her papers to the library.


Hayes began indexing the information and putting together what she could find on different families. This work resulted in more questions, so Hayes started talking to Mary June Strattman, a well-known genealogist in Franklin County.


“I asked her how slaves became free. Blacks born to a white woman or an Indian were considered free. Other slaves were set free or emancipated. Slaves could also buy their freedom.”


Hayes said she found that a child took whatever their condition their mother was in. If the mother was a slave, the child became a slave.


“That’s what you became,” she said. “White women who had black children, that was against the law. When she had children, they were listed as bastards and bound out at a very early age until they were about 30 years old. If the mother was indentured and became pregnant with a black child, the person she was indentured to could force her to work another eight to 10 years. The children became free people of color and had to register at the courthouse as free people of color.”


Throughout her career, Hayes continued her research, compiling approximately 50 books dealing with black families and their history in Franklin County.


Since her retirement, Hayes has devoted her time to continuing research on her family and Smyth County’s black residents. She moved back to Marion in January 2017 and has become a frequent visitor at the Smyth County Courthouse and the Smyth County Public Library, where she spends hours upon hours going over old records.


“I am working on a Smyth County history of black families. There are over 1,000 items, digitized documents, at the Smyth library. Our information is buried in so many records at the courthouse,” Hayes said.


When she began compiling her family history, Hayes turned to the writings of her father, who recorded the news of blacks in Marion, Chilhowie, Saltville, Rich Valley and Sugar Grove in the Smyth County News in the 1940s. Nappy Hayes recorded weddings, deaths, sports and other events of the county’s black people.


Hayes’ research uncovered information on black people in the newspapers of the 1880s and 1890s. She also studied the writings of black citizens such as Henry Smith, who was born during slavery. Order books at the courthouse are a wealth of information, recording deeds, wills, lawsuits and other information dating back to 1832 when Smyth County was formed.


“Every time I came back to Smyth County to visit, I pulled information from books with a goal to put all that information in one place. Some of the top things I have found are that after slavery, blacks built churches that also served as school houses, like Mount Pleasant. Most black people owned their own homes and, in Marion, they lived all over the town and not just in designated places,” she said.


Hayes urges anyone interested in tracing their family history to start with the oldest person in their family and ask questions. Find out about marriages, schools, deaths. Visit the family cemetery. Ask them to recall stories they can pass down. Go through the marriage records at the courthouse. These will take individuals back generations since they include the names of the mother and father. Look at old photos and name the people in the photos, she said.


“Deeds, wills, court order books, newspapers, especially obituaries, old funeral home records. Ask your family members including your in-laws. Talk to the oldest person in the neighborhood. Go to cemeteries and look at headstones. There is one person in every family that keeps that history going. I’m the person in my family,” Hayes said.


Hayes would like for anyone who has information about Smyth County’s black families and would be willing to share that information to contact her at 276-780-3950.


Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
