By

Associated Press


and 
Snejana Farberov For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  15:09 EDT, 3 May 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  17:37 EDT, 3 May 2018







           6

View  comments

 A homeless man accused of murdering a mother-of-three from Iowa during a random home invasion last week had been released from jail two days before the deadly incident.


Timothy Evans, 38, had been jailed on a $5,000 cash-only bond until a judge ordered the unemployed felon facing car burglary and drug charges released on his own recognizance last Friday. 


A prosecutor with the Linn County attorney's office signed off on the release under an arrangement with Evans' defense lawyer.


Less than 48 hours after he regained his freedom, investigators say Evans broke into a detached garage early Sunday at the Cedar Rapids home of 38-year-old Gina Frederiksen. 


They say he intended to commit a burglary, then brutally beat the woman and set the garage on fire to cover up the crime and destroy the evidence.


Scroll down for video 


Timothy Evans (left), 38, had been freed from jail two days before he allegedly killed 38-year-old mother-of-three Gina Frederiksen (right) in Iowa 

Coverup: Investigators say Evans broke into Frederiksen's detached garage and set it on fire after killing her

Police responded to the home in the 1800 block of I Street Southwest before 8am Sunday after neighbors called 911 to report an explosion. 


An officer found Frederiksen suffering from traumatic injuries to her head and other body parts in the flame-engulfed doorway of the garage. She was taken to a hospital but could not be saved, and a medical examiner ruled the death a homicide. 


Fredericksen, an administrative assistant at a financial company, was engaged to be married and had three young children. 


Investigators arrested Evans on Tuesday after witnesses told police that he had confessed to the homicide and arson in detail, and that he was seen on surveillance video attempting to break into at least one other home three hours earlier.


He has been charged with first-degree murder and is being held on $2million bond.


Nicholas Maybanks, the first assistant Linn County attorney, said Thursday that Evans' release from jail last week was 'very unfortunate' but that no one in his office did anything wrong in agreeing to it. 


Evans was caught on surveillance video allegedly trying to break into another home three hours before the killing and arson  

Glum: Evans is pictured during his first court appearance on Wednesday 

He noted that Evans was facing only aggravated misdemeanor burglary and theft charges in that case.


'It's obviously very unfortunate but I can't say that there's anything that we did that was improper or out of practice. You can't predict these things,' he said. 'Nobody has a crystal ball.'


Evans ended up behind bars on April 16, a day after he allegedly broke into an unoccupied car in Cedar Rapids and stole items valued at less than $200.


At the time, Evans had a warrant out for his arrest in neighboring Jones County after skipping his arraignment in a felony drug possession case stemming from a March 2 traffic stop in which Evans allegedly had a bag of methamphetamine and needles.


He was charged with possession of a controlled substance as a repeat offender, since he had at least three prior felony drug convictions. A judge ordered him released on pretrial supervision by the Department of Corrections, which typically involves routine check-ins with an officer.


Fredericksen (left and right) worked as an administrative assistant at a financial company. She was engaged to be married and had three young children

Evans was also suspected in a November 2017 arson at a Cedar Rapids houseboat that had been burglarized. Investigators say that a crime lab database had a hit suggesting that DNA taken from a cigarette butt at the crime scene was a potential match for Evans. 


They obtained a DNA sample from him in February in hopes of confirming the match, but he hasn't been charged and the case remains under investigation.


The order that released Evans from jail was signed by Judge Russell Keast and said only, 'By agreement of the parties, the defendant is released on his own recognizance pending further proceedings.' 


That means Evans didn't have to post bond or face any other conditions of supervision. The Jones County warrant was lifted the same day after his public defender filed a written arraignment on his behalf.


Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group