Clear skies. Low 74F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear skies. Low 74F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 5:52 pm

The Bauermeister home.

Beverly Diane Bauermeister

Alan Stack

Beverly Diane Bauermeister

Alan Stack

The Bauermeister home.

A 51-year-old Bellevue woman may have lain dead in her home for a week before family members found her Thursday afternoon.

Beverly Diane Bauermeister’s boyfriend has been jailed in connection with her death at a Bellevue mobile home park.

Thursday night, police located Alan Stack, 56, and arrested him on suspicion of second-degree murder in the death of Bauermeister, 51. Her body showed signs of significant trauma, police said. Stack was being held at the Sarpy County Jail.

Stack, who lived at the residence with Bauermeister, was taken into custody after he was found in Bauermeister’s vehicle. He was not inside the mobile home when Bauermeister’s body was found, authorities said.

Officers were dispatched about 5:15 p.m. Thursday to the Washington Terrace mobile home park to check on the well-being of Bauermeister, who went by her middle name. Family members were at her residence and had found Bauermeister’s body, police said.

Katarina Bauermeister, the slain woman’s niece, said relatives had gone to check on her after not hearing from her for days.

“When no one heard from her for about a week,” Katarina said, “My dad and my cousin, Diane’s daughter, went to her house. She was deceased on the living room floor.”

Personnel from the Omaha police crime lab assisted Bellevue authorities in collecting evidence at the scene.

The mobile home park is at 3101 Washington St., just east of Offutt Air Force Base.

In 2010 Bauermeister applied for a protection order against Stack. She wrote that on Nov. 14 of that year, Stack entered her bedroom ranting and yelling at her. She said he then sucker-punched her in the back of her head and hit her in the stomach, arms and legs. She said officers took photos of bruises and told her to take more in the following days because more bruising would become visible.

A wheelchair ramp leads to the front door of Bauermeister’s home. A neighbor, Donna Livingston, 71, said it’s likely for Bauermeister’s 90-year-old mother, who has health problems and whom Bauermeister cared for.

Katarina Bauermeister said the family understands that the 90-year-old was home when Bauermeister was killed and then lay in bed for days afterward. The woman, Katarina’s grandmother, was taken to a hospital, she said, and should be fine.

Stack and Bauermeister were recovering alcoholics, Livingston said, and Bauermeister had been sober since July.

“She was doing really well,” Livingston said.

She said Stack recently had spent time in a detox facility. His continued alcohol abuse may have led to problems between the two, Livingston said.

“They argued a lot,” she said. “She told me that she wanted to get rid of him. She was tired of supporting him.”

Livingston said Stack wasn’t overly friendly.

“Whenever I went into her home,” Livingston said, “Al would just stay in the bedroom.”

Katarina Bauermeister said “he always seemed to be an angry man.”

She described her aunt as an energetic woman who made everybody in the family laugh.

“I want everyone to know how selfless and amazing my aunt was,” she said. “She’s not just another homicide victim. She’s an aunt, a sister, a mother and a grandmother.”

jay.withrow@owh.com, 402-444-1259

Beverly Diane Bauermeister

Alan Stack

The Bauermeister family has started an online fundraiser to help pay for Diane Bauermeister's funeral arrangements:


http://bit.ly/2zONnkM




A 27-year-old woman walked into an Omaha hospital emergency room early Saturday with a gunshot wound that was not life-threatening.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


