
                                TOMMY LIVINGSTON
                            


                            
                            Last updated 16:46, June 28 2018
                            

Troy George Skinner, 25, remains in hospital in a secure ward. 

A friend of a Kiwi man who was shot after he allegedly tried to enter the house of a young American girl he met online believes he was suffering from serious mental health issues. 


James Stirling told Stuff he had been friends with Troy George Skinner for 13-years, and spoke with him the day before Skinner was shot in the neck at a property in Goochland County, Virginia. 


Skinner flew from Auckland to Los Angeles before travelling to Virginia where he allegedly claimed to the young girl's family he was a hitchhiker who needed help. 

According to police, he smashed a glass door to try to enter the home of the girl, who lives with her mother, father, and 18-year-old sister. 


READ MORE: * US girl's mum shoots Kiwi her daughter met online * Picked the wrong town  * Wouldn't stop until he was shot


In his attempts to get in, he was shot by the girl's mother with a .22 pistol. 


He left the property but collapsed shortly after and was rushed to hospital once police arrived. 


Skinner, 25, was formally charged on Wednesday, while recovering in hospital, with breaking and entering with a deadly weapon with the intent to commit rape, robbery or murder. 


If convicted he could face a lengthy prison term in a United States jail. 


"From my point of view he needs a psych ward or a prison cell. It's the Americans who have been wronged and ultimately their choice to decide what will happen to him," Stirling told Stuff.


"I'd like to think we can see his treatment and or punishment is done [in New Zealand]." 


Stirling said Skinner didn't have an obsession with crime or violence, and always seemed level-headed. 


"He was a quiet, reasonably friendly guy. Minded his own business, wasn't afraid to express his opinion. Ironically, he had pretty strong pet peeves relating to crime and overtly antisocial behaviour in general.


"I remember him as the guy who would happily go to the upstairs flat to tell them blasting music at 3am wasn't okay" 

A Goochland County sheriff said Troy Skinner smashed a glass door to try to enter the home of the girl.

Recently, Stirling heard Skinner had begun suffering from mental health issues, and was seeking help.


NZME reported Skinner had stopped taking his antipsychotic medication prior to the incident. 


"I wouldn't have called him personable, but he wasn't a sociopath in the time I've known him," Stirling said. 


"Apparently he had some aggressive episodes recently that I wasn't around for. He's a sharp guy. What he did was a truly insane thing to do. I understand he has been seeing people related to his mental health." 


While Skinner had kept hidden his contact with the young American girl, he didn't have a problem talking to woman, Stirling said. 


"He wasn't shy at all." 


When Stirling found out what Skinner had done he was in disbelief.   "I thought I was being punked for a good five minutes. I spoke to him a day before. It was totally unexpected, bewildering." 


He had tried to reach out to his friend, but had not heard anything. It is understood Skinner is currently in a secure ward at a Virginia hospital under police guard.


"I have [tried to make contact], but he's under sheriff supervision and they don't take inbound calls. I imagine that lucid or not, he'll want to cope with the self-destructive situation he's found himself in before speaking with anyone.


"I'll be around when that happens." 


The day before the shooting, Skinner had reached out to Stirling to talk about his travel plans – but made no mention of the girl. 


"He was asking for travel advice, how to manage expenses, what Portland would cost to stay in. We had a yarn for about an hour about the details. He never brought up Virginia, or a girl or anything." 


The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade has confirmed it was in touch with Skinner's family and had offered consular assistance. 


For privacy reasons no further information would be provided, a spokeswoman said.


'PLANNED TRIP'


Investigators believe Skinner's actions were part of a clearly planned trip from New Zealand. 


Skinner first made contact with the Goochland girl three to four months earlier via Discord, a voice-over-internet app that allows video-gamers to communicate via their personal device. 


US authorities have traced Skinner's movements back to a flight from Auckland at 6.05am on June 20 to Sydney. From there, Skinner boarded a 9.25am flight to Los Angeles.   


He took a third flight at 9.40pm to Washington DC, and then caught a Greyhound bus at 8.35am to Richmond, Virginia, 175 kilometres south of Washington DC. 


The Times-Dispatch reported that a neighbour saw a man in black clothing about 2.30pm cross the road near Steeplechase Parkway, where the mother and daughter lived. 


Two hours later, authorities received a phone call about a man wearing black trying to break into the family's home. 


Police said the mother was downstairs with one of her daughters when Skinner knocked on the front door, but she did not go to the door.


"They thought that was the end of it until they saw him at the back basement door, which is situated under the deck.


"He got a brick and attempted to break that door down."  



                
                     - Stuff
            

Welcome to Waltonville, where the world's richest family reigns

Business Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Largest alpine resort to be built
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Why so many new vehicles?
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        BP stung by job portal breach
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        How Deloitte dept closed its pay gap
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Chemical spill during crate wash
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Tenants too fearful to take action
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        The youngest self-made billionaire?
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Police raid Trade Me
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Businesses tackle climate change
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Shopify sold on Wellington
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Company directors' surging fees under spotlight
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Blueprint for 'fair deal' for renters released
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        RNZ pockets $4.5m funding
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Lawyers deemed 'fit and proper'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        King hit to Renters United's claims
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            