
    
        
            By Alex Napoliello

anapoliello@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A teenager suspected of planning to kill people at a high school graduation last week received an additional charge of terrorism on Tuesday.

Matthew Vanderbeek, 19, of Cream Ridge, is a student at New Egypt High School in Ocean County and had plans of buying a gun with the intention of killing students at the school's graduation Thursday night, authorities said.

He was arrested June 19 and charged with terroristic threats with a threat to kill, a third-degree crime, and second-degree attempting to possess a firearm for an unlawful purpose.

The Ocean County Prosecutor's Office added the first-degree offense, which typically carries a prison sentence of 30 years but could earn someone a life sentence if people were killed during the criminal act.

The charge is rare in New Jersey and requires approval from the state Attorney General's Office. In March, the man convicted of killing Livingston native Brendan Tevlin, Ali Muhammad Brown, became the first person in New Jersey to be convicted under the state's terrorism statute. Brown, 34, was sentenced in May with life in prison without the possibility of parole.

On Friday, NJ Advance Media reported that Vanderbeek attempted to purchase a gun by having a friend drive him to a local sporting goods store. He never made it to the store because the friend told him to leave his car when Vanderbeek revealed his intentions of shooting up the school's graduation, authorities said.

The news outlet also reported that Vanderbeek dyed his hair red - an apparent attempt to mimic James Holmes, the shooter who killed 12 people and injured dozens other at a movie theater in Aurora, Colorado, in 2012.

Authorities were tipped off to Vanderbeek after police learned about postings made on social media about his intentions on conducting a shooting at the graduation in New Egypt, a small rural town located on the edge of Ocean County.

He was previously suspended in May from the Brick Vocational School, where he went for a portion of the school day. Vanderbeek had also made similar threats to shoot up that school on graduation day.

One student recalled in April how Vanderbeek talked about his plans to do the shooting and that "the safe color to wear is orange," according to the affidavit of probable cause filed against Vanderbeek.

Vanderbeek is being held at the Ocean County jail. He is scheduled to be back in court on Wednesday. 

Alex Napoliello may be reached at anapoliello@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @alexnapoNJ. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        