By

Dailymail.com Reporter






  Published:
  16:11 EDT, 13 December 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  17:47 EDT, 13 December 2017







          97

View  comments

They're doing little to hide their high-profile romance amid an ongoing custody battle with his estranged wife Melissa.


But 'hot felon' Jeremy Meeks and girlfriend Chloe Green enjoyed yet another date night as they headed out for dinner in Los Angeles on Tuesday.  


The inmate-turned-model, 33, and the Topshop heiress, 26, looked happy and relaxed as they grabbed a bite to eat.


Hitting the town: 'Hot felon' Jeremy Meeks and girlfriend Chloe Green enjoyed yet another date night as they headed out for dinner in Los Angeles on Tuesday 

The emerging catwalk star has been at odds with his estranged wife Melissa over custody of their son Jeremy Jr, eight, in recent weeks.


She has accused the star of not paying child support and not spending time with their son.


Jeremy - who rocketed to fame in 2014 after his mugshot went viral - looked handsome in a black zip up and well-fitted tee during his outing with Chloe.


Dark trousers with a bit of a sheen covered his bottom half, while the Northern California native accessorized with a gold necklace and black sneakers. 


British girlfriend Chloe combined an Alexander McQueen skull scarf and bedazzled booties for a fashion-forward look.


Melissa who? The inmate-turned-model, 33, and the Topshop heiress, 26, looked relaxed as they grabbed a bite to eat amid his ongoing custody dispute with estranged wife Melissa


                        
                    


                        
                            
                        
                    

Saint Laurent Women's Black Skull Print Shirt Dress (sold out)




                            Visit site
                        

Chloe Green opted for an edgy look on her dinner date yesterday evening with Jeremy Meeks. 

She pulled on a pair of leather trousers and layered a shirt dress over the look before topping things off with some blingy open-toed heels. 

This skull printed button down is by Saint Laurent, which makes sense for the brand with a cool penchant for rock n roll clothing. Sadly though, Chloe's top is now sold out. 

But if you're like us and fancy an easy- breezy shirt dress to layer into our  wardrobe this winter, why dont you shop the carousel below for some of our faves.

ASOS Long Sleeve Shirt Dress In Spot


                                            Visit site
                                        

Fashion Union Shirt Dress In Western Floral Print at ASOS.com


                                            Visit site
                                        

Stradivarius Polka Dot Shirt Dress at ASOS.com


                                            Visit site
                                        

Forever 21 Polka Dot Shirt Dress


                                            Visit site
                                        

Why so serious? Chloe and Jeremy (pictured in LA in October) appear to be getting quite serious, as the fashion heiress was seen bonding with her beau's son last weekend

The former reality star added leather leggings and a cozy sweater, while matching her kicks with a studded clutch.


The fashion heiress let her ombre locks cascade down, while opting for natural looking make-up.


The couple headed inside a restaurant, where they reportedly met up with TV host and Planet Hollywood CEO Robert Earl.


 Jeremy and his estranged wife Melissa continue to work out the terms of their divorce and their custody arrangements for son, Jeremy Jr.


Custody battle: Jeremy's estranged wife Melissa  (pictured left) claims that the star has failed to pay child support for their son Jeremy Jr and 'barely' sees the son they share

The homecare nurse, who was married to Jeremy for eight years before learning he was unfaithful to her via the tabloids earlier this year, filed legal documents asking for child support last week, according to TMZ. 


The mother-of-three's legal papers claim the model has stopped paying child support and barely sees their son, and her two other children who saw Meeks as a 'father figure.' 


While she claims he's pulling in $1 million a month from modelling contract, he has claimed he receives just $6,000 per month. 


Chloe and Jeremy's relationship seems to be moving quickly, with the socialite already having been introduced to Jeremy jr.  


Case of the ex: The nurse (pictured in a November Instagram) was married to Jeremy for eight years before learning he was being unfaithful to her with new girl Chloe via the tabloids



Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group