
Wednesday 11 July 2018



Ralph Riegel
Twitter
Email



January 2 2018 12:03 PM



A young man has been charged with the murder of his older brother in their family home in Limerick.


Gerard 'Gerry' Lynch (29) appeared before Newcastlewest District Court charged with the murder of his brother, William 'Willie' Lynch (35), on December 30 last in Pallaskenry.

Judge Mark Larkin was told that Lynch replied to Gardaí after being charged: "Sorry, I didn't mean it."

Lynch of Main Street, Pallaskenry, Co Limerick appeared in court wearing slacks and a grey sweat shirt.

He kept his head bowed throughout the brief proceedings.

The defendant did not speak during the hearing.

Evidence of arrest, caution and charge was offered by Garda Alan O'Donnell.

He told the court that Lynch was charged at Newcastlewest Garda Station on January 1.

Inspector Alan Cullen said gardaí were requesting a remand in ongoing custody.

Solicitor Michael O'Donnell was appointed to represent the defendant.

He requested that the court direct that all required medical assistance be provided for his client while in custody.

Judge Larkin remanded Lynch in custody to appear again before Limerick District Court on January 9 next.

Willie Lynch, a well-known sporting enthusiast in the Pallaskenry area, was found critically injured at 5pm last Saturday in the two-storey terraced home off Main Street he shared with his younger brother.

He was discovered just a couple of hours before he was to host a charity pool tournament in aid of Milford Hospice.

Mr Lynch was pronounced dead at the scene before he could be transferred by paramedics to University Hospital Limerick (UHL).

Gardaí launched a murder investigation after a post mortem examination by Assistant State Pathologist Dr Margaret Bolster at UHL confirmed that Mr Lynch had met a violent death.

He had sustained multiple stab wounds to the torso.

Tributes have been paid to Willie Lynch who was deeply involved in sporting and community organisations in Pallaskenry.

Friends set up a special online fundraising appeal to help his family with funeral costs.

The appeal raised more than €2,500 in just 10 hours.

Willie Lynch is survived by his mother, Helen and another brother, Danny.


Online Editors


Aoife Nic Ardghail A jury in the trial of an African national accused of causing serious harm to two former partners by infecting them with HIV has begun deliberations.

Tim Healy A man who was illegally adopted, and his birth mother, have settled their High Court action against a Catholic adoption agency and the State.

Ruaidhrí Giblin A Dublin man on trial for IRA membership was arrested at the entrance of St James’ Hospital by armed gardai, some of whom had their weapons drawn, in front of a crowd, the Special Criminal...


What a difference a few weeks makes. 


Transport Minister... 


Dissident republicans were responsible for a... 


Fine Gael will actively campaign for Michael D... 


A man who was illegally adopted, and his birth mother,... 


GARDAI investigating the Bray gym murder are close to... 


First excavations at Newgrange in more than 30 years have led to the “most... 


A Dublin man on trial for IRA membership was... 


Interim injunctions against a Kerry Group employee - who... 


The HSE has secured court orders preventing a son and... 


The Duchess of Sussex says she misses her hit US series Suits. 


The Duchess of Sussex has promised to revisit... 


Prince Harry has told a Famine memorial... 


A Service of Thanksgiving was held at Garryduff... 


Taxpayer to pay for new locks as gardai... 


The public are paying their tributes to... 


Royal fans, history buffs and fashion... 


Crisp manufacturers nationwide could be in... 


The fire, which is said to have started... 


Gardai are investigating a shooting incident in... 


A man is recovering in hospital today after being stabbed a number of... 


Traffic is affected on the M1 as firefighters... 


Some have been complaining that the blizzard and... 

© Independent.ie 