
Wednesday 11 July 2018



Ken Foy and Robin Schiller



January 30 2018 10:06 PM



A close associate of the Hutch mob has died after being shot multiple times in the body in the North Strand area of the city.


Gardaí confirmed they are investigating the shooting incident at James Larkin House, North Strand, Dublin 1, which took place shortly before 9.45pm.

The man in his 20s was shot four times in the chest and twice in the body.

He was taken the Mater Hospital where he was pronounced dead.

The gunman fled the scene on foot.

The scene is sealed off to facilitate a technical examination of the area . Gardaí are appealing for witnesses to contact them at Store Street Garda Station on 01 666 800.

Nial Ring, a Dublin city councillor representing the north inner city said he spoke with senior gardai at the scene who "assured me all resources are available and being used to tackle this latest incident."

"All the local community wants is an end to this feud and a return to a normal peaceful life in this close knit and proud community," he said.

"Normality is needed to ensure that local children do not have to endure this constant trauma which will affect them beyond their childhoods. The gardaí are stepping up to the mark - we need the other agencies to do likewise," he added.


Online Editors


Ray Managh Ryanair making an injured air hostess pay for her flight home was not an aggravating factor in a €60,000 personal injury claim against the airline, a judge has ruled.

Ralph Riegel A CYCLIST has died following a road accident in Cork.

Aoife Nic Ardghail A jury in the trial of an African national accused of causing serious harm to two former partners by infecting them with HIV has begun deliberations.


What a difference a few weeks makes. 


Transport Minister... 


Ryanair making an injured air hostess pay for her... 


A CYCLIST has died following a road accident in Cork. 


A jury in the trial of an African national accused of... 


Dissident republicans were responsible for a... 


Fine Gael will actively campaign for Michael D... 


A man who was illegally adopted, and his birth mother,... 


GARDAI investigating the Bray gym murder are close to... 


The heatwave has been described as “critical” in the discovery of a henge, or circular... 


A Dublin man on trial for IRA membership was... 


Interim injunctions against a Kerry Group employee - who... 


Prince Harry has told a Famine memorial... 


A Service of Thanksgiving was held at Garryduff... 


Taxpayer to pay for new locks as gardai... 


The public are paying their tributes to... 


Royal fans, history buffs and fashion... 


Crisp manufacturers nationwide could be in... 


The fire, which is said to have started... 


Gardai are investigating a shooting incident in... 


A man is recovering in hospital today after being stabbed a number of... 


Traffic is affected on the M1 as firefighters... 


Some have been complaining that the blizzard and... 

© Independent.ie 