An officer for the Cook County Forest Preserves has been assigned to desk duty after a video appeared to show him failing to help a woman who was being harassed because she wore a shirt with the Puerto Rican flag. 

In a stern message to NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg, President Trump said NATO allies are not spending enough on defense during a bilateral breakfast at Wednesday's NATO summit.  

President Trump accused fellow NATO ally Germany of being "captive to Russia" because of the payments it makes to Moscow for energy. Trump said the payments make it harder for the U.S. to defend Germany from Russia. 

President Donald Trump nominated Judge Brett Kavanaugh to replace Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy on Monday night. Born in Washington, D.C., Kavanaugh has served as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit since 2006. 


Two boys were rescued at a flooded cave in Thailand’s Chiang Rai province on Monday, July 9, bring the total number of those rescued to seven, according to Reuters, citing the Thai Royal Navy and a local witness.

Two Boston police officers do their own version of "car pool karaoke" by singing "God Bless America" while cruising in their patrol car in honor of July 4th.

A SpaceX Dragon cargo craft launched for the International Space Station (ISS) from Cape Canaveral in Florida, early on June 29.

Justice Anthony Kennedy was appointed to the Supreme Court by President Ronald Reagan in 1988.  He announced his retirement from the bench 30 years later, on June 27, 2018. 

On February 26, 2015, 'End Rape On Campus' co-founders Andrea Pino, left, and Annie Clark spoke at the Campus Accountability and Safety Act re-introduction press conference.

The Department of Health and Human Resources takes an inside look at an undocumented immigrant children's shelter in Texas, the largest licensed child care facility in the nation. Note: video has no audio. 

Following President Trump callling for depriving undocumented immigrants of due process rights, White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders tells reporters on June 25, 2018 that immigrants can receive due process without seeing a judge.

A Duke University biologist and his co-authors have found that American swamp sparrows may have been singing the same songs for 1,000 years. So, passing traditions on for generations isn’t unique to humans.

Surveillance footage from inside Tomahawk Ridge Community Center in Overland Park, KS shows a 5-year-old hug and eventually damage a $132,000 sculpture. 

A video uploaded to Twitter shows a man hanging onto the hood of a black Mercedes-Benz as it races along at a high-rate of speed on I-95 in Miami. 

Dave Walz, a warden supervisor with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, captured video of a tiny cub climbing out of a newly constructed open basement in Vilas County.

Bowing to pressure from anxious allies, President Donald Trump signed an executive order Wednesday ending the process of separating children from families after they are detained crossing the U.S. border illegally.