Get the latest sports news, coverage and opinion – all in your inbox.


                
                    Now reading the latest in
                

                
                Colleges News
            


            
                The latest in
            
            
            Colleges News
        


        This story is about
        Colleges
    


        Published
        Jun. 14
    


                    Louis DeLuca/Staff Photographer                

Texas Tech Red Raiders wide receiver Quan Shorts (1) motors down the sidelines on a second-quarter touchdown pass reception during the Baylor University Bears vs. the Texas Tech University Red Raiders NCAA football game at AT&amp;T Stadium in Arlington, Texas on Friday, November 25, 2016. (Louis DeLuca/The Dallas Morning News)



        
            By
            
                            
                            SportsDayDFW.com                     

                    
            
                Contact SportsDayDFW.com 
                
                    
                    on Twitter:
                    @SportsDayDFW
                                            
            

Texas Tech head coach Kliff Kingsbury announced Thursday that junior wide receiver Quan Shorts has been dismissed from the program. 

MORE: Did Kliff Kingsbury's handling of Jett Duffey's legal issues tip his hand for Texas Tech's QB race?


According to Tech athletics spokesman Matt Dowdy, the school will have no further comment on Shorts' dismissal at this time.


Shorts was one of four Tech football players arrested back in March following an altercation with law enforcement outside of Bash Riprocks Nightclub in Lubbock.


The four players were suspended by Coach Kingsbury, only to be brought back to the team a few days later.


Shorts was booked into Lubbock County Detention Center at 3:41 p.m. today, according to Don Williams of the Lubbock Avalanche-Journal. His charges have not been made public yet.

4 football players, including QB Jett Duffey, starting CB Des Smith and starting WR Quan Shorts arrested on one of the biggest days in #TexasTech sports history. SMH. This program. pic.twitter.com/0K3aPz5co7

In two seasons at Tech, Shorts caught 13 passes for 227 yards and three touchdowns.

Twitter: @SportsDayDFW