By

Associated Press


and 
Daily Mail Online Reporter






  Published:
  21:17 EDT, 18 June 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  21:24 EDT, 18 June 2018









View  comments

Sarina Dodson (pictured) was arrested Saturday in Texas on a felony charge of assisting escape

Law enforcement authorities in eastern New Mexico say an officer helped three inmates escape from a county lockup.


Curry County Sheriff Wesley Waller says detention officer Sarina Dodson was arrested Saturday in Texas on a felony charge of assisting escape.


Waller says Dodson was working when three inmates escaped from the Curry County Detention Center in Clovis Friday.


The inmates were identified as Aaron Clark, who was accused of attempted child abuse and identity fraud; Ricky Sena, who was facing charges of aggravated battery with a deadly weapon and auto theft; and Victor Apodaca, who had been jailed on drug charges. 


New Mexico authorities are still searching for the escaped felons.  


Dodson is at the Lubbock County jail. Records do not list an attorney.


Art Scott, who works near the jail, told KRQE that he was not shocked to hear about the circumstances of the incident. 


The inmates were identified as Aaron Clark (L), who was accused of attempted child abuse and identity fraud; Ricky Sena (C), who was facing charges of aggravated battery with a deadly weapon and auto theft; and Victor Apodaca (R), who had been jailed on drug charges

'I hate to say this, but I wasn't really too surprise... It's happened before,' said Scott.   


The Eastern New Mexico News reports the jail has had multiple escapes, including eight one night in 2008.


'They're there for a reason. They need to be in there,' said Scott.  


The Curry County Detention Center along with the county's courthouse have been closed until further notice.  


Local resident Esperanza Meredith says the idea that escaped convicts may be hiding out in or near the community is chilling.


'Scared. Kind of like, wow. I didn't even know, didn't hear no sirens, didn't see nothing,' Meredith said. 


'I will be cautious. I will make sure that more closely that my doors are closed. My doors are locked. That I'm safe, that my husband is safe,' she said. 


In 2015, 52-year-old Joyce Mitchell was sentenced to seven years in prison for helping convicted murderers Richard Matt and David Sweat escape from Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora near the Canadian border. 


She supervised the two inmates in the prison's tailor shop. Matt was shot dead three weeks later by searchers in woods west of the prison. Sweat was shot and captured two days later near the border. 


Mitchell was denied early release in February 2017 after going before the parole board at the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility in Westchester County. 


New Mexico authorities are still searching for the escaped felons while Dodson is currently being held at the Lubbock County jail (pictured) 

 




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group