A Pembroke woman told police she was on the phone with her drug dealer, “dope-sick" after drinking vodka and on her way to get drugs, when the car she was driving forced another car into the path of an oncoming dump truck, leaving a 58-year-old Bridgewater woman dead, records show.


“Ya, I’m (expletive) dope-sick as (expletive),” Danielle Mastro, 33, told police while being questioned following the fatal crash, according to court records.
  


Mastro, charged with motor vehicle homicide and leaving the scene of an accident, said she had not eaten in two days and was calling and texting her dealer to get drugs around the time her Audi A6 struck a Chevy Equinox when she struck the compact SUV from behind, causing it to veer into the path of an oncoming 12-wheel dump truck, records state.


The head-on crash resulted in the truck rolling over and coming to rest on its side.


The victim, identified as Deborah Combra, 58, was pronounced dead at Brockton Hospital, according to Plymouth District Attorney Timothy J. Cruz.


Witnesses saw Mastro exit the driver’s seat of her car after the crash as Combra lay in the street after being ejected from her car, court records show. Officers stopped her nearby as she walked away from the scene.


While being questioned about the crash, Mastro told police she remembered her airbag deploying and hitting her in the face, the police report states. When she realized she could no longer drive her car, she said she thought “let me get the (expletive) out of the car so I can try to go get my (expletive) before I have to go deal with the cops,” records show.


Mastro confirmed to police that she was on the phone with her dealer and on her way to buy drugs, saying she did not even stop to look at Combra’s car or the dump truck strewn across a nearby lawn, records state, saying, “I didn’t even look at it, I threw it in park and (expletive) ran.” 


Mastro also admitted she was driving with a suspended license, records show, and told cops she “drank a (expletive)-load of vodka earlier in the day,” and “was driving like a dope-sick idiot and didn’t deserve any special treatment.” She said she was planning on buying $50 worth of heroin, the report states.


Combra had been at lunch with a female passenger in the Equinox, who lives in Brockton, records show. Both the passenger and the dump truck driver suffered non-fatal injuries. When Combra arrived at the hospital, she was in “traumatic arrest” and had suffered a skull laceration, numerous fractures to her arms and legs, lacerations to her head and face, and a nurse noticed both of her ankles were deformed, records show.


Mastro was ordered held on $50,000 bail and faces being sent to Stoughton District Court where officials say she has an open case. She was also ordered to be fitted with a GPS monitoring bracelet and be admitted to an inpatient drug and mental health program. 


Relatives of Cambra sobbed through the arraignment and politely declined to comment about their loved one as they filed out of court. One family member said Mastro “needs to be locked up for a very long time” and said the details of the crash and Mastro’s conduct are “infuriating.” 


Defense attorney Alison King said Mastro has been struggling with addiction issues for years and recently relapsed. King asked for $25,000 bail on the condition Mastro be admitted to an inpatient drug and mental health treatment facility if she were to make bail. 


Mastro is due back in court Nov. 1. Outside the courtroom, Cruz said the only way to keep the public safe from Mastro is to keep her in jail.


“I think she's a significant risk to public safety,” Cruz said. “We have an individual out there who puts her own needs ahead of others people’s safety on a public way, which is why I believe she should be held.”