Sunny. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Generally clear skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 11:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


Rescued Thai boys make victory signs from hospital beds 

ATLANTA — NFL veteran Adam “Pacman” Jones was assaulted by an airport worker at Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport in Atlanta, police said. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Guadalupe Alvarado

Guadalupe Alvarado

McALLEN — When Guadalupe Alvarado was hired to transport meth from Mexico to Missouri, the Missouri woman said she was promised $10,000.


Driving a gray Chevrolet Tahoe loaded with more than 100 pounds of crystal meth inside a hidden compartment, Alvarado was a little more than a thousand miles away from her destination before her failure to stop at the inspection station caught the attention of authorities. This led to her arrest on federal drug importation charges on Dec. 20, 2016.


U.S. District Judge Randy Crane handed down a sentence of more than seven years for the 27-year-old woman during a brief hearing Thursday. In addition to the 87-month sentence, Alvarado will also serve four years of supervised release, and be required to participate in a drug treatment program, court records show.

Federal prosecutors said Alvarado traveled more than 1,500 miles from her native Kansas City, Missouri, home to Guanajuato, Mexico, a city in central Mexico known for its rich colonial and mining history. It’s also currently infamous for the brutal violence perpetuated by the drug cartels in the region, where she was to turn over her SUV to unidentified men who would then load it with narcotics.


Alvarado, who originally pleaded not guilty to the federal drug charges against her, pleaded guilty in June to one count of importation of a controlled substance. This, according to court records, was in exchange for federal prosecutors dismissing the remaining three counts: attempt/conspiracy to import a controlled substance; conspiracy to distribute a controlled substance; and possession of a controlled substance.


Following her arrest at the Hidalgo Port of Entry just five days before Christmas, the woman told federal agents that she arrived in Guanajuato on Dec. 17, 2016. For three days several unidentified members of a drug trafficking organization began the process of stashing drugs into the SUV, according to the criminal complaint filed against her last year.


Once the SUV was ready, Alvarado began what was expected to be a more than 24-hour drive to Kansas City — at the end of which she believed she would be paid $10,000.


But at about the halfway point of her trip at the U.S.-Mexico border in Hidalgo, Alvarado caught the attention of U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers when she drove past the initial inspection station, court records show.


“(Customs and Border Protection officer) alerted the (other officers) in the secondary and post-secondary area of the vehicle’s attempt to abscond,” the complaint states. “(CBPO officer) was able to successfully stop the vehicle and escort it back to the secondary inspection station.”


A K-9 alerted officers to an area near the wheel-area of the SUV and the officers later determined anomalies in the same area using a gamma ray machine, the complaint states.

Subsequently, officers found 24 bundles of what was later determined to be methamphetamine weighing more than 130 pounds.


“Alvarado stated an individual hired her to transport illegal narcotics from Guanajuato, Mexico to Kansas City, Missouri,” the complaint states.


According to the CBP website, officers seized more than 37,000 pounds of meth during the 2016 fiscal year and more than 44,000 in year-to-date 2017.


lzazueta@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Lorenzo Zazueta posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.