Sunny. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mainly clear. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 8:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


Weslaco native Benita Valdez became the newest member of Tropical Texas Behavioral Health’s board of trustees after she was appointed and sworn in last week by county officials. 

HONOLULU--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jul 11, 2018--Kamu Grugier-Hill, linebacker from the reigning Super Bowl championship football team the Philadelphia Eagles, has joined together with professional athletes from Hawai‘i who are with the National Football League (NFL), Major League Baseball (MLB) and…

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Volunteer Fire Chief David Simmons speaks during the groundbreaking ceremony Wednesday for an expansion to the fire station in Donna.

Volunteer Fire Chief David Simmons speaks during the groundbreaking ceremony Wednesday for an expansion to the fire station in Donna.

DONNA — City officials broke ground Tuesday for an expansion of the fire department.


Hidalgo County Precinct 1 Commissioner David Fuentes, Councilwoman Sonia Gallegos and volunteer Fire Chief David Simmons were speakers during the ceremony held at the city’s fire station on 10th Street.


A grant through the Urban County program is helping the city fund the construction of the new structure, Simmons said.

The expansion will include covered space to house the newest fire trucks.


“We need to make sure we take care of them,” Gallegos said of the new equipment. “This is the first phase in trying to make sure that we protect our investment — building out this bay.”


Donna Fire Department has 25 volunteer firefighters and two maintenance employees who work alongside Simmons, a 30-year veteran of the department.


“It’s been 34 years since this station behind (me) was initially built,” Simmons said of the original structure behind him.


Fuentes congratulated Gallegos, the mayor, the city staff and all the volunteers.


“It’s amazing to me that the city of Donna has been able to cut their tax rate for three, four consecutive years and still be able to do expansions like this,” Fuentes said, “And deliver a better service to their community.”


McAllen, Mercedes and Weslaco fire chiefs were present at the ceremony.

“First responders are the people that run to these emergency situations while the rest of the people are running away,” Fuentes said.


A new restroom with a shower, paved parking and a storage room will be part of the expansion.


Luis Figueroa of ROFA Architects Inc. was chosen to design the building, which could be completed within six months.


“We’re very proud and happy that the city is able to provide this,” Simmons said.


cgarcia@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Cristina Garcia posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.