


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone calls for strict sentencing for inmates who attacked three detention officers over the course of two days.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Shane Tadlock
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Three Maricopa County detention officers were assaulted by inmates in recent days, with injuries ranging from a broken nose to head trauma, officials said Tuesday.


Detention Officer Clinton Payne, a 12-year Sheriff's Office veteran, was seriously injured in an attack outside a courtroom that morning, officials said.


Payne was beaten and stunned with his own Taser while transporting a detainee in a secured area, officials said. Payne had just removed one of the handcuffs so the man could use the restroom, which is department protocol, officials said.


"What happened this morning is an example of one of the most egregious acts that our detention officers face in threat of violence, the job that they do every day," Sheriff Paul Penzone said at a press conference on Tuesday.


In a separate incident Monday, Field Training Officer Thomas Touchet and Detention Officer Alfred Fuller were attacked by two male inmates while handing out laundry at the Fourth Avenue Jail in Phoenix, according to MCSO. Touchet suffered a cut in his mouth and Fuller suffered a broken nose.


Jerrold Burnett (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The inmate accused in the courthouse attack was identified by officials as 36-year-old Shane Tadlock.


Tadlock had been jailed on charges of armed robbery, dangerous-drug possession and drug paraphernalia. 


Penzone said he attacked the officer, striking him violently, knocking him to the floor and continuing to beat him. 


"He then took the detention officer's Taser, tasing him multiple times as the detention officer fought back, radioed for help and begged for this criminal to stop attacking him," Penzone said. 


Penzone said the attack went on for about three or four minutes before other detention officers and civilian employees were able to restrain the attacker. 


During the beating, Payne refused to give up the security key that would let Tadlock out of the secured area, Penzone said. 


Payne suffered multiple facial fractures and will have a long recovery, Penzone said.


"The courage that he had even as he spoke in his hospital bed, so severely beaten and swollen that he was basically unrecognizable," Penzone said. 


Penzone said people do not see the challenges that go on behind the walls of a jail.


"I believe it is long overdue to start talking about these issues," he said.


Penzone said the Sheriff's Office currently employs 1,800 detention officers, 200 short of what they should have to properly staff the jail.


He said additional funding and other resources could help address the issue and provide a safer environment for detention officers.


Penzone said the agency will seek charges against anyone responsible for injuring employees. 


Jamaine Richardson (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

"We can no longer tolerate or allow for violent people in our community to threaten our safety," he said. "I absolutely am taken aback by it, disgusted, and there is no punishment enough for people like this."


The two inmates involved in the first case of assault were identified by officials as 23-year-old Jamaine Richardson and 39-year-old Jerrold Burnett.


Burnett is being held on a charge of first-degree murder and armed robbery. Richardson is being held on several counts of armed robbery, aggravated assault, burglary and threats.


READ MORE:


Westgate evacuated after threats; man arrested


NBA's Morris twins acquitted in beating of man


Las Vegas shooter wired about $100K to Philippines


Couple accused of stealing nearly $1.3M from HOAs


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
