


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police booked Jacqueline Ades at a Maricopa County Sheriff's Office jail after numerous reports of her stalking a man she met online.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Maricopa County court documents show Jacqueline Ades of Phoenix was arrested on suspicion of stalking and harassing a man she met online.
    Maricopa County Superior Court

Jacqueline Ades
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Paradise Valley police arrested a woman Tuesday on suspicion of stalking and harassing a man she met online, according to Maricopa County court documents.


Court records say Jacqueline Ades, 31, of Phoenix, visited the man's home and office while flooding his phone with threatening text messages. She began stalking the man last summer shortly after meeting him through a dating website, according to the documents, which were submitted to the court by police.


Ades is suspected of sending the man around 65,000 text messages and sometimes 500 in a single day, court documents show. 


Paradise Valley police said in a separate statement the man called the department last summer when he found her parked outside his home. Police said they escorted her off the property.


Police said Ades began sending threatening text messages after the incident, including multiple death threats.


"Oh what would I do w ur blood! ... Id wanna bathe in it," was an example listed in court documents. 


Another included an anti-Semitic epithet with Ades describing herself as the "new Hitler."


Court documents say the man called police last month when surveillance footage showed Ades in his home while he was out of the country. 


Paradise Valley police arrested Ades after finding her taking a bath in the home on April 8. At that time, police also found a large butcher knife on the passenger seat of her car, the court documents added. 


She was later released, but failed to appear in court on multiple occasions, court records show.


Scottsdale police later escorted Ades away from a Scottsdale office building where the man worked, Paradise Valley police said.


Police say Ades told the Scottsdale officers she was the man's wife.


After hearing about the Scottsdale incident, Paradise Valley police searched for and arrested Ades on Tuesday in Phoenix.


Court documents say Ades told police she didn't want to hurt the man and sent the threatening texts because she didn't want him to leave.


Ades faces charges of threatening and intimidating, stalking, and harassment. She is being held without bond.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 


 
