


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Phoenix City Council Wednesday voted to give $250,000 to the family of Ernest "Marty" Atencio, who died after a 2011 incident at a county jail.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Maricopa County Board of Supervisors is expected to pay $7 million to the family of Ernest "Marty" Atencio, who died while being booked into Maricopa County jail.
(Photo: Atencio family/Special for The Republic)

The Phoenix City Council on Wednesday voted to give $250,000 to the family of Ernest "Marty" Atencio, who died after a 2011 incident at a county jail. 


Atencio's family sued the city and Maricopa County in 2012, claiming Phoenix officers were involved in a struggle during his incarceration that led to county Sheriff's Office officials punching Atencio in the face and shooting him with a stun gun close to his heart. 


In March, the Maricopa County Board of Supervisors approved a separate $7 million settlement.


The lawsuit stemming from Atencio's death was one of many pricey legal battles during former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio's time at the helm of the jail system. Arpaio was voted out of the post in 2016 and is now running for U.S. Senate. 


On Dec. 15, 2011, Phoenix police arrested Atencio on suspicion of misdemeanor assault after he frightened a woman by kicking at her apartment door. Officers had also reported encountering Atencio earlier in the day acting erratically at a 7-Eleven convenience store.


According to the lawsuit, Atencio refused when Phoenix officers asked him to remove his shoes to go through a scanner at the county's Fourth Avenue Jail, which led to a struggle with the officers.


Arpaio's deputies joined and formed a "dogpile" atop the inmate, shooting him with a stun gun and striking him with a closed fist.


"While he was being tased, punched and manhandled, Marty cried out in pain," the lawsuit states. 


Atencio was on life support for four days before he died, his family's attorney told The Arizona Republic in March. 


An autopsy completed by the Maricopa Medical Examiner's Office states Atencio's death was caused by "complications of cardiac arrest in the setting of acute psychosis, law enforcement subdual, and multiple medical problems. The manner of death is listed as 'undetermined.'" 


The Phoenix City Council voted 5-2 to approve the settlement, with council members Sal DiCiccio and Jim Waring voting in opposition. 



    Full interview: Ernest Joe Atencio on son's death
    

RELATED COVERAGE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
