


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Switch from stripes is expected to save Maricopa County more than $20,000 annually, Sheriff Paul Penzone says.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The Maricopa County Sheriff's Office said its new uniforms for inmates will save taxpayers thousands of dollars every year.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The Maricopa County Sheriff's Office will ditch the black-and-white-striped uniforms issued to inmates in favor of orange, a move officials say will save taxpayers thousands of dollars annually.


The switch from stripes to solid orange started this week and will be completed by Friday, according to an MCSO news release.


"Our staff has done an excellent job examining our entire operation to find cost savings and workplace efficiencies that will stretch our dollars without compromising safety," Sheriff Paul Penzone said in a prepared statement. "Changing the inmate uniform is one more way we can deliver top service at reduced expense."


Penzone said the orange uniforms will save 12 percent, or at least $22,000, each year.


The news release said adult pretrial inmates will have "MCSO Unsentenced" printed on the front and back of the uniform.


Sentenced inmates will have "MCSO" only on the front and back of the uniform. Juvenile inmates will have yellow sleeves and "MCSO" stenciled on the front and back of the uniform. All stencils are in black ink.


MCSO switched to striped uniforms in April 1997 after using a uniform color code based on an inmate's classification or status, officials said.


This multicolor system made purchasing and laundering processes complicated, according to the news release.


The stripes also were more costly than just orange, officials said.


"Stripes were expensive and I asked our custody leadership to look into a way to cut costs," Penzone said. "The orange uniforms are much more cost-effective, especially in the variety of sizes we need."


READ MORE:


Penzone says Maricopa County jail meals are sufficient, offers a taste to media


Some county inmates going on hunger strike to protest poor food, activist says


Tent City jail to become rehabilitation center, possible state corrections facility


Maricopa County's Tent City jail officially shut down


Audit: Hispanics still treated differently in MCSO traffic stops


Taxpayer tab up to $70M in Joe Arpaio racial-profiling case


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
