Iowa safety Brandon Snyder spent the early Sunday hours in a jail cell after being arrested for drunk driving. After being pulled over just after 3:00 a.m. in the morning on Sunday, Snyder admitted to drinking and failed a breathalyzer test.

“We are aware of the incident involving Brandon,” a statement from Iowa head coach Kirk Ferentz said. “While we are currently gathering additional facts, we are very disappointed to learn of Brandon’s involvement. Brandon is subject to the rules and regulations of the UI Student-Athlete Code of Conduct, and the rules and regulations of our football program.”

Snyder was not expected to play in Iowa’s appearance in the Pinstripe Bowl this season due to injury, but it remains to be seen just what his official status will be in light of this weekend’s legal trouble.

As reported by the Des Moines Register, the 22-year old was pulled over near Kinnick Stadium. The police report notes Snyder was wearing multiple wristbands, suggesting he made a couple of stops to consume alcohol during the course of the night. He was released from a county jail at 9:30 a.m. on Sunday.

Follow @KevinOnCFB

The puffs of white smoke continue to fly out the chimney, and we got a big one on Wednesday with the first unveiling of a conference’s Preseason All-Big 12 team. It’s just a preseason team, yes, but it’s actual football talk about the actual season that’s actually about to happen…. in seven more weeks.

West Virginia quarterback Will Grier earned Preseason Offensive Player of the Year honors and TCU defensive end Ben Banogu garnered Defensive Player of the Year accolades. Grier is easily the pass-happy conference’s leading returning passer; his 3,490 yards from 2017 place him more than 1,500 yards ahead of the pass-happy conference’s second-leading returning passer in Texas’s Sam Ehlinger (1,915 yards). Banogu leads all returning pass rushers with 8.5 sacks in 2017.

Oklahoma defensive back Brendan Radley-Hiles, a freshman from Inglewood, Calif., by way of IMG Academy, earned Newcomer of the Year honors. Radley-Hiles was the 38th-rated player in the 247Sports Composite rankings for the 2018 class; for what it’s worth, three Big 12 signees ranked higher in Texas safeties Caden Sterns and B.J. Foster and Oklahoma offensive tackle Brey Walker.

The 3-time defending Big 12 champion Sooners placed five players on the Preseason All-Big 12 offense and none on the defensive side. Texas Tech did not have a single player placed on the offense but put three players on defense.

Here’s how the full teams break out.

OFFENSE
QB Will Grier, West Virginia
RB David Montgomery, Iowa State
RB Rodney Anderson, Oklahoma
RB Justice Hill, Oklahoma State
WR Denzel Mims, Baylor
WR Marquise Brown, Oklahoma
WR David Sills V, West Virginia
TE Grant Calcaterra, Oklahoma
OL Dalton Risner, Kansas State
OL Bobby Evans, Oklahoma
OL Ben Powers, Oklahoma
OL Marcus Keyes, Oklahoma State
OL Yodny Cajuste, West Virginia

DEFENSE
DL JaQuan Bailey, Iowa State
DL Daniel Wise, Kansas
DL Jordan Brailford, Oklahoma State
DL Ben Banogu, TCU
DL Breckyn Hager, Texas
LB Joe Dineen, Jr., Kansas
LB Dakota Allen, Texas Tech
LB David Long, Jr., West Virginia
DB Brian Peavy, Iowa State
DB Kendall Adams, Kansas State
DB Kris Boyd, Texas
DB Jah’Shawn Johnson, Texas Tech
DB Justus Parker, Texas Tech

SPECIALISTS
P Austin Seibert, Oklahoma
PK Austin Siebert, Oklahoma
PR/KR KaVontae Turpin, TCU

When Collin Hill suffered a torn ACL playing a game of pickup basketball in mid-March, it was thought that the quarterback would miss at least the first month of Colorado State’s season. As it turns out, that thought could very well prove inaccurate.

In offering up the latest update on Hill’s status, Mike Bobo indicated Tuesday that the junior is “ahead of schedule with everything” in his rehabilitation. The head coach went so far as to state that the program is not officially ruling Hill out yet for the season opener against Hawaii Aug. 25.

Even if Hill is sidelined for the opener, Bobo stated that “he’ll definitely be ready at some point this season.”

“As it gets closer, we’ll have to judge how well he is and how much he’ll be able to compete,” the coach said according to The Coloradoan. “He’ll get reps to get ready. If he’s not ready to compete, then we’re going to put the guys out there that are ready to compete and practice in fall camp and get ready for Game 1.”

The Rams will kick off summer camp July 27, and Hill is expected to have some level of participation from the get-go.

Hill started four of the first five games of the 2016 season as a true freshman before suffering a torn ACL in the same knee during an Oct. 8 game against Utah State. This past season, Hill took a redshirt as he continued his recovery from that initial ACL tear.

In 2016, Hill passed for 1,096 yards and eight touchdowns and two interceptions. He was projected as CSU’s starting quarterback this offseason prior to suffering the second significant knee injury, and will now compete with, among others, Washington graduate transfer K.J. Carta-Samuels for the job.

It appears Texas Tech has indeed bolstered its defensive line, although it won’t be an immediate boost.

Following up on speculation that has been simmering for weeks, Matt Clare of Rivals.com confirmed that Mark Brown has transferred into the Texas Tech football program. The defensive end had decided to transfer from San Diego State earlier this offseason.

The move to Lubbock will serve as a quasi-homecoming for Brown as he went to high school in Fort Worth.

This is now confirmed and official, #SDSU DE Mark Brown is transferring to #TexasTech…more @RedRaiderSports https://t.co/lapxEWSgbY

— Matt Clare (@MattClareRivals) July 10, 2018



Brown was a three-star member of the Aztecs’ 2017 recruiting class. He took a redshirt as a true freshman with the Mountain West Conference school, although he was named as the program’s Defensive Scout Team Player of the Year.

After sitting out the 2018 season to satisfy NCAA transfer rules, Brown will have three years of eligibility that he can use beginning with the 2019 season.

Nearly a decade after last playing there, Tim Tebow is set to take his rightful place of honor in The Swamp.

Florida announced Wednesday that Tebow will be inducted into the university’s Football Ring of Honor during the LSU game Oct. 6.  During Tebow’s four years in Gainesville (2006-09), the Gators went 3-1 against the Tigers, including a 2-0 mark at home.

Tebow’s name will be unveiled and displayed in the north endzone of Ben Hill Griffin Stadium during the gameday ceremony.  Tebow will join five other former Gators who have already been inducted into the Ring of Honor — Wilber Marshall, Emmitt Smith, Steve Spurrier, Danny Wuerffel and Jack Youngblood.

“I am so humbled and thankful to be able to receive this blessing, being inducted into the Ring of Honor,” Tebow said in a statement. “I know in my heart that I truly couldn’t have done it without amazing coaches and teammates who loved and sacrificed for each other so that we could accomplish our goals.

“Loving Florida wasn’t just something I did for four years, but it has been a lifelong passion. I want to thank the University of Florida and all the fans for making Gator Nation so special. I was born a Gator, I played as a Gator, and I’ll always be a Gator!

“God Bless and Go Gators!”

A three-time Heisman finalist, Tebow became the first sophomore to claim the trophy when he won the award in 2007.  The two-time national champion was also a two-time SEC Offensive Player of the Year and the first player in NCAA history to rush and pass for 20 or more touchdowns in the same season.

In addition to his role as an SEC Network analyst, Tebow is also a minor league baseball player in the New York Mets organization.