Deciding When to Run (and What For) For folks who prefer to champion change from within the system, running for office can be a surefire way to make sure your voice (and those of whom you represent) is heard loud and clear. If navigating the political landscape sounds tricky or daunting—you’re not alone. Learn where you should start by joining in the conversation with Oregon Labor Candidate School and Oregon AFL-CIO. Oregon AFL-CIO, 3645 SE 32nd, 6-8 pm, FREE

Lonely Hearts ZINGO Show your love for the Portland Zine Symposium and support marginalized voices and independent media by dabbing the heck out of some bingo sheets for the chance to win ton of cool prizes, including zines (duh!). Admission gets you one sheet, and additional bingo cards are available for purchase at $2 each. Milepost 5, 850 NE 81st, 6-9 pm, $5

One Tail at a Time Portland Foster Home Training Whether you’re looking to dip your toes into the world of dog parenting or simply have some extra space for a canine boarder, One Tail at a Time PDX wants you! Foster pet parents provide vital temporary shelter for dogs in need and can be a great opportunity to see what it’s like to care for a rescue. This orientation will provide all the info you need and is mandatory training for foster parents. Must love dogs. Taborspace, 5441 SE Belmont, 6:30-8 pm, FREE

Race and Place: Racism and Resilience in Oregon’s Past and Future Most folks have heard by now that Oregon has a history of being really, really racist. If you’ve ever dreamed of a more inclusive Oregon, this is the talk to attend. Facilitator Traci Price and Anita Yap will discuss topics like thriving and diverse communities, the past and present impact of racism, and the influences of history in regards to our sense of place. Northeast Coalition of Neighborhoods, 4815 NE 7th, 6:30-8 pm, FREE

Reimagining PPS: A Conversation with Superintendent Guerrero Portland Public Schools (PPS) is a sprawling district comprised of over 49,000 students and 78 schools. In October 2017, the district appointed Guadalupe Guerrero as superintendent. City Club of Portland will host a conversation with Guerrero to check in on his progress and much-needed vision for what’s to come. Free for members. Sentinel, 614 SW 11th, noon-1:30 pm, $15-30

Screening: 13th Watch Ava DuVernay’s Oscar-nominated documentary, 13th, for a chilling reminder of the atrocious, multigenerational damage that stems from the criminal justice system within the United States. The film highlights the parallels between slavery and mass incarceration while alluding to the 13th amendment, which was intended to free slaves. Free for Portland State University students. 5th Avenue Cinema, 510 SW Hall, 7-10:30 pm, $5

Urban Gleaners at Mt. Scott Community Center BYOBag to fill up with free groceries at Urban Gleaners’ weekly food-for-all program. If you’d like to volunteer, you can still get food while lending a hand with distribution. Comment on the Facebook event page or just show up to get involved! Mt. Scott Community Center, 5530 SE 72nd, 1:30-3 pm, FREE

Black History &amp; Culture Trivia Night Fundraiser The Urban League of Portland Young Professionals (ULPDXYP) empowers budding African American professionals to engage in civic development, leadership, and elder care. This trivia game doubles as a fundraiser for ULPDXYP while celebrating Black history and culture. With images of civil rights marches and Marsha P. Johnson on the event flyer, it’s guaranteed to be good. Bring your own crew of up to five players or make new friends and join a team on the day of! Mississippi Pizza, 3552 N Mississippi, 5-7 pm, $10

Maru Mora-Villalpando in Portland The United States has been home for immigrant rights activist Maru Mora-Villalpando for more than 25 years. After Mora-Villalpando came out as undocumented in 2014, she launched the NWDC Resistance to contest the treatment of detained immigrants at the Northwest Detention Center in Tacoma and stop deportation. She is now facing deportation and will lead a discussion in partnership with the Multnomah County Commissioner candidate for District 2, Maria Garcia, about collective resistance and what it means to be a sanctuary city. MIC Center, 1425 NE Dekum, 6-8 pm, FREE

Screening: Big Pharma If you’d like to know the ins and outs of the many ways our healthcare system is fucked, catching Big Pharma: Market Failure is a must. Beyond explaining the extreme spike in drug prices, the film explores social and economic solutions for change. State representative Rob Nosse will lead a Q&amp;A after the screening. All funds benefit Portland Jobs with Justice labor coalition. Clinton Street Theater, 2522 SE Clinton, 7-9 pm, $5-25 sliding scale

Planting Work Party When Northeast Portland residents saw a sizeable, unused strip of land between the I-84 and I-205 freeways, a grassroots campaign called Friends of Gateway Green was launched in 2009. Their mission was to create a public park on the “island” and last year, the park officially opened. Now the group is focusing on sprucing up the area, creating branding, and spreading the word. You can help by rolling up your sleeves to plant native seedlings! Tools and snacks provided. To get there, head north from the Gateway Transit Center by bike or on foot using the I-205 multi-use path and following the signs. Gateway Green, I-205 Multi-Use Path, 1-3 pm, FREE

Celebrating 25 Years of PSU’s Multicultural Student Center Rejoice as Portland State University’s multicultural student center turns 25 years old! What started as a petition with 300 signatures in 1991 has become a space where students of all backgrounds can share and explore intersecting identities. Arrive at noon to enjoy lunch before the retrospective celebration (which includes a time capsule project!). Multicultural Student Center at Portland State University, 1825 SW Broadway, Suite 228, noon-2 pm, FREE

Sign up for the latest news and to win free tickets to events

Buy tickets to events around Portland

Great deals on local businesses

Print Archives


            
              All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204
            
          


            Contact
            |
            Privacy Policy
            |
            Terms of Use
            |
            Takedown Policy
          


          
            All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204
          
        


          
            Contact |
            Privacy Policy |
            Terms of Use |
            Takedown Policy
          
        