

By Katie Dowd, SFGATE

Caption


Close

The Thalia dance hall on Pacific Street in San Francisco circa 1918.

The Thalia dance hall on Pacific Street in San Francisco circa 1918.

A 1911 street scene on Columbus between Jackson and Pacific in San Francisco.

A 1911 street scene on Columbus between Jackson and Pacific in San Francisco.

Union Square Theater (circa 1928) North side of O'Farrell between Powell and Stockton. Opened 1914 as the Gaiety. Also known as the Hippodrome and the Filmarte. Part of Macy's is now on the site. - courtesy of OpenSFHistory.org.


Union Square Theater (circa 1928) North side of O'Farrell between Powell and Stockton. Opened 1914 as the Gaiety. Also known as the Hippodrome and the Filmarte. Part of Macy's is now on the site. - courtesy of


The view along San Francisco's Pacific Street, featuring the Barbary Coast club, the unofficial flagship of the area that also featured numerous other clubs and bars, in the 1930s. Other famous nightspots visible on the strip are Bee &amp; Ray Gorman's Gay 90s, the House of Blue Lights, and Pago Pago.


The view along San Francisco's Pacific Street, featuring the Barbary Coast club, the unofficial flagship of the area that also featured numerous other clubs and bars, in the 1930s. Other famous nightspots


The entrance to the Hippodrome Theater in San Francisco in the early 1900s.

The entrance to the Hippodrome Theater in San Francisco in the early 1900s.

Spider Kelly's is seen on Pacific Street in the 1920s.

Spider Kelly's is seen on Pacific Street in the 1920s.

The new remodel of Spider Kelly's in the 1930s.

The new remodel of Spider Kelly's in the 1930s.

Click through to see rare, historical scene photos from the San Francisco Chronicle archives.

Click through to see rare, historical scene photos from the San Francisco Chronicle archives.

George C. Hoberg, a respectable traveling salesman from the East Coast, had grand plans for his 1910 visit to San Francisco. He checked in first at the St. Francis Hotel, and then prepared for his evening out. George was going “slumming” on Terrific Street.

The stretch of Pacific Ave., between Kearny and Montgomery, was famous all over the nation as one of America’s hottest — and most daring — nightclub scenes. "Terrific Street," so-called because of the excellent ragtime and nascent jazz music being produced there, was dirty, boozy and fun. It was the kind of fun buttoned-up businessmen like George couldn’t resist.

Since the late 1800s, slumming had become a rather ghoulish pastime of the middle and upper classes. Famously practiced in the notorious Five Points of New York City, wealthy interlopers would visit downtrodden neighborhoods as a form of entertainment. Terrific Street was built with slumming in mind; many venues built special "slummers’ balconies," where patrons could safely watch the action from above.

It was there, in the slummers’ gallery of the popular Thalia dance hall, that George C. Hoberg found himself in a bit of trouble. A waitress approached George and informed him he had not purchased enough to drink. Sensing trouble, George made for the exit.

Old footage of busy crowded streets and a Bank of Italy. (Nuray Pictures/Getty Images)

"As he started to leave, several waitresses kicked him on the shins," the San Francisco Call reported. George drew his revolver, and the police were summoned. He was hauled off to jail for carrying a concealed weapon.

The next morning, he was called in front of a judge to explain his behavior. George told the sympathetic judge — who no doubt knew all about those Terrific Street ladies — his tale, and all charges were dismissed.

And so George returned home to New York City, hopefully a little wiser.

---

From 1907 until the early 1920s, Terrific Street was San Francisco’s bawdiest nightclub scene, springing from the ground that once held the Barbary Coast’s red light district. After the 1906 earthquake leveled much of the neighborhood, the city decided to clean up the blocks of brothels like the Nymphia, a three-story establishment with 150 "cubicles" for business on each floor.

But San Franciscans would not be denied entertainment. In its place, Terrific Street emerged, cultivated by promoters with a genius for money-making gimmicks. Entertainment was big business in San Francisco. On New Year's Eve in 1912, the city anticipated 30,000 people would hit the downtown venues. The Palace Hotel alone served 2,000 diners that night. It was said the bright lights of Terrific Street could be seen across the bay in Oakland, luring in hundreds of revelers each night.

The most adventurous went to Spider Kelly’s, named for its boxer proprietor. Spider Kelly ran the raciest joint in town, and his club was famous for its “key racket.” After a night of dancing with his hired girls, some male patrons would beg to go home with their partner. She would agree, but only on the condition he bought the key to her room. After paying the $5 fee, she’d hand him a key and promise to meet him after closing time for a tryst.

“The dupes wandered around until morning, vainly seeking doors their keys would fit,” the WPA’s guide to San Francisco noted.

When a Chicago police captain toured the area in 1912, he gravely dubbed Spider Kelly's "undoubtedly the worst dive in the world." They probably took it as a compliment.

Spider Kelly's wasn't the only venue using its ladies to turn a tidy profit. When the city banned liquor sales at dance halls in the mid-1910s, the Thalia turned itself into a “dance academy.” For a fee, patrons could pay their staff of lovely ladies to “teach” them how to dance. The practice became known as taxi dancing, a phrase that went mainstream. Well aware of the high demand, the Thalia staffed its dance floor with over 100 female dancers and waitresses.

Another popular stop was Purcell’s at 520 Pacific, a music venue started by Sid Purcell and Sam King, two black Pullman porters-turned-entrepreneurs. Inside Purcell’s, the music was hot and fast. Pianists played up to 30 songs per hour and taped up their fingers like athletes. Dancers at Purcell’s are credited with inventing the Texas Tommy and turkey trot, two dances that would sweep the nation.

But the rowdy fun came with a price: crime. Local newspapers are filled with accounts of fights and robberies. The San Francisco Call wrote in 1908 the street was rife with “pickpockets, thugs, petty thieves, hopheads, dance hall ropers, bunko men, keepers of houses of prostitution and assignation.”

One piano player, a jazz pioneer named Sid Le Protti, summed up the scene thusly:

“One time we had a bad shootin’ scrape over at Louie Gomez’s,” he said. “How that drummer didn't get shot, nobody knows! This customer got in a fight and pulled a gun and started shootin’. One of the bullets went right through the bass drum. ...

"They killed that fella as he went out the door; the bartender reached over and hit him with a bottle full a’ whiskey, and then after he hit him, the fellow staggered, and the bartender jammed the rest of the broken bottle in his neck. That cut his jugular veins and his throat, and he fell over and bled to death.”

---

It was all a bit much for the city government.

In 1913, the San Francisco police commissioner banned alcohol sales in any establishment that also hosted dancing. Laws were passed prohibiting women from visiting any saloon in the city. And in 1920, Prohibition shut down the party for good (although it did find a new home underground).

By 1923, Terrific Street's music scene had dried up, never to return. Some partygoers went to Oakland, others to the Fillmore. Today, you'd never guess the debauchery that once filled its streets. It's a sedate block, lined with green trees, law offices and coffee shops.

There's just one hint at its past life: A pretty, half-moon window with the gold letters "HIPPODROME" curving along it. Now the Artist &amp; Craftsman Supply store, it was once the rollicking Hippodrome club. If you're lucky, you can get a tour inside, where a series of mysterious tunnels run under the building.

Rumor has it, the tunnels were once used to shanghai drunk sailors. But it's easy enough to imagine a Terrific Street partier, realizing their wallet was a little too light for the fun they'd had, escaping out the back door.