
    
        
            By Aimee Green

agreen@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

Greg Porter, the 61-year-old man accused of intentionally running his SUV into three women at Portland State University last week, told authorities after his arrest that he smokes marijuana daily for pain.

Court papers released Tuesday say Porter, however, claimed he hadn't used marijuana for the two days before last Friday, when police say he drove his 2005 Mazda Tribute into three women along the sidewalk at Southwest Sixth Avenue and Montgomery Street.

Porter is scheduled to be arraigned Tuesday afternoon.

All three women are still being treated at OHSU Hospital. One of them is in fair condition, and the other two have asked that their conditions not be made public, said OHSU spokeswoman Tracy Brawley.

Hours after police say Porter drove off from the scene, officers tracked down Porter and his SUV, which showed front-end damage. Porter was booked into Multnomah County Jail and was denied the opportunity to post bail because of the attempted murder charges against him.

Porter told jailers that he has been homeless for the past year and most recently has been living in his car. He said he has a ninth-grade education, is unemployed and lives off Social Security disability checks of $1,425 a month. He didn't say what his disability is.

Gallery: 3 hospitalized, suspect in custody after downtown Portland hit-and-run Friday, May 25

Authorities noted that Porter’s criminal history dates to the 1970s. In 1976, when he was still a teenager, he was convicted of larceny in Texas. In 1996, when he was in his late 30s, he was convicted of driving under the influence of intoxicants. It’s not clear where he committed that crime.

Although Porter told jail officials that he has never been diagnosed with a mental illness, an administrator at a rehabilitation facility that Porter checked out of last year said Porter suffered from delusions. The first page of a Portland police report also lists a warning to officers that Porter may be mentally ill, stating: "CAUTION: SUICIDAL / MENTAL HEALTH."

Two of Porter’s former neighbors at the King City Apartments described Porter as confrontational or difficult to get along with when he lived there from roughly 2015 to 2017. Court records show he and his wife, Mary Porter, were served an eviction notice from the apartments in late May 2017 for failing to pay their $850 monthly rent.

Neighbors say Mary Porter died that same month. Neighbors also said the couple had broken up a month earlier, and Greg Porter started living out of his car. The Porters were officially evicted last June, according to court papers.

-- Aimee Green

agreen@oregonian.com

o_aimee


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        