On Monday, January 15, many events will be taking place around Detroit to celebrate the life and legacy of Martin Luther King Jr. Kids and adults will find a wide range of activities, from historical films to a march to creative expressions. More information can be found at the links provided. 

The Detroit Institute of Arts will be open on Monday with notebook-making activities for kids and the showing of the film King: A Filmed Record...Montgomery to Memphis. Guides will also be available for gallery tours. Admission is free for Wayne, Oakland, and Macomb County residents.

The Detroit Historical Museum will have kids activities including making coloring and activity books, open mic poetry, and cupcakes. The museum also has an extensive Detroit ’67 exhibit, and team members will be on hand to answer questions. 

MLK Day is the Wright Museum’s busiest day of the year. Children’s workshops, music performances, storytelling, and more are planned. Two new exhibits will also be opening that day. More info can be found here.

At the Central United Methodist Church, a rally and march for jobs, peace, and justice will start at noon. It’s followed by a community meal with music at St. John’s Episcopal Church.

The Eastside Community Network will host a celebration at Osborn High School with music, poetry, discussions, and a dramatic screening of Letter from the Birmingham Jail. Bus transportation is provided around the city for this event. More info can be found here.

The Henry Ford in Dearborn will have free admission and parking for MLK Day. Visitors can see the bus made famous by Rosa Parks, and learn more about activism in the community.

Tour de Troit is leading its 7th Annual Martin Luther King Bike Ride starting at 10 a.m. at the  McGregor Memorial Conference Center. The ride is about 10 miles and stops at historically significant places relevant to Dr. King and local activists. The ride is free and those who plan on participating should register here.

One has some features in tact, while the other is hidden behind a lot of brush.

The nostalgic boat suffered a devastating fire last week. Can it be restored?

Berkley, Ferndale, Huntington Woods, Oak Park, and Royal Oak will get MoGo bike stations next year.

The City Council voted to create a historic district for these buildings that had been threatened with demolition.

This 1921 four-bedroom home has tasteful modern updates.

Both metro and city rents have increased sharply in the last month.