By

Khaleda Rahman For Dailymail.com


and 
Ap






  Published:
  08:35 EDT, 23 April 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  11:16 EDT, 23 April 2018







          51

View  comments

The hate-inspired lynchings that killed thousands of people and terrorized generations of blacks in the United States are solemnly commemorated in a new memorial in Alabama's capital.


The National Memorial for Peace and Justice, which opens on Thursday, is a project of the non-profit Equal Justice Initiative, a legal advocacy group in Montgomery.


Among the thousands of names that are listed on the new memorial is Elmore Bolling - whose daughter Josephine Bolling McCall is anxious to see the monument, located about 20 miles from where her father was killed in rural Lowndes County.


Bolling had defied the odds against black men and built several successful businesses during the harsh era of Jim Crow segregation in the South.


He had more money than a lot of whites, which his descendants believe was all it took to get him lynched in 1947.


He was shot to death by a white neighbor and strung up, according to news accounts at the time, and the shooter was never prosecuted. 


The EJI's executive director Bryan Stevenson says people in the South don't talk about slavery and don't have monuments that confront the legacy of lynching. 


He added that without confronting the difficulties of segregation, 'we are still burdened by that history.'


'In the American South, we don't talk about slavery,' he said.


The organization says the combined museum and memorial will be the nation's first site to document racial inequality in America from slavery through Jim Crow to the issues of today.   


National Memorial for Peace and Justice, in Montgomery, Alabama, will honor the thousands of people killed in lynchings across the United States

 The monument is a memorial to all lynching victims with room for names to be added as additional victims are identified

A statue of chained people is on display at the National Memorial for Peace and Justice, the new memorial in Alabama's capital which opens on Thuesday

Not all lynchings were by hanging. The EJI says it scoured old newspapers, archives and court documents to find the stories of victims who were gunned down, drowned, beaten and burned alive

A person is seen stranding among the columns suspended from the air at the National Memorial for Peace and Justice

New emotional footage shows boys being saved from Thai cave

Woman slips note to vet staff about armed and abusive boyfriend

Trump and Melania join world leaders for Brussels cocktail party

Melania Trump chats cheerfully with Brigitte Macron in Brussels

Ex-UCLA basketball star posts heartbreaking video before suicide

England fans react to Croatia goal and match heads into extra time

'Germany is totally controlled by Russia': Trump at NATO meeting

Thai boys give wave to the world in first video since rescue

Harry and Meghan thrilled to receive framed gift from Dublin crowd

Three teens taunt a one-year-old girl with a taser while babysitting

President and Melania Trump arrive in Brussels for NATO summit

Behind the scene footage of Allen &amp; Co party grounds

'We don't have monuments and memorials that confront the legacy of lynching. We haven't really confronted the difficulties of segregation. And because of that, I think we are still burdened by that history.'


The site includes a memorial to the victims of 4,400 'terror lynchings' of black people in 800 U.S. counties from 1877 through 1950. All but about 300 were in the South, and prosecutions were rare in any of the cases. 


Stevenson said they emphasized the lynching era because he believes it's an aspect of the nation's racial history that's discussed the least.


'Most people in this country can't name a single African-American who was lynched between 1877 and 1950 even though thousands of African Americans were subjected to this violence,' Stevenson said. 


Elmore Bolling defied the odds against black men and built several successful businesses during the harsh era of Jim Crow segregation in the South. 


He had more money than a lot of whites, which his descendants believe was all it took to get him lynched in 1947.


He was shot to death by a white neighbor, according to news accounts at the time, and the shooter was never prosecuted.


But Bolling's name is now listed among thousands on a new memorial for victims of hate-inspired lynchings that terrorized generations of U.S. blacks.


Daughter Josephine Bolling McCall is anxious to see the monument, located about 20 miles from where her father was killed in rural Lowndes County.


Josephine Bolling McCall poses with a photo of her father, lynching victim Elmore Bolling, at her home in Montgomery, Alabama

McCall, 75, said her father's killing still hangs over her family. The memorial could help heal individual families and the nation by acknowledging the painful legacy of racial murders, she said.


'It's important that the people to whom the injustices have been given are actually being recognized and at least some measure — some measure — of relief is sought through discussion,' said McCall.


McCall plans to view the memorial with her five living siblings. She says they suffered more than she did, since she was only 5 when their father was slain.


A newspaper account from the time said the 39-year-old Bolling, who owned a store and trucking company and farmed, was shot seven times on a road near his store by a white man, Clarke Luckie, who claimed Bolling had insulted his wife during a phone call.


McCall, who researched the slaying extensively for a book about her father, said it's more likely that Luckie, a stockyard employee, resented her father, who had thousands of dollars in the bank, three tractor-trailer rigs and employed about 40 people.


'He was jealous and he filled him with bullets,' she said.


Luckie was arrested, but a grand jury issued no indictment and no one was ever prosecuted. McCall believes the white people who controlled the county at the time purposely covered for the killer, who died decades ago.

The organization says the combined museum and memorial will be the nation's first site to document racial inequality in America from slavery through Jim Crow to the issues of today

A powerful quote by Mary Angelou is etched on the outside of the Justice and the Legacy Museum in Montgomery, Alabama

Other names honored at the memorial include David Walker, who along with his wife and their four children, was lynched in Hickman, Kentucky, in 1908, after he was accused of using inappropriate language with a white woman.


William Donegan was lynched in Springfield, Illinois, in 1908 for having a white wife, according to his epitaph at the memorial.


The 84-year-old was hung from a tree across the street, where his assailants cut his throat and stabbed him. 


William Donegan was lynched in Springfield, Illinois, in 1908 for having a white wife.


Violence erupted in the town on August 14 when a mob of white men planning to kidnap and lynch two men accused of raping a white woman learned that the men had been moved from the local jail to another city.


So the mob descended on Springfield’s black neighbourhoods, vandalizing homes and businesses and making off with almost $150,000 of goods.


The riot, which left an estimated seven dead, led to hundreds of black people seeking protection from the National Guard at nearby Camp Lincoln while others fled the city.


The violence came to a climax early the following morning when two men – who had nothing to do with the alleged crime – were publicly lynched.


Scott Burton tried to defend himself against the attackers and was shot four times, dragged through the streets, then hung and mutilated until the National Guard intervened, according to the Equal Justice Initiative.


Donegan, an 84-year-old black man, was taken from his home and hung from a tree across the street, where his assailants cut his throat and stabbed him.


He was still alive when militia arrived at the scene but died the next morning.


A report in the Los Angeles Herald, from August 16 that year, said Donegan was a cobbler whose shop was set on fire during the riot.


When he emerged from the burning shop, he was met with a 'shower of bricks' and his throat was slashed.


A rope was run through the wound and he was strung up to a tree.


Police arrested 150 white people suspected of participating in the violence and 117 were indicted.


Three people were indicted for murder; one committed suicide and two were acquitted.


In September, Nellie Hallam, the alleged rape victim whose accusations set off the wave of violence, signed an affidavit stating that neither of the black men initially accused had attacked her. She said her attacker was a white man, but she refused to identify him.

An epitaph in honor of David Walker and his family, who were lynched in Kentucky in 1908, is on display at the National Memorial for Peace and Justice

 David Walker, his wife and five children were killed on October 3rd after a white woman complained that he swore at her, something that he always denied and was never proved.


The same evening, a lynch mob arrived at Walker's Kentucky home and ordered him out and when he refused set fire to his family home.


Hoping he could stop them and make them see sense, Walker exited the front door and was promptly killed a hail of bullets.


Pleading with the lynch mob for her children's life, Walker's wife walked out onto the porch holding their infant baby. The mob gunned her down too.


The Walker's three youngest children were too scared to remain inside the house and ran out to see the bloodied boides of their parents.


Again, the hate-filled lynch mob shot them dead.


The eldest of the Walker children was too scared to leave the house and was burned alive inside.


The reaction to the lynch mob known as the Night Riders was fierce, with the governor of Kentucky, Augustus E. Willson strongly denouncing the actions of the mob.


However, no one was ever prosecuted for the crime.

Epitaphs for William Donegan, Horace Duncan and Fred Coker are seen on display at the National Memorial for Peace and Justice

Horace Duncan and Fred Coker are two other innocent African-American men who are among those remembered at the memorial.


The pair had been accused of sexual assault in April 1906 in Springfield, Missouri, according to the Equal Justice Initiative.


Racist sentiments were agitated by local publications who blamed rising crime on black residents.


And although both men had alibis that were backed up by their employers, a mob refused to wait for a trial.


Instead, they gained entry into the men’s jail cells – using sledgehammers and telephones - and hung them from a light tower in the town square just before midnight.


A crowd of 5,000 white people participated as Duncan and Coker’s bodies were burned and shot. Newspapers later reported that both men were innocent.

Two other innocent African-American men, Horace Duncan and Fred Coker, are among those remembered.


The pair had been accused of sexual assault in April 1906 in Springfield, Missouri, and although both men had alibis, a mob refused to wait for a trial.


Instead, they gained entry into the men's jail cells and hung them from a light tower in the town square.


A crowd of 5,000 white people participated as Duncan and Coker's bodies were burned and shot. Newspapers later reported they were innocent.


 Combined, the memorial and an accompanying museum a few miles away at the EJI headquarters tell a story spanning slavery, racial segregation, violence and today's era of swollen prison populations

With nearly seven million people behind bars or on parole or probation nationwide - a disproportionate number of them minorities - the NAACP says blacks are incarcerated at a rate five times that of whites

E.M. Beck, who studied lynching for 30 years and has written books on the subject, said the memorial might actually understate the scope of lynching even though it lists thousands of victims

The memorial's design evokes the image of a racist hanging, featuring scores of dark metal columns suspended in the air from above



The EJI said a common theme ran through the slayings, which it differentiates from extrajudicial killings in places that simply lacked courts: A desire to impose fear on minorities and maintain strict white control.


Some lynchings drew huge crowds and were even photographed, yet authorities routinely ruled they were committed by 'persons unknown.'


Combined, the memorial and an accompanying museum a few miles away at the EJI headquarters tell a story spanning slavery, racial segregation, violence and today's era of swollen prison populations. 


With nearly seven million people behind bars or on parole or probation nationwide - a disproportionate number of them minorities - the NAACP says blacks are incarcerated at a rate five times that of whites.


E.M. Beck, who studied lynching for 30 years and has written books on the subject, said the memorial might actually understate the scope of lynching even though it lists thousands of victims.


The rectangular structures, some of which lie flat on the ground and resemble graves, include the names of counties where lynchings occurred, plus dates and the names of the victims

The goal is for individual counties to claim the columns on the ground and erect their own memorials

 Some lynchings drew huge crowds and were even photographed, yet authorities routinely ruled they were committed by 'persons unknown,' the EJI says

'I think it's an underestimate because the number and amount of violence in early Reconstruction in the 1870s will probably never be known,' said Beck, sociology professor emeritus at the University of Georgia.


'There was just an incredible amount of violence taking place during that period of time.'


The memorial's design evokes the image of a racist hanging, featuring scores of dark metal columns suspended in the air from above. 


The rectangular structures, some of which lie flat on the ground and resemble graves, include the names of counties where lynchings occurred, plus dates and the names of the victims. 


The goal is for individual counties to claim the columns on the ground and erect their own memorials.


Not all lynchings were by hanging. 


'Thousands of African Americans are unknown victims of racial terror lynchings whose deaths cannot be documented, many whose names will never be known. They are all honored here,' reads a message at the memorial

A quote by Martin Luther Kind Jr. is on display on the inside walkway of the National Memorial for Peace and Justice

The memorial's opening on April 26 will be marked by a two-day summit focusing on racial and social justice

The EJI says it scoured old newspapers, archives and court documents to find the stories of victims who were gunned down, drowned, beaten and burned alive. 


The monument is a memorial to all of them, with room for names to be added as additional victims are identified.


Its opening on April 26 will be marked by a two-day summit focusing on racial and social justice, to be followed by a concert featuring top acts including Common, Usher, the Dave Matthews Band and The Roots on April 27.


One of Alabama's oldest black congregations, Old Ship A.M.E. Zion Church, sits across the street from the memorial. 


Its pastor plans to offer prayer and conversation to help visitors who are shaken by the experience of visiting the site.


Church members have mixed feelings about the memorial, she said. They want to acknowledge and honor the past, McFadden said, but some are wondering how they'll personally react to visiting the memorial the first time.


'It's something that needs to be talked about, that people need to explore. But it's also something that has the potential to shake people to the core,' said Rev. Kathy Thomas McFadden.


The National Memorial for Peace and Justice, to honor thousands of people killed in racist lynchings, will open on Thursday

The opening will be followed by a concert featuring top acts including Common, Usher, the Dave Matthews Band and The Roots on April 27

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group