Advertisement

Supported by

By Chris Stanford

 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)


Good morning.


Here’s what you need to know:


• He’s been in office 14 months, but President Trump is increasingly falling back on the hard-edge isolationism that fueled his “America First” campaign.


He also said he planned to deploy the National Guard to the border with Mexico, to confront what the White House calls the growing threat of illegal immigration and crime.


Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, didn’t say how many troops would be sent, nor when. Mr. Trump has spoken before about using the military to police the border, only to have his aides walk back the remarks.

• Immigration rights campaigners said the announcement was a political ploy. Mr. Trump has been criticized by some conservative supporters for signing a trillion-dollar-plus spending measure that didn’t fund the border wall he promised.

• The woman who shot and wounded three people at the company’s headquarters in San Bruno, Calif., before killing herself on Tuesday has been identified by the police as Nasim Najafi Aghdam.


Ms. Aghdam, who was in her late 30s, was active on YouTube, where she had posted videos including music parodies and workouts.


She had criticized YouTube for measures that decreased the number of views of her videos, some of which contained what the site’s staff said were inappropriate scenes. YouTube had removed all of her channels by Tuesday night.


• Here’s  what else we know about the shooting.

• A mentally ill man on suicide watch hanged himself. Gang members were allowed to beat other prisoners. Inmates whose cries for medical attention were ignored resorted to setting fires in their cells.


These are just some of the details that have emerged during a trial in Mississippi that has provided a rare glimpse into the world of privately operated prisons.


• The case comes as the number of inmates in private facilities is increasing and as the Trump administration hints that it will expand their use.

• For the 50th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. today, we look back at the civil rights leader and the battles that outlived him: workers’ rights, a sprawling protest movement, persistent segregation and poverty.


“All the issues that he raised toward the end of his life are as contemporary now as they were then,” a historian who has written several books about Dr. King said.


Here’s the Times front page the day after Dr. King was shot, and his obituary.


• We also spoke to black pastors around the U.S. about their calls for action in a climate that has shifted drastically since the civil rights era.

• China struck back at the U.S. today with proposed tariffs on American goods including soybeans, cars and chemicals. The move came just hours after the Trump administration detailed $50 billion in tariffs on Chinese products.


The news sent U.S. stocks  sharply down this morning. Here’s a snapshot of global markets today.

• Amazon is the latest in a long line of companies that President Trump has denounced on Twitter, contributing to a drop in the online retailer’s stock.


We checked the facts behind some of his criticisms.


• How do you say “Oops” in Swedish? The New York Stock Exchange welcomed the Sweden-based company Spotify on its first day of trading by flying a Swiss flag out front.


The streaming music service ended the day with a valuation of $26.5 billion.


• Morgan Stanley has fired a star financial adviser who had been accused by multiple former wives and girlfriends of physical abuse and stalking.

The Times reported the accusations against the broker, Douglas Greenberg, last week.


Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.


• Save your relationship — outsource chores.


• Make a luxury trip to Paris affordable with these tips.


• Recipe of the day: Try a dinner of Swedish (not Swiss) meatballs, mashed potatoes and a little lingonberry jam.


Our journalists recommend these great pieces:


• “Though not the dominant force in technology that it was in the mid-20th century, IBM continues to employ hundreds of thousands worldwide.


“This investigative piece shows the ways many of those workers are made to feel unwelcome, or forced out, late in their careers.


“Once past 55, one former employee said, ‘You have to prepare for losing your job and burning through every cent you’ve saved just to get to retirement.’ ” [ProPublica/Mother Jones]


— Kevin McKenna, deputy business editor


• “ ‘The Road Not Taken,’ a poem widely seen as a celebration of unorthodox choices, has been called ‘the most misread poem in America.’


“This animated video by the magazine that first published the poem in 1915 helps us reconsider what Robert Frost meant about taking ‘the one less traveled by.’ ” [The Atlantic]

— Jennifer Jett, senior staff editor, Hong Kong


• Oaxaca on the Gowanus


Our critic tried out Claro, in Brooklyn, a restaurant that pays tribute to a rich branch of Mexican cuisine with house-ground masa and riveting moles.

• When it’s always sweater weather


For nearly 20 years, Samuel Barsky has been knitting sweaters depicting familiar sights. More recently, he has posted photographs of himself in front of landmarks while wearing matching knitwear.

• Best of late-night TV


Several of the comedy hosts discussed President Trump’s tweets about Amazon and the Postal Service: “This is when I appreciate Twitter: It used to be, if you wanted to hear a 71-year-old man whining about the post office, you had to go to the post office,” Seth Meyers said.


• Quotation of the day


“The one thing that would be dishonorable for us is to bring all this attention to the assassination of Dr. King and not have a resurrection of the efforts and the unfinished business dealing with systemic racism, systemic poverty.”

— The Rev. Dr. William Barber II, a North Carolina pastor whose sermons and outreach efforts often address civil rights.


• The Times, in other words


Here’s an image of today’s front page, and links to our Opinion content and crossword puzzles.

Each week, The Times’s crossword column, Wordplay, highlights the answer to one of the most difficult clues from the previous week’s puzzles.


This week’s word: Niobe.


The Greek mythological character Niobe was the subject of a tough clue from the March 28 crossword puzzle: “ ‘Like ___, all tears’: Hamlet.” The word has appeared in Times crosswords 139 times.


Niobe is most closely associated with tears, as noted in Shakespeare’s “Hamlet”:


A little month, or ere those shoes were old


With which she followed my poor father’s body,


Like Niobe, all tears. Why she, even she —


O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason


Would have mourned longer! — married with my uncle 

The story of Niobe’s tears began at a ceremony held to honor the Titan Leto, mother of the twin gods Apollo and Artemis. In a fit of arrogance, Niobe bragged that she was superior to Leto because she had more children (either 12 or 14, depending on the version of the myth).

When the twins heard this, they came to earth and killed all of Niobe’s children. In anguish, she ran to Mount Sipylus to beg the gods to end her pain. Zeus felt sorry for her and turned her into a rock, so she would feel no more.


Even as a rock, however, Niobe’s tears continued to flow, and the stream that pours from the real Weeping Rock in Manisa, Turkey, symbolizes a mother’s eternal mourning.


Deb Amlen contributed reporting.


_____


Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.


Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. To receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, sign up here.


Check out our full range of free newsletters here.


What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.




Follow Chris Stanford on Twitter: @stanfordc.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS