


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Attorneys for 'Serial Street Shooter' suspect Aaron Saucedo want him to appear in court without restraints, but law enforcement thinks otherwise.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Aaron Saucedo, the man police have accused of being Phoenix's "Serial Street Shooter."
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

In a hearing last Friday, attorneys for "Serial Street Shooter" suspect Aaron Saucedo asked a Maricopa County Superior Court judge if their client could appear in court in street clothes instead of a jail uniform and without the handcuffs, leg irons and belly chains that defendants in custody usually wear in pretrial hearings.


Because of long-standing case law, defendants are never seen by jurors at trial when they are wearing visible restraints or jail stripes, so as not to prejudice their opinion as to a defendant's guilt.


But defendants do usually wear them in pretrial hearings, especially if they are  suspected of dangerous crimes.


Saucedo, 23, is charged with nine murders over the course of 12 shootings between August 2015 and July 2016, mostly in the Maryvale neighborhood of west Phoenix, though some of the events took place in east-central Phoenix.


His attorney, Susan Corey, asked Judge Joseph Mikitish to allow him to wear street clothes and skip the restraints during future hearings. Mikitish passed the question of restraints to the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office, because its deputies are in charge of court security and transporting prisoners from jail to the courtroom.


On Wednesday, the County Attorney's Office answered on behalf of the Sheriff's Office. It would prefer that Saucedo remain in chains.


If the judge ordered him out of chains, however, the Sheriff's Office would increase the number of deputies guarding Saucedo and outfit him with non-visible restraints worn under his street clothes like defendants charged with dangerous crimes do during trial.


Those restraints consist of leg braces that make it difficult to run and an electric shock belt. Neither is obvious so long as the defendant does not have to walk in front of jurors. Instead, the defendant is usually seated at the defense table or the witness stand before the jurors enter the courtroom.


Corey also asked that the media be forbidden from photographing Saucedo or at least be required to blur his face. Mikitish has not yet ruled on that motion, which is being contested by several media outlets including The Arizona Republic. So far, Saucedo's attorneys have waived his presence for pretrial hearings.


Identity is expected to play a major role in Saucedo's defense. Most of the victims of the Serial Street Shooter were killed, and those few who survived likely did not get a good view of their assailant. One survivor, whose descriptions to police helped create a composite sketch of the shooter, did not recognize a photo of Saucedo as his attacker when it was shown to him by Republic reporters.


Saucedo was scheduled for a hearing on Oct. 23, but on Wednesday it was postponed until Nov. 29.


READ MORE:


Court battle waged over media coverage of 'Serial Street Shooter' suspect


Saucedo pleads not guilty in 'Serial Street Shooter' case


Saucedo charged in 'Serial Street Shooter' murders


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
