


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The hearing Friday was Lopez’s first court appearance since he was arrested Oct. 24, which is when police say he admitted to killing his mother.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Susana Lopez, a Paramus woman found dead in her garage by police responding to a welfare check on her son, Jesus, on Oct. 24, 2017, had called 911 in June of 2016 in fear of her son, who now is accused of her murder.
    NorthJersey.com

Jesus Lopez, right, speaks with his attorney, John Bruno, before he is arraigned in Bergen County Superior Court on charges of murdering his mother.
(Photo: Chris Monroe/)

Jesus Lopez’s long history of mental illness was well known to the Paramus police.


They had been called to his home almost 50 times over the past decade as he attempted suicide, had outbursts of violent behavior and constantly fought with his mother before he allegedly killed her last month, according to police reports obtained through a public records request. And, the reports show, he was committed to a psychiatric hospital at least five times over the past eight years.


Lopez, 30, his eyes red and sunken, appeared in court Friday for the first time since police found his mother’s body in the family garage last week, her throat apparently slit with a box cutter about two weeks before. His attorney, John Bruno, entered not guilty pleas on his behalf to murder and other charges, later saying that he's contemplating an insanity defense.


“It is certainly a distinct possibility, but we’re not ruling out any options right now,” Bruno said.


Police have said Lopez killed his mother, Susana Lopez, 56, on Oct. 11 in the living room of their Spring Valley Road Home. Lopez moved her body to a detached garage three days later, they said. Paramus police officers found her on Oct. 24 after they were called to the home by a social worker for a welfare check.


Bruno said that Susana’s sister, Marina, and her husband John, who were in court on Friday, are “fully supportive of their nephew” and that the family is “rallying around him.”


“I’m confident that when all the facts come out, that this tragedy will be more of a tragedy when you see that it could have been avoided,” Bruno said. “I’m hopeful that he will not be found guilty.”


Last year, according to 911 tapes, Lopez made unspecified threats against his mother in April and one month later talked about "killing himself and others with knives."



    Police dispatch: Jesus Lopez told 911 that he 'wanted to kill himself and others. Specifically with knives,' on Oct. 21, 2016.
    NorthJersey.com

The police reports show that Lopez often was upset with his mother. In 2012, his mother called police worried about him after he left the house upset with her for praying the rosary too fast. In 2011, police said he broke down doors at his home after his mother refused to let him use the telephone.


According to some of the reports, she said she was not afraid of him.


Jesus Lopez (Photo: Courtesy: Bergen County Prosecutor's Office)

For the past week, Lopez had been held at New Bridge Medical Center in Paramus where authorities said he was being medicated. He missed at least three prior scheduled hearings because doctors determined he would not be able to understand the proceedings, Bruno said. On Thursday, doctors cleared him for Friday’s hearing.


“I question that, but the doctors did what they thought was appropriate,” Bruno said.


Lopez is charged with murder, desecration of human remains, possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose and hindering apprehension. Bruno said he requested a detention hearing, scheduled for Monday in front of Judge James X. Sattely, to determine whether Lopez will be able to assist in his own defense.


Lopez is being held in Bergen County Jail.


Paramus police on Friday released a large volume of police reports related to Lopez dating back to 2008.


The most recent report was from Oct. 24, when police officers said they climbed through a window to get inside Lopez’s house and found him staring at the wall with “a catatonic look on his face.” Police said in the report that they noticed “an extremely foul odor” and “a large quantity of flies just inside the window” on the south side of the garage.


“I killed my mother 13 days ago,” Lopez told police.


Six days after he allegedly killed his mother, a social worker visited him at the home, according to the report.  But after subsequent attempts at contact failed, social workers called police, asking for a welfare check, the records show.


Over the years, Lopez had threatened to kill police officers and allegedly assaulted them on several occasions, according to the reports. But on May 30 of this year he dialed 911 and asked to join the department. Police released a tape of that incident on Friday.


“I’ve been stuck here in my house and to be honest I don’t do anything,” Lopez said to police. “It’s come to the point where I’m really losing my mind.”


Police responded to his home and told him to use the non-emergency line in the future for such inquiries, according to a report.


Five days later, according to another report, Lopez attempted to commit suicide by taking 24 aspirin.


PARAMUS: How did the alleged murder go unnoticed for nearly two weeks?


CRIME NEWS: Youth stabbed multiple times in Montclair's Nishuane Park


On June 28, Paramus police responded to a call from Our Lady the Visitation Roman Catholic Church where Lopez made an employee uncomfortable after inquiring about a job in the parish and returning “numerous times” to determine the status of his application.


The almost 50 police reports released on Friday show a man who appeared to have been suffering from a mental illness for years. He was charged at least seven times with various offenses, including assault and making terroristic threats, but other times no charges were listed in the reports even after violent confrontations. He was taken at least five times to Bergen Regional Medical Center, a psychiatric hospital, now known as New Bridge.



    Police dispatch: Susana Lopez called 911 in Sept. of 2016 to report threatening behavior by her son, Jesus.
    NorthJersey.com

Lopez called police on June 19, 2008 following a dispute with his mother, who told officers she wanted to speak to someone regarding “stress related issues.” He threatened to blow up police cars and kill officers on Oct. 2, 2009, when he spit into the face of an arresting officer. He earlier told a neighbor that he had a gun and wanted to “take on” the police. There is no indication in any of the reports that he possessed a gun.


He broke down doors at his home on May 22, 2011, after his mother didn’t allow him to use the telephone. Another report, one month later, said he pushed an officer through a glass door. And he was involuntarily committed on Oct. 11, 2012 after he allegedly took a swing at a police officer.


In 2015, he kept going back to the Paramus Fire Department, which is near his home, asking to be a firefighter.


“The fire department officers are familiar with Jesus Lopez,” police said in a report. “They did not want to possibly anger Jesus by rejecting him so they advised him that he would be contacted to discuss his options in the near future.”


Staff writer Keldy Ortiz contributed to this report.


Email: janoski@northjersey.com


 
