MONTGOMERY COUNTY, Texas - A 17-year-old girl orchestrated a carjacking involving her own friend with two other teenagers in Montgomery County, deputies said.
                     


Susan Maria Mize, 17, from Spring, was arrested on Friday night after Montgomery County deputies learned she was allegedly involved in the entire episode.
                  
  


Deputies said a 16-year-old boy and 15-year-old boy carjacked the 17-year-old girl and her male friends at the intersection of Rayford Road and I-45 in Spring late Friday night.
                     


Deputies said Mize asked her friend if he wanted to earn $150 to give the two other teens a ride into Houston, which he agreed to. Both traveled to Creekside Park to meet her friends. That's when, police said, the 15-year-old boy, wearing a mask, walked to the victim's door and showed him an object believed to be a gun, officials said.
                     


Deputies said the 15-year-old demanded the victim to get in the back seat of the vehicle, where the 16-year-old boy entered the vehicle with a knife. The victim was tied up with Mize's shoelaces and robbed of the $150 and his wallet, while the suspect was striking him several times and threatening him with the knife and gun, officials said.
                     


The teens drove the victim to a HEB store, located at 3540 Rayford Rd. and demanded him to withdraw his money from an ATM inside the store while the 16-year-old watched, officials said.
                     


The two suspects tied the victim up with the shoelaces and then took Mize home, officials said. Deputies said Mize never called 911 to report what was happening to her friend. 
                     


Deputies said the victim told the teens that he had more money at inside his home and they drove him to his residence. Once inside, the victim told his parents what happened and the teens left in his vehicle, officials said.
                     


The victim's parents immediately called 911 to report the robbery.
                     


Deputies found the stolen car in Dennis Johnson Park. Officials said as Harris County deputies approached the vehicle and arrested the 16-year-old while the 15-year-old ran into the woods.
                     


After an investigation, deputies learned Mize orchestrated the carjacking involving her own friend. Mize told deputies that he was an easy target to rub, but tying him and taking the vehicle was not her idea, officials said.
                     


Deputies confiscated the weapons, which turned out the be BB guns.
                     


 Mize was arrested and is facing aggravated robbery charges. She’s in jail on a $75,000 bond.
                     


The 16-year-old was also arrested and is facing aggravated robbery charges.
                     


Deputies said the 15-year-old has been identified and a warrant is being filed for his arrest.
                     


Copyright 2018 by KPRC Click2Houston - All rights reserved.

Get email alerts for local stories and events around the world.