By

Hannah Parry For Dailymail.com







  Published:
  15:51 EDT, 6 February 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  16:38 EDT, 6 February 2018







           2

View  comments

Salvador Gomez-Lopez, 46, of Montgomery County, is accused of slashing a bystander at a bus stop after they asked him to stop urinating in public

A man was slashed in the face and neck at a Maryland bus stop after asking a 'drunk' and 'belligerent' stranger to stop urinating in public.


Salvador Gomez-Lopez, 46, of Montgomery County, was arrested on two counts of assault, public intoxication and possession of a dangerous weapon with intent to injure after the incident last November. He has recently been indicted.


A spokeswoman with Immigration Customs and Enforcement told Fox News that Gomez-Lopez was a wanted fugitive, in the country illegally from El Salvador. ICE have since 'lodged a detainer'.


The victim, who has not been named, told police that he had been at the Wheaton Metro bus turnaround, on Georgia Avenue, Montgomery County, at around 11pm on November 30.


He, and another witness at the scene, said that Gomez-Lopez had pulled down his pants and began urinating in full view of other bus riders.


When the victim suggested he should use a bathroom, Gomez-Lopez grabbed sharp box-cutter knife from his backpack, WJLA reports. 


A struggle ensued and the attacker reportedly slashed the victim's head, neck and stomach, before the bleeding man was finally able to wrestle the knife off Gomez-Lopez.


When police arrived, they found the victim covered in blood, with deep knife wounds. He was rushed to hospital where he is recovering from the attack.


The victim told police that he had been at the Wheaton Metro bus turnaround (pictured) on Georgia Avenue, Montgomery County, at around 11pm on November 30 when he was attacked

Gomez-Lopez, who officers described as 'drunk and belligerent' and 'uncooperative' was arrested at the scene. They say he gave them a fake name while he was being questioned.


The defendant, a father-of-two who worked for a relative part-time, is expected in court for a three-day trial in April.


If convicted, he could face up to 38 years in jail. Gomez-Lopez is being held on $5,000 bond. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group