
    
        
            By Olivia Rizzo


            NJ Advance Media for NJ.com
            

A Montgomery bus driver has been accused of sexually assaulting some of the children he was responsible for bringing to school every day.

Edward Atoeff, 85, who was still driving school buses when he was arrested Monday, allegedly sexually assaulted at least nine children during his career as a bus driver. 

Two adult victims went to the Montgomery police on Feb. 12 and reported that Atoeff had assaulted them on multiple occasions when they were 8 and 12-years-old respectively. 

The initial report launched an investigation by Somerset County Prosecutor's Office Sex Crimes/Child Abuse Unit and revealed that Atoeff had sexual contact with at least seven other children, according to authorities. Authorities, however did not say how long ago the alleged crimes took place.

Atoeff came into contact with his victims through his bus company Jastyke Transportation.

A spokesperson from the Somerset County Prosecutor's office said Atoeff's victims date back to the 1960s. 

Atoeff was arrested at his Cherry Valley Road home without incident on March 19, according to authorities. He is charged with two counts of first-degree aggravated sexual assault and two counts of second-degree sexual assault.

Atoeff is currently being held at the Somerset County jail pending a detention hearing. 

Anyone who may have been a victim or who has more information about this case should contact the Somerset County Prosecutor's Office at 908-231-7100 or the Montgomery Township Police Department at 908-359-3222.

Olivia Rizzo may be reached at orizzo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @LivRizz. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        