
    
        
            By Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

An SUV driver accused of crashing into three women on the sidewalk near Portland State University has been booked into the Multnomah County jail.

Greg P. Porter, 61, faces accusations of attempted murder, first-degree assault, reckless driving and failure to perform the duties of a driver after witnesses said he appeared to intentionally drive onto the sidewalk near Southwest Sixth Avenue and Montgomery Street a little after 10 a.m. Friday and then sped down the walkway.

Portland police said late Friday that it's still not clear why the crash occurred. 

The injured women have not yet been identified by police and were taken to OHSU Hospital. One woman is in critical condition and another is in serious condition. Portland police said they didn't have an update on the condition of the third victim.

Porter was arrested about two and a half miles away, near Northeast 16th Avenue and Glisan Street, after someone spotted his damaged blue 2005 Mazda Tribute and called 911.

Porter is the registered owner of the SUV, state department of motor vehicle records show. His most recent listed address is Secora, a rehabilitation facility in Southeast Portland.

James Aldred, an administrator at Secora, said the man police arrested was a patient at the facility who moved out May 1 after finishing physical therapy. Aldred said the suspect suffered from delusions.

"It doesn't surprise me that he was involved in something," Aldred said, but that he wouldn't have expected "something to this degree."

The crash occurred at the Portland State University Urban Center, a hub that houses university departments, eateries and is the location of a MAX station and several bus stops.

Police said the women were walking along the east sidewalk of Southwest Sixth Avenue when they were struck.

Eder Campuzano and Mike Rogoway of The Oregonian/OregonLive staff contributed to this report. 

-- Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com503-221-8343; @EvertonBailey


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        