
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

WOOLWICH TWP. -- Township police reported a busy start to November as officers recovered a stolen handgun and seized a large quantity of marijuana this week.

Early Thursday morning, Woolwich Patrolman Curtis Rucker stopped a vehicle at Route 322 and the New Jersey Turnpike interchange.

Rucker "detected the presence of illegal narcotics" and searched the vehicle, police said.

That search turned up illicit narcotics and a loaded Ruger LC9 9mm handgun.

Police learned the gun had been reported stolen.

The driver, Grant S. Grandison, 32, from Bronx, New York, was arrested without incident, charged with weapon and theft offenses, and jailed in Salem County Correctional Facility pending a detention hearing.

About 24 hours later, Patrolman Matthew O'Loughlin pulled over another vehicle in the same area. After detecting the odor of illegal drugs, a K-9 sweep and search turned up several pounds of raw marijuana, drug paraphernalia and several knives.

Brad A. Montgomery, 35, of Scarborough, Maine, was arrested on drug and weapons offenses and placed in the Salem jail pending a detention hearing.

Woolwich Police credited East Greenwich Police Patrolman Michael Robostello and his K-9 partner Kilo for their assistance.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        