By Crystal Hill



                                            chill@mcclatchy.com
                                        


                        
                            February 19, 2018 05:47 PM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

The girl might have gotten away with the robbery — if her father’s quick thinking hadn’t foiled the plot, according to authorities.

A 16-year-old boy and another male had approached the man’s red Nissan Friday in Montgomery County, Texas and carjacked him and his daughter, Susan Mize, 17, authorities said, KPRC-TV reported.

The family was forced to drive to their home to give the robbers more money, police said, according to the Montgomery County Police Reporter. But when they got to the house, the father ran inside, locked the door and called police, authorities said.



Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

Do you know what to do if you accidentally dial 911? Do you know what information is crucial in an emergency? Here's what you need to know in North Texas to get the police, fire or ambulance service you need fast. 






The two robbers released Mize and fled in the car, authorities said, the Courier reported.

Authorities eventually spotted the vehicle and chased it, the newspaper said. The thieves abandoned the car and tried to escape into the woods, KPRC-TV reported.

During their escape, one of the robbers fired a gun, sparking a manhunt, the news station said. He has not yet been found, according to police.

Police, however, still took two people into custody — the 16-year-old boy and Mize, the Montgomery County Police Reporter said. Authorities learned that Mize had allegedly orchestrated the carjacking and robbery because she wanted money, the newspaper said.

She was taken to Montgomery County Jail, the Courier reported.

Mize faces aggravated robbery charges, KPRC-TV said.

Police urge drivers to be aware of their surroundings and look around before exiting the vehicle. Drivers are also advised to keep car doors locked and windows rolled up.


                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    