Password has been successfully updated.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

We didn't recognize that password reset code. Enter your email address to get a new one.

We've sent an email with instructions to create a new password. Your existing password has not been changed.

Need a Profile? Register Now.

Need a Profile? Register Now.

Need a Profile? Register Now.

We have sent you a verification email. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your AJC.com profile.

If you do not receive the verification message within a few minutes of signing up, please check your Spam or Junk folder.

We look forward to seeing you on AJC.com frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.


Click here to return to the page you were visiting.


Don't worry, it happens. We'll send you a link to create a new password.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

You're now logged in.

Password has been successfully updated.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

We didn't recognize that password reset code. Enter your email address to get a new one.

We've sent an email with instructions to create a new password. Your existing password has not been changed.

You're now logged in.

LINK YOUR ACCOUNT FOR PREMIUM ACCESS

Are you already a home delivery subscriber for ajc.com?


High: 93° | Low: 76°


Chance of rain:
0%



Wind: WNW at 9mph

© 2018 Cox Media Group

Prosecutors in Washington State said an escort shot a man in the head twice in his home, then stole his wallet and gun before running away. The man survived, police said.



&gt;&gt; Read more trending news



Investigators in Snohomish County arrested the suspect, 21-year-old Marissa Wallen on Tuesday, and she made her first court appearance via video camera Wednesday. 


Probable cause documents say Wallen shot the 36-year-old victim while the two were engaged in sexual activity at his North Everett home.


“I was stunned on Tuesday when the first detective came to our door,” said Mark Barnum, who lives next door. “He said your neighbor was shot twice in the head.”


The probable cause document said Wallen admitted to shooting her client in the back of the head, while they were engaged in sexual activity, and that "she fired a second shot that struck him in the side of the face.”


Wallen “said that she then took his wallet (off) his night stand and fled the location, believing, he was dead on his bedroom floor,” according to the probable cause document.


The victim's neighbor said he heard a noise. 


“I heard what sounded like two or three taps coming from the wall,” Barnum said. “It was notable because we don't usually hear anything.” 


He said he thought the noise could have been a hammer at first, until he talked with detectives. 


“It just kind of shocking to think perhaps that was maybe - maybe those were the shots. Maybe it was [the victim]. And I feel really badly that I was unable to help,” Barnum said 


An officer found the victim three days after the shooting. 


During a welfare check, the officer found the victim “sitting up against a wall in the master bedroom… he had a lot of dried blood on his head and he was awake, but unresponsive,” the documents said.


A CT scan found two bullets still in the victim’s head.


Neighbors say he works in tech.


“He keeps to himself a lot, he's got his computer stuff up there. He handles a lot of websites, it security,” said Erik Buxton, another neighbor. We’ll talk, he’s a nice guy.” 


Documents say he had cameras that captured Wallen inside the home and running down the driveway. 


Wallen is also accused of using the victim's credit cards to rack up more than $10,000  in charges


Documents say the victim "had been hiring female escorts and frequenting a strip club in Seattle, where he was bragging about how much money he earned and belongings he had at his house.” 


“He liked to kind of flash his money a little bit. It's what's going to happen - you're going to attract negative people along the way,” Buxton said. 


But neighbors say they're just glad he survived. 


“He got a long hard road ahead of him, so I wish him well,” Barnum said. “I’m just so glad that for him and his family that he’s going to pull through.”


A judge Wednesday said Wallen had warrants out for her arrest and a long string of failures to appear, and set her bail for $1 million. 


Jenner Matthews was arrested in connection with the case Tuesday. The probable cause document said Wallen made payments to him through Facebook using the victim’s accounts.


Officers were able to communicate with the victim at the hospital with gestures, but court documents say the victim is unable to speak.


Investigators say an escort shot an #Everett man in his head - TWICE. Found him 3 days later *alive*. I'm working on details for you @6p! pic.twitter.com/nd53UjSe3t

© 2018 Cox Media Group