Ah, Mill Basin: the Brooklyn neighborhood is the land of many a ridiculous McMansion, many of which could very well have been airlifted to New York City from Miami Beach.

One of those homes just listed with Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices, and it’s one that’ll be familiar to astute Curbed NY readers: The house, located at 2387 56th Drive, was once offered alongside its more extravagant neighbor at 2458 National Drive (which was built by a Colombo family crime associate). 

The last time the two were on the market together, they were going for $18 million; now, the smaller home (the “guest house,” if you will) is on its own, and asking $4.5 million. (And to make matters a tiny but more complicated, this house was listed by itself in 2015 for $8 million—clearly, the market has changed since then.) 

The home itself isn’t as outrageous as its tricked-out neighbor (which has a meditation room and a 1,000-square-foot pool), but it’s still plenty huge: It spans approximately 7,000 square feet, with five bedrooms, more than five bathrooms, an elevator, a three-car garage, roof deck, myriad balconies, fireplaces, floor-to-ceiling windows, and marble everywhere. 

It also comes with views of Mill Basin and its lavish next-door neighbor. As for that neighboring McMansion, it’s currently off the market; given the home’s history, we wouldn’t be surprised if it pops up again at some point soon. 

You won’t find a sunset like this anywhere else.

Pricespotter is Curbed’s weekly pricing guessing game, and this week, we’re looking at a two-bedroom on the Upper East Side. Can you guess the asking price?

Many community members are calling upon City Council to vote no on the proposal while others feel it could work with major revisions.

The five-story townhouse surpassed the $34.53 million record set by another townhouse on the same street.

The apartments will be spread out between two different locations in downtown Far Rockaway

The four-story corner house measures 3,200 square feet and comes with five bedrooms.