
		Dr. Brian Moran, Prostate Cancer Foundation of Chicago medical adviser, and John Aguzino, foundation board president, inform and engage participants at informational support group meeting.
		Courtesy of Jen Smalcuga
	

If you have recently been diagnosed with prostate cancer, chances are you will want to know all your treatment options. Prostate Cancer Foundation of Chicago provides a friendly place to ask professionals specific questions about diagnosis and treatment --and a place to gain valuable insight from men like you who are at different points along the prostate cancer journey.

Informational Support Group

The foundation works hand-in-hand with Chicago Prostate Cancer Center to support prostate cancer awareness, prevention, public education, and clinical research with a focus on quality of life. Through free monthly Informational Support Group meetings -- hosted by Foundation and Center directors -- men and their loved ones are empowered with a better understanding of prostate cancer and its treatment options.


Special Guest Jonny Imerman


The next Informational Support Group meeting will be at 7 p.m. Wednesday, April 4, at the Center, 815 Pasquinelli Dr., Westmont. Hear special guest Jonny Imerman, founder of Imerman Angels, an organization created on the belief that no one should have to face cancer alone. Diagnosed with testicular cancer at age 26, Jonny was lucky enough to have loving support from his family and friends, but never met anyone his age who was a cancer survivor. Imerman Angels connects cancer fighters, survivors and caregivers for all cancers, all around the world. Seating is limited; call (630) 654-2515 to RSVP.


Grill 89 All-Day Fundraiser


Also on April 4, PCFC is teaming up with neighbor Grill 89, 800 E. Ogden, Westmont. Dine anytime from 11 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.---perhaps on your way to the Informational Support Group meeting. Grill 89 will generously donate 25 percent of all food and beverage sales all day long to help raise funds for prostate cancer research and education. No flyer or mention is necessary.


Win a $100 gift card


Diners have a chance to win a $100.00 Grill 89 gift card by bringing their Grill 89 receipt of April 4, to Chicago Prostate Cancer Center at 815 Pasquinelli Dr. Or email your receipt to info@chicagoprostatefoundation.org no later than Thursday, April 5 by 4 p.m. Include your name and phone number on your receipt. A lucky winner will be drawn Friday morning.


More information


Prostate Cancer Foundation of Chicago looks forward to serving men newly diagnosed with prostate cancer, while greeting longtime friends this Wednesday. For more information, follow www.facebook.com/ProstateCancerFoundationChicago or see www.chicagoprostatefoundation.org, or call (630) 654-2515.



								
									dhGlobalObj.showAd( { 'slug':'ArticleTower' } );
								
							

