Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.


✓ Unlimited access to billingsgazette.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

LIMITED TIME OFFER Save 30% with an annual subscription ✓ Unlimited access to E-Edition✓ Unlimited access to the billingsgazette.com website and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (800) 762-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Sunny. High near 85F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mainly clear. Low 61F. Winds NE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren of Sharon Adler, who died Sunday, April 1, pose in front of a snow giraffe they made in her honor Monday in the front yard of Adler's home in the Gorham Park neighborhood.

A giraffe sculpture sits in the front lawn of a home in the Gorham Park neighborhood Tuesday. The snow sculpture was made by family members in honor of Sharon Adler, who died Sunday. Sharon Adler had a love of giraffes ever since a 1997 trip to Africa.

Scott Adler sweeps snow off of a giraffe sculpture he and other family members made in honor of his mother, Sharon Adler, who died Sunda. Sharon Adler had a love of giraffes ever since a 1997 trip to Africa.

City Government Reporter

Children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren of Sharon Adler, who died Sunday, April 1, pose in front of a snow giraffe they made in her honor Monday in the front yard of Adler's home in the Gorham Park neighborhood.

Three generations of the Adler family crafted a majestic life-size giraffe in a front lawn in the Gorham Park neighborhood Monday to honor Sharon Adler, who died on Easter Sunday 10 days short of her 82nd birthday.

A longtime day care operator and Moss Mansion tour guide, Sharon Adler took an African trip in 1997 and “fell in love with giraffes,” said her daughter, Pam Nielsen of Seattle. “It became a thing with her.”

Her backyard became a bit of a giraffe preserve, and grandchildren and great-grandchildren enjoyed drawing pictures of the graceful animal for her. She kept them all in a thick pile, Pam said.

Pam’s brother, Scott, of Missoula, joined two of Sharon Adler’s grandchildren and four great-grandchildren Monday to shape ice and snow to construct the giraffe. “It took us three hours — including lunch,” he said Tuesday morning.

A giraffe sculpture sits in the front lawn of a home in the Gorham Park neighborhood Tuesday. The snow sculpture was made by family members in honor of Sharon Adler, who died Sunday. Sharon Adler had a love of giraffes ever since a 1997 trip to Africa.

For spots, family members dabbed on Worcestershire sauce, achieving the giraffe’s yellow hue with food coloring. The artists used one of Sharon’s backyard giraffes as a form for the neck and head, sculpting the unnamed creature.

Even while reclining, the giraffe is nearly seven feet tall.

“We were just going to build a snowman,” Scott said, “but then it started snowing some more (Monday morning) and it ended up being a giraffe.”

As a neighbor pointed out, “you can tell that tall and short people contributed the giraffe’s spots,” he said.

Funeral services for Sharon will be held at 1:30 p.m. Saturday at Mount Olive Lutheran Church, 2336 St. Johns Ave. in Billings. Family members are hoping that cold temperatures will linger long enough to keep the giraffe in its current state into the weekend.

Scott Adler sweeps snow off of a giraffe sculpture he and other family members made in honor of his mother, Sharon Adler, who died Sunda. Sharon Adler had a love of giraffes ever since a 1997 trip to Africa.

Her children said Sharon loved to travel — not only abroad, but domestically with her husband of almost 63 years, Lou.

In 1969, Lou’s employer, Campbell’s Soup, gave him and Sharon tickets to Super Bowl III, played in the Orange Bowl in Miami and made famous by Joe Namath’s brash guarantee that his upstart New York Jets would defeat the Baltimore Colts — which they did, 16-7.

The soup company put the Adlers up in a box, seating them near comedian Jackie Gleason.

According to Scott Adler, at one point during the historic contest, Gleason leaned over and asked the Adlers, “Who are you people?”

Fifteen years later, Lou’s work meant they could take in the Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. For her 80th birthday, Sharon took a cruise on the Rhine River, visiting the gravesite of her brother who was killed during World War II.

Surrounded by some of her closest family members, the longtime choir member and Sunday school teacher died on Easter Sunday — having “always said that if she could pick the day to die, it would be Easter Sunday,” family members said. “She did it her way.”



Sharon M. (Swanson) Adler joined various family members and friends in heaven on Easter Sunday, ten days before her 82nd birthday. She always …

City Government Reporter

City reporter for The Billings Gazette.


                                    
                                        Whenever Mike Ferguson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 