GET READY FOR THE HOLIDAYS WITH 
IT'S A REALLY, REALLY COZY CHRISTMAS! 
HERE'S YOUR COMPLETE GUIDE TO ALL THINGS FESTIVE 
THIS SEASON ON LIFETIME
 




Lifetime's Unscripted Holiday Special Premieres



Wednesday, 11/22 at 10pm - Little Women: Atlanta: A Little Thankful



The Little Women of Atlanta are ready for the holidays! To kick off the season, the ladies get together for a special dinner to give thanks and reminisce on all of their great moments. But as they dig up memories of the past three seasons things get heated and the knives come out - literally! But, save room for dessert because after dinner, there's a special sneak peek of season four of Little Women: Atlanta.



Wednesday, 12/13 at 8pm - Little Women LA: A Little Festive



The Little Women of LA have had an eventful year! To celebrate, they gather together for a festive night of Secret Santa and a look back on all their favorite times together.



Friday, 12/22 at 9pm - A Very Bring It! Holiday



The holidays are approaching and Coach D and her Dancing Dolls are ready to celebrate! In a fun filled special, the team reflects on past seasons of the show, participates in a dance-off challenge, prepares a holiday treat and surprises a superfan!



Friday, 12/22 at 10pm - The Rap Game Holiday Remix



It's Christmas time in Atlanta and legendary producer and So So Def CEO, Jermaine Dupri gathers his posse around the tree to celebrate the highs and lows of The Rap Game's past. With the help of Rap Game Mentor, Da Brat, JD looks back to answer questions about past seasons and create the ultimate hit list of The Rap Game's most jaw-dropping moments.



Tuesday, 12/26 at 9pm - Married at First Sight: Holiday Game Night



Pastor Cal and his wife Wendy are joined by the couples from season five of Married at First Sight, for a special holiday gathering filled with fun and games and a look back at their unconventional journey to wedded bliss. 




Lifetime Original Christmas Movie Premieres



Saturday, 11/25 at 8pm - Wrapped Up in Christmas



Christmas is one of Heather's (Tatyana Ali, Fresh Prince of Bel Air) favorite times of year but this year, as the manager of the upscale Town Center Mall, she has to be the Christmas Grinch and cancel the leases of under-performing stores. One afternoon, Heather's niece, Molly asks the mall Santa to help find a boyfriend for her beloved aunt. Unbeknownst to Molly and Heather, "Santa" is actually Ryan (Brendan Fehr, Guardians of the Galaxy), who is working at the mall for the holidays and helping his Aunt Patty run her failing toy store. As Heather and Ryan begin to fall for each other, they have no idea of one another's true identity: Heather who is tasked with closing his aunt's store and Ryan who is too ashamed to tell Heather that he is the actually the mall Santa. Will Molly's Christmas wish come true, or will Heather be stuck as the Town Center Grinch? The film also stars Kim Fields, Jasmine Guy, Joseph Marcell, Dan Lauria, Jackee Harry and Mindy Sterling. Wrapped Up In Christmas is produced by ARO Entertainment. Jeff Schenck executive produces. Peter Sullivan serves as a director from a script by Jennifer Notas Shapiro. 



Sunday, 11/26 at 8pm - A Very Merry Toy Store



Connie Forrester (Melissa Joan Hart, Sabrina, the Teenage Witch), a young single mom, and Will DiNova (Mario Lopez, Holiday in Handcuffs) each run their small, family-owned toy stores in Connecticut. Similar to their families, Connie and Will have been business rivals for year, until both of their livelihoods fall into jeopardy when the big box toy store "Roy's Toys" has its grand opening right before Christmas. In order to save their businesses, Connie and Will band together to save the stores that have defined their families for generations, and in the process, might just find love in time for Christmas. The film also stars Beth Broderick, Brian Dennehy, Billy Gardell, Mario Cantone, Dan Amboyer and Tara Strong. A Very Merry Toy Store is produced by Hartbreak Films. Paula Hart and Melissa Joan Hart executive produce. Paula serves as a director; David Breckman serves as a writer.



Saturday, 12/2 at 8pm - Four Christmases and a Wedding



When event planner Chloe (Arielle Kebbel, Midnight Texas, UnREAL) is hired to plan the local Christmas Festival, she is beyond thrilled to embrace the challenge. Professionally, everything is going great, but much to the dismay of her mother (Markie Post, Christmas on the Bayou), Chloe confesses she has given up on ever finding Mr. Right. That all changes the night of the opening of the festival when she meets Evan. The two begin a whirlwind romance, but as Christmas Day nears, Chloe learns that Evan is being transferred overseas for work. What follows is three more Christmases where Chloe and Evan cross paths at the annual festival, but each year something -- or someone -- stands in the way of true love. Will a touch of Santa's magic on their fourth Christmas Eve finally bring them together? The movie also stars Corey Sevier, Judge Reinhold and Robyn Lawley. Four Christmases and a Wedding is produced by Annuit Coeptis Entertainment. Timothy O. Johnson executive produces. Marita Grabiak serves as a director with a script by Barbara Kymlicka.



Sunday, 12/3 at 8pm - My Christmas Prince



Samantha (Alexis Knapp, Pitch Perfect), a dedicated teacher in Manhattan, returns to her home town of Maple Falls, Wyoming every year for Christmas. This year, she's delighted when her boyfriend Alex, a European diplomat from the tiny country of Madelvia, decides to joins her. Samantha later discovers Alex is actually a prince destined for the throne, turning her entire world upside down. Realizing that staying with Alex means spending her life in the constant glare of publicity and giving up the job opportunity of a lifetime, Samantha must decide if she loves Alex enough to make the transition from teacher to royal - or will it be too big a leap for this small-town girl? The movie also stars Marina Sirtis, Charles Shaughnessy, Jane Carr, Parker Stevenson and Pamela Sue Martin. My Christmas Prince is produced by ARO Entertainment. Jeff Schenck executive produces. Sam Irvin serves as a director and Hanz Wasserburger serves as the writer.



Saturday, 12/9 at 8pm - Christmas in Mississippi



Photographer Holly Logan (Jana Kramer, Country Crush) returns to her hometown of Gulfport, Mississippi for Christmas. The town is resurrecting their traditional holiday light show for the first time since a terrible hurricane struck five years earlier. Holly volunteers to pitch in, but soon has second thoughts when she discovers the festival is run by her high school sweetheart, Mike (Wes Brown, We Are Marshall). Now Holly must spend the next few days with the man who broke her heart. With the help of Caroline (Faith Ford, Hope &amp; Faith), her match-making mother and Mr. Kriss, the kind man who will play Santa in the town's celebration, Holly begins to fall in love with her hometown, and Mike, all over again. Christmas in Mississippi also stars Barry Bostwick (Spin City, Cougar Town) and Richard Karn (Home Improvement). Christmas in Mississippi is produced by Ken Badish and Daniel Lewis of Active Entertainment. Emily Moss Wilson serves as the director. Marcy Holland serves as the writer.



Saturday, 12/16 at 8pm - Snowed Inn Christmas



Jenna Hudson (Bethany Joy Lenz, Colony) and Kevin Jenner (Andrew Walker, A Bride for Christmas) are polar opposites, working for the same online publication in New York City. With both having nowhere they want to be for Christmas, they volunteer for a special writing assignment. After a snowstorm forces their plane to land in none other than Santa Claus, Indiana, the two are placed in a Christmas Wonderland and the focus of their story shifts to saving the historic town inn run by Carol and Christopher Winters. As the two overcome their differences, they also rediscover the magic of Christmas. But with the inn's fate in jeopardy and the return of someone from Jenna's past, Carol and Christopher lend a helping hand to bring Jenna and Kevin together. The film also stars Tasha Smith. Snowed Inn Christmas is produced by Juliette Hagopian and is executive produced by Howard Braunstein. Gary Yates serves as a director; Carly Smale serves as the writer.




Lifetime: Acquired Christmas Movie Premieres



Sunday, 12/10 at 8pm - A Christmas Reunion



Sunday, 12/17 at 8pm - A Perfect Christmas List





Lifetime Original Christmas Movie Premieres - Director's Cuts



Monday, 11/27 at 8pm - Wrapped Up in Christmas (Director's Cut)



Monday, 12/11 at 8pm - Four Christmases and a Wedding (Director's Cut)



Monday, 12/18 at 8pm - Snowed Inn Christmas (Director's Cut)



Saturday, 12/23 at 8pm - A Very Merry Toy Store (Director's Cut)



Sunday, 12/24 at 8pm - My Christmas Prince (Director's Cut)



Monday, 12/25 at 8pm - Christmas in Mississippi (Director's Cut)



*Each Director's Cut features additional footage that will bring even more insights into the characters' journeys and in some cases their futures.





Lifetime: Christmas Mini Movie Premieres



Saturday, 11/25 at 10pm - A Family for the Holidays



Becky is always in a hurry and rarely has the time to speak with her sweet, elderly neighbor Grace who is always trying to start conversation with her. When Becky discovers that none of Grace's grown children will be home for Christmas, she decides invite Grace to join her family for Christmas Eve. The mini movie stars Christine Chatelaine, Peter Benson, Barbara Wallace, Ava Sleeth and Christian Convery.



Sunday, 11/26 at 10pm - The Christmas Snowman



After wishing for the perfect man, a woman discovers her handsome new neighbor is actually the snowman she built the day before, who has now come to life. But when she awakes on Christmas morning, he is gone and the snowman is back. Could it all have been a dream? The mini movie stars Erin Boyes and Anthony Konechny.



Saturday, 12/2 at 10pm - The Ugly Christmas Sweater



During her first days working at a social media company, Megan's team is tasked with finding the best Christmas hashtag. Megan is determined to be the one to do so to impress her boss and the cute guy in her cubicle. However, when she is forced to wear her eccentric grandmother's gift - an ugly Christmas sweater - her unfortunate turn of events may well be the key to winning over her new boss and her new beau. The mini movie stars Kayla Fields, Gwen Van Dam, Yemi Cole, Meredith Thomas and Michael Blake Kruse. Brendan Fehr serves as director.



Sunday, 12/3 at 10pm - Delivering Christmas



When a young girl tries to write a letter to Santa, she confesses to the mailman that she can't think of what to ask for after her Grandma passed away and her mother has been grieving. Without family to spend the holiday with, the mailman decides that for the next twelve days, he will deliver surprise gifts to the mom to remind her of the Twelve Days of Christmas. The mini movie stars Jessica Morris and Jason-Shane Scott.



Saturday, 12/29 at 10pm - The Christmas Trap



When a couple on the brink of divorce get stuck in an elevator together on Christmas Eve, both think it will be a nightmare. But surprisingly, the Christmas music brings back memories, the gifts they have just shopped for spark a flame, and a misunderstanding from a Christmas past is resolved. As the elevator crew works overtime to rescue them, they realize where they went wrong and rekindle a love that had never really died. The mini movie stars Lucia Walters and Colin Lawrence.



Saturday, 12/16 at 10pm - My Christmas Grandpa



The cashier at a small market is a grouchy man who never has a smile for anyone; but when a little girl asks for a Grandpa for Christmas and chooses him, he is completely transformed by the child's love and compassion. The mini movie stars Vivica A. Fox, Bill Cobbs and Ricco Ross.





Lifetime: Holiday Theatricals



Thursday, 11/23 at 8pm - Christmas with the Kranks



Monday, 12/4 at 8pm - The Holiday




Lifetime will be airing 30+ Lifetime Christmas movie repeat titles throughout our stunt.


		




