Actress to play guest services worker at posh resort

Photo by Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images  

Kat Dennings has landed a lead role in the forthcoming ABC comedy pilot based on the book and blog “How May We Hate You,” TheWrap confirmed.

The untitled single-camera, ensemble comedy will focus on two co-workers who cater to the needs of guests at a high-end resort.

Dennings has been cast as Ellie, a guest services specialist who is forced to wear a plastic smile while dealing with hotel clientele who pay more per night than she has to pay in rent each month. While in debt from three botched attempts at different grad schools, she’s working to make ends meet with her best friend Gabe at the fancy hotel.

Also Read: Hannah Simone to Lead ABC's 'Greatest American Hero' Reboot

The show is based off the viral Tumblr blog and subsequent book created by Anna Drezen and Todd Dakotah Briscoe.


Justin Noble will write and co-executive produce the pilot, with Aaron Kaplan and Dana Honor executive producing for Kapital Entertainment and Wendi Trilling under the TrillTV banner. Dennings will also have a producer credit. The project hails from CBS Television Studios and ABC Studios.

Ever wanted to live like your favorite TV family? Well, now you can put a dollar figure on that dream.  

An Empire Today study, which is exclusive to TheWrap, priced popular television show residences as if they were listed on a short-term rental site, a la Airbnb or VRBO. The home improvement company then cross-referenced the fictional characters' homes to actual comparable listings on those real rental sites.  

Scroll through to see them. 




Also Read: Valentine’s Day Viewing Guide: 10 Movies for All Relationship Statuses (Photos)

Show: "Friends"  

Occupant(s): Monica and Rachel  

Deets: Two-bedroom, 1,500 sq. ft. apartment in Greenwich Village with open-air balcony. Occasional views of naked neighbor  

Nearby: Central Perk coffee shop, Allesandro's restaurant  

Cost: $364/night  

 




Also Read: The Most and Least Watched Post-Super Bowl TV Shows: ‘Friends,’ ‘Glee,’ ‘Blacklist,’ ‘Alias’

Show: "Stranger Things"  

Occupant(s): Joyce and her boys  

Deets: Three-bedroom, ranch-style home in a tight-knit, picturesque Indiana community. Walls sometimes adorned with Christmas lights     

Nearby: Unique woodlands, confusing geography and Hawkins National Laboratory    

Cost: $224/night  

 




Also Read: Procter &amp; Gamble Lends Old Spice Guy to Tide for Super Bowl LII Ad (Video)

Show: "Full House"   

Occupant(s): The Tanner Family  

Deets: 2,500 sq. ft., four-bedroom, four-bathroom Victorian-style home in San Francisco with fenced in backyard and patio  

Nearby: Golden Gate Bridge, "Good Morning San Francisco" set  

Cost: $1,349/night  

 




Also Read: Jodie Sweetin Has Never Seen an Entire Episode of ‘Full House’

Show: "Seinfeld"  

Occupant(s): Jerry  

Deets: One-bedroom, one-bathroom apartment with spacious kitchen, including wraparound counters, in New York City  

Nearby: Neighbor with boundary issues, Monk's Coffee Shop  

Cost: $325/night  

 




Also Read: Happy Festivus! Here’s the Story Behind Fake ‘Seinfeld’ Holiday (Video)

Show: "Gilmore Girls"  

Occupant(s): Lorelai and Rory  

Deets: Two-story, two-bedroom home with wraparound porch and plenty of coffee mugs in small New England town of Stars Hollow  

Nearby: Luke's Diner, Miss Patty's Dance School, Kim's Antiques    

Cost: $307/night  

 




Also Read: ‘Gilmore Girls: A Year in the Life': 15 Things Still Bothering Fans a Year Later (Photos)

Show: "It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia"   

Occupant(s): Charlie and Frank  

Deets: One-room apartment with hot plate, couch and no plumbing in Philadelphia  

Nearby: Paddy's Pub  

Cost: $122/night  

 




Also Read: Glenn Howerton’s Latest ‘Always Sunny’ Update: ‘Dennis Could Be Gone Forever’

Show: "Star Trek"  

Occupant(s): Captain Jean-Luc Picard  

Deets: Guests on this 8,000 sq. meter, 5,000-bedroom spaceship will access to the holodeck, arboretum, gymnasium, amphitheaters, sick bay should it be required, and the ship’s bar. Access to the bridge is strictly prohibited, however  

Nearby: Stars, other galaxies  

Cost: $100,000/night  

 




Also Read: Did You Catch the ‘Star Trek: Discovery’ Finale’s Deep Cut Callback to the Original Series?

Show: "The Big Bang Theory"  

Occupant(s): Leonard and Sheldon  

Deets: Two-bedroom, one-bathroom apartment in Pasadena, with open floor plan and broken elevator just outside. Please don't touch anything.      

Nearby: City Hall  

Cost: $237/night  

 




Also Read: ‘Big Bang Theory’ Actress Defends Matt Damon Over His Sexual Misconduct Comments (Video)

Show: "The Simpsons"  

Occupant(s): The Simpson Family  

Deets: Four-bedroom, three-bathroom, two-story, 2,000 sq. ft. home in Springfield, Oregon features an attached two-car garage and a versatile treehouse in the backyard. Should anything go wrong, contact helpful neighbor Ned Flanders  

Nearby: Kwik-E-Mart convenience store, Moe's Tavern, a stunning view of Springfield Gorge  

Cost: $510/night  

 




Also Read: Hank Azaria: ‘Simpsons’ Producers ‘Will Definitely Address’ Apu Racial Stereotypes Criticism

Show: "The Golden Girls"  

Occupant(s): Blanche  

Deets: Four-bedroom, four-bathroom home with large porch in Miami perfect for a girl's trip, especially for the older crowd    

Nearby: Golden Palace Hotel  

Cost: $417/night  

 




Also Read: Happy 96th Birthday, Betty White! Watch 9 of Her All-Time Best TV Moments (Videos)

Show: "Roseanne"  

Occupant(s): The Conner Family  

Deets: Four bedroom house includes guest space in converted basement and a charming front porch  

Nearby: Lanford Lunch Box  

Cost: $256/night  

 




Also Read: Roseanne Barr Says Her TV Character Supports Trump: ‘It’s Just Realistic’

Obviously those listings and dwellings are all fake (though you actually can rent the "Full House" home).

Still, Airbnb and VRBO are both solid alternatives to traditional hotels. Check both websites out for plenty of cool non-TV cribs to crash in on your next vacation.

 




Also Read: 17 Beloved Rom-Coms for Valentine’s Day, From ‘Notting Hill’ to ‘Silver Linings Playbook’ (Photos)

What would the “Friends” apartment rent for nightly? A lot more than this ramshackle “Always Sunny” pad

Ever wanted to live like your favorite TV family? Well, now you can put a dollar figure on that dream.  

An Empire Today study, which is exclusive to TheWrap, priced popular television show residences as if they were listed on a short-term rental site, a la Airbnb or VRBO. The home improvement company then cross-referenced the fictional characters' homes to actual comparable listings on those real rental sites.  

Scroll through to see them. 




Also Read: Valentine’s Day Viewing Guide: 10 Movies for All Relationship Statuses (Photos)