TCA 2018: New John Paul Getty III kidnapping series “Trust” will debut in-between the two

“Atlanta” fans don’t have to wait much longer for the “Robbin'” season. FX has set the season premiere dates for “Atlanta Robbin’ Season” and the final run of “The Americans,” as well as the series debut for “Trust.”

Here’s what to mark your calendar with:

Below are each season’s official descriptions, straight from FX.

Also Read: New Fox Entertainment President on Why He Still Wants Multi-Camera Comedies

“Atlanta”
In “Atlanta Robbin’ Season,” two cousins work through the Atlanta music scene in order to better their lives and the lives of their families. “Earn Marks” (Donald Glover) is a young manager trying to get his cousin’s career off the ground. “Alfred Miles” (Brian Tyree Henry) is a new hot rapper trying to understand the line between real life and street life. “Darius” (Lakeith Lee Stanfield) is Alfred’s right-hand man and visionary. “Van” (Zazie Beetz) is Earn’s best friend and the mother of Earn’s daughter.


Also Read: 'Family Guy' Writers Explain How That 2005 Kevin Spacey Joke Passed Fox's Standards &amp; Practices

“Trust”
Inspired by actual events, “Trust” delves into the trials and triumphs of one of America’s wealthiest and unhappiest families, the Gettys. Equal parts family history, dynastic saga and an examination of the corrosive power of money, “Trust” explores the complexities at the heart of every family, rich or poor.

Told over multiple seasons and spanning the 20th century, the series begins in 1973 with the kidnapping of John Paul Getty III (Harris Dickinson), an heir to the Getty oil fortune, by the Italian mafia in Rome. His captors banked on a multi-million-dollar ransom. After all, what rich family wouldn’t pay for the return of a loved one? Paul’s grandfather, J. Paul Getty Sr. (Donald Sutherland), an enigmatic oil tycoon and possibly the richest man in the world, is marooned in a Tudor mansion in the English countryside surrounded by a harem of mistresses and a pet lion. He’s busy.


Paul’s father, J. Paul Getty Jr. (Michael Esper), is lost in a daze in London and refuses to answer the phone. Only Paul’s mother, Gail Getty (Hilary Swank), is left to negotiate with the increasingly desperate kidnappers. Unfortunately, she’s broke.

“Trust” charts the teenage grandson’s nightmare ordeal at the hands of kidnappers who cannot understand why nobody seems to want their captive back. The cast also includes Brendan Fraser, Anna Chancellor, Norbert Leo Butz, Charlotte Riley and Luca Marinelli. “Trust” is created by Simon Beaufoy and executive produced by Danny Boyle, Beaufoy and Christian Colson, with Boyle directing the first three episodes. The show is produced by FX Productions, Cloud Eight Films, Decibal Films and Snicket Films Limited.

Also Read: 'New Girl' Final Season Mystery: Does Furguson the Cat Die?

“The Americans”
“The Americans” is a period drama about the complex marriage of two KGB spies posing as Americans in suburban Washington D.C. during the Reagan administration. The arranged marriage of Philip (Matthew Rhys) and Elizabeth Jennings (Keri Russell) grows more passionate and genuine by the day, but as the pressures and demands of the job grow heavier, the personal toll becomes almost too exhausting to bear. Having revealed their true identities to their teenage daughter Paige (Holly Taylor), Philip and Elizabeth’s ability to protect their cover and their family’s safety deteriorates.

After a particularly fraught mission, Philip and Elizabeth decide to end their tour and take their family home to Russia. However, a game-changing development in one of their ongoing cases forces them to abandon those plans for the sake of the motherland. Now, Paige delves deeper into the family business, even as Philip takes a step back from it. The Jennings struggle to maintain a smokescreen of normalcy, especially around their son, Henry (Keidrich Sellati), who remains blissfully ignorant of the spies in his midst. Their neighbor and Philip’s best friend, FBI Agent Stan Beeman (Noah Emmerich), has also yet to discover their true identities. Although he’s transferred divisions, Stan remains their greatest threat since his friend and former partner, Agent Dennis Aderholt (Brandon J. Dirden), leads the force tasked with uncovering the Soviet Illegals hiding in plain sight.

With Gorbachev in power in the Soviet Union, the winds of change are sweeping through both Russia and America, creating new perils. A growing rift within the KGB draws disillusioned former officer Oleg Burov (Costa Ronin) back into the fray, and may set Philip and Elizabeth on opposing sides as the Cold War reaches its boiling point.

Yes, as usual there will be surprises at the 75th Golden Globe Awards on Sunday night. Here is what TheWrap's Steve Pond predicts will go down in the TV categories:

Best Television Series - Drama: 

In the TV categories, HFPA voters love to salute new shows, and to go a different route than the Emmys. The first of those won’t be difficult, but the second will be – “The Handmaid’s Tale” was the big winner at the Emmys, but it feels too much like the show of the moment for the Globes to shy away just because the Television Academy likes it too.

Prediction: "The Handmaid's Tale"

Best Television Series - Musical or Comedy: 

It’ll be easy to go for a new show in this category, too – but which one, “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” or “SMILF?” Maybe the former, which had a splashy debut just as the HFPA was voting.

Prediction: "The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel"

Best Television Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television:

The voters reportedly loved “The Sinner,” but this is probably another category where the reigning Emmy champ will be too much of an event to ignore. But there’s one potential snag: Now that HBO has announced a second season, “Big Little Lies” should really be in the drama-series category – and if voters feel as if they’re victims of category fraud, “The Sinner” could stage an upset here.

Prediction: "Big Little Lies"

Best Actor in a Television Series - Drama: 

Sterling K. Brown could well win for “This is Us,” but I suspect voters will want someone from a slightly newer show – either Jason Bateman for “Ozark” or Freddie Highmore for “The Good Doctor.”

Prediction: Jason Bateman, "Ozark"

Best Actress in a Television Series - Drama:

Maggie Gyllenhaal gets “newest, hottest show” points for “The Deuce,” but even the HFPA knows this is the year of Elisabeth Moss.

Prediction: Elisabeth Moss, "The Handmaid's Tale"

Best Actor in a Television Series - Musical or Comedy:

Voters apparently really liked the revived “Will and Grace,” so Eric McCormack is a contender. Aziz Ansari is always a cool choice. And Kevin Bacon is not only a star, he’ll let some lucky presenter say “I Love Dick” on national television.

Prediction: Kevin Bacon, "I Love Dick"

Best Actress in a Television Series - Musical or Comedy:

There are lots of fresh new faces on fresh new shows in this category, and you could make a case for any of them winning. But as creator, showrunner and star of a late-breaking show, maybe Frankie Shaw has a slight edge over Rachel Brosnahan.

Prediction: Frankie Shaw, "SMILF"

Best Actor in a Limited Series or Motion Picture Made For Television:

Fresh new faces? Not so much. In a category filled with esteemed veterans, look for the most veteran and most esteemed to take the prize.

Prediction: Robert De Niro, "The Wizard of Lies"

Best Actress in a Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television:

Yes, this should be an easy win for Nicole Kidman, who already has the Emmy for her performance in “Big Little Lies.” But voters know it’s not really a limited series, and they do love Jessica Biel and “The Sinner,” so this is an upset waiting to happen.

Prediction: Jessica Biel, "The Sinner"

Best Supporting Actor in a Series, Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television: 

The supporting categories mix drama and comedy series with limited series and TV movies, which means that qualms about where “Big Little Lies” belongs are meaningless here. That’ll help Alexander Skarsgard, who had the most eye-catching, um, part of the season.

Prediction: Alexander Skarsgard, "Big Little Lies"

Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television:

And the absence of potential category fraud will also help Laura Dern at the end of a year in which everybody finally kind of figured out that Laura Dern rocks.

Prediction: Laura Dern, "Big Little Lies"

Check out TheWrap’s picks before the 75th Golden Globe Awards air Sunday at 8 p.m. ET on NBC

Yes, as usual there will be surprises at the 75th Golden Globe Awards on Sunday night. Here is what TheWrap's Steve Pond predicts will go down in the TV categories:

TheWrap's latest news and analysis from Television Critics Association press tour.