


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

This makes the already mysterious missing person case even more confusing.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Timothy Cunningham.
(Photo: Buzz60/Atlanta Police Department)

Timothy J. Cunningham has been missing for more than a month, and the Centers for Disease and Control now says he did receive a promotion — which contradicts earlier police statements. 


"There has been news coverage that Commander Cunningham recently did not receive a promotion," Acting CDC Director Anne Schuchat said in a statement posted online Monday. "As many of his colleagues in the USPHS have pointed out, this information is incorrect."


Cunningham was promoted to Commander July 1, 2017 for "his exemplary performance," the CDC reports. 


The Atlanta Police Department previously said Cunningham was in a meeting about a promotion he did not receive the day he went missing. Major Michael O'Connor with the department mentioned the promotion at least a dozen times in a press conference last month. He said Cunningham met with his supervisor the morning of Feb. 12.   


More: Missing CDC scientist had meeting about being passed over for promotion before disappearance, police say


"The purpose of that meeting was to explain a promotion that he did not receive to branch manager. He had been informed the previous Monday that he was not getting the promotion but the explanation occurred on the morning of the twelfth," he said. 


The Atlanta Police Department is standing by its statements, saying the information came directly from the CDC. This conflicting information makes the already mysterious missing person case even more confusing. 


Cunningham, a 35-year-old Harvard-educated epidemiologist who aided the CDC in responses to Ebola and Zika outbreaks, disappeared later that day after he told co-workers he was feeling sick and planned to finish work from home. 


When a family member went to check on him, Cunningham wasn't home, but his cell phone, car keys and beloved dog, Mr. Bojangles, were all left behind. His car sat parked in the garage.


A day before Cunningham disappeared, he made an unusual comment to neighbor Viviana Tory's husband — asking that Viviana erase his cellphone number from her phone. 


He seemed to "evaporate" without a trace, his brother Anterio Cunningham told local media. 


Conspiracy theories have swirled around the prominent official's disappearance, such as false claims he is a flu vaccine whistle blower. 


The reward for information leading to charges around the case was raised to $15,000. 


"We have not given up hope that he will soon be found. If Tim reads this message, we hope you come home soon," Schuchat said. 


WXIA-TV, Atlanta, contributed to this report. Follow Ashley May on Twitter: @AshleyMayTweets


 
