

By Zosha Millman, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

Amazon received more than 200 bids to host its second North American headquarters. Click through the slideshow to see some of the wildest stunts from cities hoping to house Amazon's estimated $5 billion project.


Amazon received more than 200 bids to host its second North American headquarters. Click through the slideshow to see some of the wildest stunts from cities hoping to house Amazon's estimated $5 billion


The city of Calgary, Alberta, unveiled this billboard near Amazon headquarters in Seattle on Thursday, Oct. 19, 2017.

The city of Calgary, Alberta, unveiled this billboard near Amazon headquarters in Seattle on Thursday, Oct. 19, 2017.

From cactus gifts to giant Amazon box social media campaigns, check out the great lengths cities are going to land Amazon's new $5 billion headquarters.

From cactus gifts to giant Amazon box social media campaigns, check out the great lengths cities are going to land Amazon's new $5 billion headquarters.

Tucson decided to make its point with a 21-foot saguaro cactus, delivered to Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos. The company declined the gift, choosing instead to donate it to a museum.

Tucson decided to make its point with a 21-foot saguaro cactus, delivered to Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos. The company declined the gift, choosing instead to donate it to a museum.

Birmingham, Ala. has placed three giant Amazon delivery boxes around town as part of a social media campaign to get the e-commerce giant's attention. Residents are encouraged to snap photos with the boxes and post them to social media with the hashtag #bringatob.





Birmingham, Ala. has placed three giant Amazon delivery boxes around town as part of a social media campaign to get the e-commerce giant's attention. Residents are


New Jersey: A giant tax break


New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and other lawmakers have pledged to offer tax breaks worth $5 billion if Amazon builds HQ2 in the state.

New Jersey: A giant tax break

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and other lawmakers have pledged to offer tax breaks worth $5 billion if Amazon builds HQ2 in the state.

Dan Gilbert, the Detroit billionaire who founded Quicken Loans and Rock Ventures, has established a 59-person committee made up of business leaders and politicians, including the mayor of nearby Windsor, Ontario. The war room is designing an "Olympics-like bid" for Amazon's HQ2, according to Crain's Detroit.


Dan Gilbert, the Detroit billionaire who founded Quicken Loans and Rock Ventures, has established a 59-person committee made up of business leaders and politicians, including the


The City of Stonecrest, Ga. has approved a plan to carve out a 345-acre stretch of land inside the town to give Amazon its own city if it wins HQ2.

The City of Stonecrest, Ga. has approved a plan to carve out a 345-acre stretch of land inside the town to give Amazon its own city if it wins HQ2.

Chicago leaders have formed a committee with a cool 600 members dedicated to bringing Amazon's HQ2 to the Windy City.

Chicago leaders have formed a committee with a cool 600 members dedicated to bringing Amazon's HQ2 to the Windy City.

The University of Pennsylvania's business school is partnering with the City of Philadelphia to leverage the creativity of its students. Wharton is holding two pitch competitions asking students to pitch Philly to Amazon.


The University of Pennsylvania's business school is partnering with the City of Philadelphia to leverage the creativity of its students. Wharton is holding two pitch


Little Rock Mayor Mark Stodola discusses the city's decision to not pursue Amazon's proposed second headquarters at a news conference, Thursday, Oct. 19, 2017, in Little Rock, Ark. The city ran a full-page ad in the Washington Post, telling the e-commerce giant: "It's not you, it's us." (AP Photo/Andrew DeMillo)


Little Rock Mayor Mark Stodola discusses the city's decision to not pursue Amazon's proposed second headquarters at a news conference, Thursday, Oct. 19, 2017, in Little Rock, Ark. The city ran a full-page ad


A Carolina Panther fan shows his desire for Amazon to make Charlotte it's East Coast headquarters before an NFL football game against the Philadelphia Eagles in Charlotte, N.C., Thursday, Oct. 12, 2017. (AP Photo/Bob Leverone)


A Carolina Panther fan shows his desire for Amazon to make Charlotte it's East Coast headquarters before an NFL football game against the Philadelphia Eagles in Charlotte, N.C., Thursday, Oct. 12, 2017. (AP


New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker, right, speaks while New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie stands behind him during an announcement in Newark, N.J. The New Jersey lawmakers announced they are submitting a bid to Amazon that Newark would be the best location for the company's planned second headquarters. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig, File)


New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker, right, speaks while New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie stands behind him during an announcement in Newark, N.J. The New Jersey lawmakers announced they are submitting a bid to Amazon


Zavian Tate, a student at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, pushes a large Amazon Dash button, in Birmingham, Ala. The large Dash buttons are part of the city's campaign to lure Amazon's second headquarters to Birmingham. (AP Photo/Brynn Anderson)


Zavian Tate, a student at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, pushes a large Amazon Dash button, in Birmingham, Ala. The large Dash buttons are part of the city's campaign to lure Amazon's second


Many cities have thrown their hat in for Amazon's second headquarters, but a couple are bringing the fight to Seattle's HQ1.

The corporate giant's search for a second headquarters has brought in a whopping 238 bids from across the continent, and some have included more than just proposals. (See some of the wildest in the slideshow above.)

And though the decision from Amazon isn't due until 2018, November has seen a couple bids from cities that are making their eagerness known in Seattle. 

The city of Philadelphia has launched an ad campaign using Metro buses for the month of November. According to The Inquirer, the City of Brotherly Love is using bus wraps that "extol Philadelphia's vibrancy and livability" one everything from food to murals.

Though the advertising campaign doesn't mention Amazon or HQ2 at all, the goal is to keep Philadelphia on the company's (as well as Seattleites') mind. 

Which is a method being utilized by another city: Toledo, Ohio. 

Toledo native Michael Taylor has prime real estate now, living across the street from Amazon's glass domes. And he is trying to make sure that Seattle's Amazon employees consider his hometown, by putting a sign in his window that reads "You will do better in Toledo." 

According to The Toledo Blade, Taylor got the idea after a different city was interested in placing a sign in the apartment complex's window to send a message to Amazon. He turned that city down, and turned his attention to his hometown.

According to Taylor the growth in Seattle "has just exploded...because of Amazon," and he wants that for his hometown.

"While I was on the phone I thought wow, that's a great idea, I'm going to call Toledo," Taylor told The Blade.

It all comes the same week as "Last Week Tonight" host John Oliver finally brought up Amazon's controversial search for a second North American headquarters. During a segement on economic development programs, Oliver noted that the HQ2 contest heavily emphasized government incentives – "as they mentioned in their instructions 21 times."

According to Oliver, stunts are less likely to get Amazon's attention than tax credits and other incentives. Things like Taylor's or that of Stonecrest, Georgia's (which offered to create the "City of Amazon") are likely less attractive than New Jersey's $7 billion in tax credits for HQ2 which "could mean billions of tax dollars that would not be collected for things like roads or schools or hospitals and Amazon already has more money than it knows what to do with."

Ultimately he calls on local governments to demand better treatment when offering tax breaks.

"It's pretty clear that economic development needs to be done in a much smarter way and I don't fully blame the companies for this because if governments are going to offer ridiculous incentives, they are going to take them," Oliver said.

"So governments need to hold themselves and companies more accountable and if companies aren't producing what they promised, we need a system to claw our money back."