
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

09/19/2017 07:15 AM EDT

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj) 

Casa de Campo, where Sen. Menendez often stayed with Salomon Melgen, is really nice. 


Story Continued Below

You probably knew that already. But did you know how nice the golf courses are? One of them is top-ranked. The houses range from $500,000 to $40 million. There’s a boat to a private island with a beach, just in case the exclusive beach isn’t enough for you. And they raise their own pheasants on site, just for shooting. Seriously!

Prosecutors outlined all that and then some yesterday, not just about Casa de Campo, but also about Tortuga Bay in Punta Cana, where Menendez stayed with Melgen, though in a room comped by the owner because they were attending his son’s wedding. 

But while prosecutors were showing glossy brochures from the resorts, here’s one thing they didn’t show: Proof that Menendez used any of those amenities. Did Menendez shoot a pheasant? Nobody said, but the implication from the defense was no. Maybe he’ll address it if he testifies. 

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “We cultivate the pheasants.” —Casa de Campo president Andres Pichardo Rosenberg 

WHERE’S CHRISTIE? On Morning Joe and then speaking at The United Against Nuclear Iran’s 2017 summit 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — Consultant Chris Russell, Consultant Maggie Moran, Assembly Dem staffer Edgardo Cardinali

DAYS SINCE CHRISTIE LAST TOOK QUESTIONS FROM NJ PRESS CORPS: 1

WHAT TRENTON MADE

#TRANSPARENCY — “Botched warning about infant in danger sparks disgust, vows of action,” by NJ Advance Media’s Susan K. Livio: “The federal court monitor for New Jersey's child welfare agency said she will open an inquiry into its botched handling of a call to the state child abuse hotline that warned an infant might be at risk. The agency did nothing, and the baby died 103 days later. On May 1, 2015, two days after Jalon Josiah ‘JoJo’ Lemons was born at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center, a hospital worker called the hotline to report the baby's mother, Micael Jordan, had revealed that one of her children had suffocated while sharing a bed with her and others. But an NJ Advance Media investigation published Thursday found the child welfare agency never followed-up on the call or dispatched caseworkers to Jordan's apartment on South 11th Street in Newark, where they would have seen a family with four children financially struggling -- and without a crib.” Read the report

MORE MENENDEZ — “At Menendez trial, a pivotal battle over evidence,” by The Record’s Nicholas Pugliese and Dustin Racioppi: “In the background of the corruption trial of U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez, a potentially pivotal battle is brewing over the type of evidence that can be shown to the jury. Defense attorneys want to show that Menendez, a Democrat from Paramus, has helped ‘hundreds’ of people in ways that are similar to how he is alleged to have corruptly helped co-defendant Salomon Melgen, a Florida eye doctor and longtime friend. They want to ask the jury: Why would Menendez need to be bribed to do things he does all the time? But prosecutors are adamant that that type of evidence is inadmissible.” Read the report

CARTOON BREAK — “Senator Menendez earned frequent flier miles,” by Drew Sheneman Read the report 

— “The best reform for the campaign finance system is strengthening political parties” Read the op-ed

CRAIG CARTON GETS THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT HE NEVER GAVE ANYONE ELSE — “Chris Christie on Craig Carton: 'I don't want to believe that Craig's a criminal'” by NJ Advance Media’s James Kratch: “Gov. Chris Christie is sticking by Craig Carton. Christie commented on his friend's arrest on federal fraud and conspiracy charges for the first time in an exclusive interview with NJ Advance Media, saying he's ‘not the kind of guy that cuts and runs,’ and he intends to do anything he can to help the embattled former WFAN host who often had Christie as a fill-in co-host on his ‘Boomer and Carton Show.’ ‘I certainly don't believe, I don't want to believe that Craig's a criminal, but I've also been a prosecutor,’ Christie told NJ Advance Media's Stephen Stirling. ‘So, I'm anxious to hear all the facts come out, but it won't change our friendship.’” Read the report

—Remember that as Carton puts out statements about all the “vitriol” aimed at him, this kind of stuff he used to say on the air in New Jersey. 

DEPRIVING GUADAGNO OF A CAMPAIGN CHIT — "What Christie administration just decided on whether to raise your gas tax," by NJ Advance Media's Samantha Marcus: “Gov. Chris Christie's administration will not raise the tax rate on gasoline in New Jersey at the start of October, an indication the nearly year-old 23-cent gas tax hike is meeting expectations. Lawmakers hiked the tax on gasoline last year for the first time in 28 years to raise new money for state's fraying infrastructure network. That law, which raised gas prices in the Garden State by 23 cents per gallon overnight in November, also requires state officials revisit the tax rate each Oct. 1 to ensure it's drumming up enough revenue for transportation projects. The state's online rate schedule for the Petroleum Products Gross Receipts Tax indicates the tax rate will not change.” Read the report

—“Brown's son follows Assemblyman's footsteps in military” Read the report

2017

40 MASTROS* — “Murphy estimates plan to make community college free could cost up to $200M,” by POLITICO’s Linh Tat and Katherine Landergan: “Democratic gubernatorial nominee Phil Murphy said Monday he wants to work toward making community college free to everyone in New Jersey, an initiative that could cost as much as $200 million per year. The proposal, which would apply to recent high school graduates as well as older students seeking new skills or a career change, would be phased in during his first term, if he's elected, Murphy said.” Read the report

*It’s been brought to my attention that my current valuation of the mastro ($8 million) is too low. As I understand it, the Christie administration has paid Gibson Dunn and the Digital Forensics firm it worked with $11.3 million. But I’m not sure what the latest total paid to Gibson Dunn alone is. If you know, please let me know. 

TWEET RESPONSE — “No such thing as a free lunch. Taxpayers will have to work longer and harder to pay for all of your proposals and tax increases, Phil.” —@KimGuadagnoNJ on Murphy’s free tuition plan

3 THINGS, BUT I FORGOT 2 OF THEM — “These 3 things will change no matter who succeeds Christie (yes, marijuana's on the list),” by NJ Advance Media’s Matt Arco: “1. More marijuana Yes, the Garden State is getting more pot. New Jersey joined the growing list of states with medical marijuana programs just as Christie prepared to take office. Christie, a former federal prosecutor, has taken a hardline approach against marijuana and was accused by medicinal marijuana advocates of dragging his feet in implementing the program, signed by Democrat Jon Corzine just as he was leaving office. The state has strict limits on who can get it for medicinal use and Christie has trashed states like Colorado that legalized recreational pot. On the presidential campaign trail, he said he would crack down on recreational use across the nation.” Read the report

—“Jersey City mayoral challenger to hold 4 town halls on policy” Read the report

THE TRUMP ERA

UNTIL IT DOESN’T — “White House backs pharma partnership after delaying other opioid panel proposals,” by POLITICO’s Katie Jennings: “The White House has delayed implementing two of the top recommendations of the presidential opioid commission chaired by New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, but the Trump administration sent several officials to Trenton on Monday to advance a third program — a public-private partnership with the pharmaceutical industry. Standing next to Christie, counselor to the president Kellyanne Conway said President Donald Trump has made the opioid epidemic a priority, which is why he established the Commission on Combating Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis in the first place.” Read the report

JARED WENT TO THEM — “Kushner Cos. to buy large N.J. apartment complex for $190M,” by The AP: “The real estate company owned by the family of Jared Kushner is expanding its garden apartments holdings with the purchase of a 1,032-unit complex in southern Middlesex County. The Kushner Cos. says it's paying $190 million for Quail Ridge in Plainsboro. The purchase follows a deal for a 5,517-unit complex in Maryland earlier this year.” Read the report

LOCAL

TORRES! TORRES! TORRES! — “Paterson awaits scheduled Friday date with destiny for Torres,” from InsiderNJ: “A scheduled hearing on Friday for Paterson Mayor Jose “Joey’ Torres coupled with a despondent looking legal defense fund have created the impression among that whispering multitude hovering near the mayor’s office that he will accept a plea deal with the AG’s Office and create a vacancy. The word on the street is six months in jail and then a braceleted probationary period.” Read the report

NOW WATCH THIS DRIVE — “Trenton Police Director Ernest Parrey golfs day after weekend of 3 murders,” by The Trentonian’s David Foster: “Following bloodshed this past weekend that left three men dead in Trenton, the city’s top cop was working on his short game. Trenton Police Director Ernest Parrey Jr., who is already under fire from critics who want to see him gone, was captured Monday afternoon at the posh Jasna Polana private golf club in Princeton participating in a fundraiser. The event was a pre-planned event benefitting the Police Unity Tour and Princeton PBA Local 130. When asked by two Trentonian reporters if he thought it was best to be out golfing after the violent weekend, Parrey responded, ‘I think I’ve earned my time and so that’s why I’m here.’” Read the report

—“Trenton NAACP mulls no-confidence vote in mayor” Read the report

STILL A COP — “Newark cop arrested for 3rd time in 2 years,” by NJ Advance Media’s Jessica Mazzola: “Peter Chirico, a 21-year veteran of the Newark police department, was arrested in the early morning hours of Sept. 11 on aggravated assault charges stemming from a domestic incident, a spokeswoman for the Essex County Prosecutor's Office confirmed … City police confirmed Chirico has been arrested twice before, in September of 2015 and June of 2016. The details and statuses of those arrests were not immediately clear. According to a July administrative law decision, Chirico was also suspended from the department after a woman filed a restraining order against him in 2015. As a result, Chirico was barred from carrying his service weapon, the decision reads. The incident prompted the department to suspend him, without pay, for nine days, it says.” Read the report

BURRO IN A BOROUGH — “Donkey statue mysteriously appears in Dumont,” by The Record’s Philip DeVencentis: “A life-sized donkey statue became a beloved pet on Sunday when it inexplicably hoofed its way downtown and, just as mysteriously, hee-hawed its way out of sight by lunchtime the next day. Onlookers said the borough's burro, which someone placed on the lawn in front of the W. Madison Avenue. CVS pharmacy, appeared to have lost its rider: It was rigged with a saddle and stirrups, while its reins were tied to the post of a street sign. By Monday morning, onlookers said, the statue had somehow garnered a Stetson hat atop its head and a bright pink lei around its neck. Students let out at the high school on Monday afternoon said the statue caused quite a stir in between classes.” Read the report

—“Restaurateur lands top spot on Hoboken mayoral ballot” Read the report

—“Petition drive aims to rescind Bayonne's new residency ordinance” Read the report

—“Ballot positions drawn for Jersey City mayor, council races” Read the report

—“Coughlin dons fundraising warpaint in battleground districts, raises $400K” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE 

PORT AUTHORITY RAPID RESPONSE IN ACTION — “After 86 years and countless deaths, suicide fence coming to GWB,” by NJ Advance Media’s Larry Higgs: “A temporary ‘pedestrian safety fence’ intended to prevent suicides will be installed starting on Sept. 25 on the south side of the George Washington Bridge, announced Monday after a tour of the span by high ranking Port Authority officials. Installation of the fence on the span's upper-level south sidewalk means it will be temporarily closed to pedestrians and bicyclists for three months, officials said. So far this year, agency ‘initiatives’ have been credited with ‘intervening in 45 cases where emotionally disturbed people were considering doing themselves harm on the bridge,’ officials said.” Read the report

MANY SIDES — “Diner defaced with swastikas, other anti-Semitic graffiti,” by NJ Advance Media’s Rob Jennings: “WANTAGE -- A popular diner was defaced over the weekend with anti-Semitic graffiti and authorities are seeking answers. Workers at the Airport Diner reported the vandalism after arriving Sunday morning. Photos of the damage show two exterior walls marked with swastikas, ‘Heil Hitler,’ ‘Kill Jews,’ and ‘WPWW,’ which has come to stand for ‘White Power World Wide.’” Read the report

—“The most expensive places to die in New Jersey” Read the report

—“Project to ‘transform’ Paterson’s Great Falls breaks ground” Read the report

WOMEN RULE NEWSLETTER – POLITICO’s Women Rule series, produced in partnership with founding partners Google and the Tory Burch Foundation, is a journalism series dedicated to exploring women's leadership in politics, policy and their communities. Stay up to speed on what’s happening in the Women Rule community with our monthly newsletter. This month’s edition features a podcast on America’s opioid epidemic with two leading women from the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy, a Q&amp;A with Kelly Ward, executive director of the National Democratic Redistricting Committee, plus job updates from community members making strides in their careers. A special thank you to the 2017 Women Rule presenting sponsor Chevron. Subscribe: here. 

-- Want to make an impact? POLITICO New Jersey has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Garden State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: jshapiro@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew


                                            By Edward-Isaac Dovere

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC