


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Devils' veteran battled back from cancer to become a key part of a team in the playoff hunt.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Lee Stempnial of Carolina and Brian Boyle of the Devils on the face off. 
(Photo: Chris Pedota/NorthJersey.com)

NEWARK – Brian Boyle came to the Devils hoping to make an impact on a team that looked to be on the verge of contention. His prediction was accurate, as the Devils are on the verge of their first playoff berth since 2012 and his 23 points have been impactful.


But 23 is just a number and it doesn’t even begin to measure the reach the alternate captain has had on the team.


The New Jersey chapter of the Professional Hockey Writers Association chose Boyle as this year’s nominee for the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy. It’s a sportsmanship award of sorts, but it means so much more. Masterton nominees embody the “qualities of perseverance, sportsmanship and dedication to ice hockey,” according to the PHWA.


The veteran center was signed for all the aforementioned qualities, but when he was diagnosed with Chronic myelogenous leukemia, a treatable form of bone marrow cancer, on Sept. 19, 2017, Boyle and his family were tested in ways they never imagined.



    Taylor Hall talks about the Devils' 4-3 win over the Carolina Hurricanes on Tuesday, March 27, 2018.
    Abbey Mastracco/NorthJersey.com

READ MORE: Marcus Johansson rips Brad Marchand hit


READ MORE: Devils hold off Lightning in possible playoff preview


Yet through it all, his leadership never wavered. Boyle remained a strong locker room presence with the focus firmly on the ice, even when it could have been elsewhere.


“One of the things that I think has helped him have some credibility in the locker room is what he’s done on the ice his whole career and what he continues to do on the ice and how he goes about his business every day,” Devils coach John Hynes said. “I think when you look at his personality, he’s very well-spoken. He’s thoughtful before he speaks and he treats people really well. And when you do that, you can hold guys accountable, give them advice. He’s been a big part of what we’ve tried to do here.”


Boyle wants to thank the organization for their support in the best way he knows how: By leading them to the playoffs.


“I’ve got a lot of motivation,” Boyle said. “I certainly want to do my part and that’s elevate my game. That’s kind of everybody’s responsibility. I want to do well in the big moments. But from what I’ve seen and the support system I’ve had, I’m certainly motivated to do my best for a lot of reasons.”


New Jersey Devils' Miles Wood grimaces after a collision with an Anaheim Ducks player during the second period of an NHL hockey game Sunday, March 18, 2018, in Anaheim, Calif. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong) (Photo: Jae C. Hong, AP)

They’ll get a speed boost Tuesday, against the Carolina Hurricanes when forward Miles Wood returns to action. After missing three games with a hyperextended elbow, Wood rejoined the Devils during the morning skate, resuming his place on the left side of the second line with Pavel Zacha and Kyle Palmieri and injecting more quickness into the lineup.


“Speed, compete and grit,” coach John Hynes said. “He brings a lot of energy to our team and this year I think he’s been a real strong offensive threat for us 5-on-5 and on the power play. But the team we’ll see tonight doesn’t take a lot of penalties so he’s hopefully going to be a big factor for us.”


Patrick Maroon joined the morning skate late but Hynes confirmed that he’ll sit out on Tuesday with a lower-body injury. Instead, Stefan Noesen will draw in, allowing the Devils to keep him on the third line with Blake Coleman and Travis Zajac and keep a line that saw success in its last game against the Tampa Bay Lightning intact.


“It was more injury than it was lineup,” Hynes said. “If Patty was ready to go, we would have had to make a really tough decision on who was going to come out, because Noesen, Coleman and Zajac played extremely well the other night. Probably one of our better lines. But that’s what you want. That’s a good problem to have.”


Keith Kinkaid is expected to make his seventh start in eight games.


 Download our app and get alerts for breaking news, scores, analysis and more. iPhone app | Android app | Find us on Twitter