


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police, tipped by public, say diary entries led to arrests.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

The Cherokee county Sheriff's Dept. released mug shots Oct. 26, 2017, of Victoria McCurley, 17, left, and Alfred Dupree, 17, following their arrests on charges of plotting at attack on Etowah high school in Woodstock, Ga.
(Photo: Cherokee County Sheriff's Dept.)

 


Two Georgia teenagers were charged Thursday with attempted murder and arson for allegedly plotting a Columbine-style attack on their high school with an incendiary device.


Alfred Dupree, of Acworth, Ga., and Victoria McCurley, of Woodstock, Ga., both 17, were denied bail Thursday at a hearing.


Sgt. Marianne Kelley, of the Cherokee county sheriff's department, said the teens allegedly targeted the Etowah High School in Woodstock, and four unidentified staff members. Cherokee county is located about 20 miles north of Atlanta.


In a letter to parents, Etowah high school principal Robert Horn said a member of the community notified police of a "potential threat" on Monday. He added, in bold letters, that, "At this time there are no other suspects and no active threat to Etowah High School."


Kelley said the suspects were arrested separately on Wednesday. She said authorities acting on the tip, initially interviewed Dupree and found evidence for the alleged plot in his diary. The journal, in turn, led police to question McCurley at her home, where deputies allegedly found an incendiary device.


"The incendiary devices were described as being of a flammable substance," Kelley told reporters.


The teens, described as friends, were medically evaluated before being taken to the Cherokee County Adult Detention Center.


The teens were charged as adults with three counts of criminal attempt to commit murder, four counts of terroristic threats and acts, criminal attempt to commit arson and possession and an explosive with intent to kill, injure or destroy any public building.


Kelley said that while there was no specific indication as to when they allegedly intended to carry out the attack, investigators determined that there was a definite threat against the school and specific staff members and students.


After the bond hearing,Cherokee County sheriff Frank Reynolds said the plot to attack the school was similar to the deadly 1999 Columbine High School massacre in Colorado in which 15 people were killed and 24 were injured, WXIA-TV reports.


The sheriff also called the person who alerted authorities to the plot, a "hero."


Contributing: WXIA-TV
