Scattered showers and thunderstorms. High 92F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%..

Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:35 pm

A Paris man was sentenced to serve 10 years in jail on a drug possession charge when he pleaded guilty during Monday’s arraignment day in Henry County Circuit Court.

Steven Russell, 41, 22 W. Wood St. in Paris, pleaded guilty to a charge of the possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver and was sentenced to serve 10 years in the Department of Correction. He was additionally fined $2,000.

His sentence will be served with one year in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

Russell had additionally been charged with resisting arrest, evading arrest, simple possession, possession of drug paraphernalia, introduction of drugs into a penal institution where prisoners are quartered and bribery of a public servant, but these charges were dismissed according to the terms of his plea agreement.

In a separate plea agreement, Duane Jerome Ewell, 38, of 1175 Hwy. 641S, Apt. A8 in Paris, was given deferred probation when he pleaded guilty to a charge of possession of a controlled substance with the intent to deliver.

This means that Judge Donald Parish did not accept the guilty plea from Ewell but instead placed him on deferred probation. This means that if Ewell abides by the terms of his probation for one year the charge against him will be expunged.

Ewell was additionally fined $2,000.

Other defendants pleading guilty to charges against them (listed with age, last known address, charges and sentences) include:

DRUGS

• William Clayton, 65, 1312 N. Market St. in Paris — Possession of meth with intent to deliver.

Clayton was sentenced to serve eight years in the DOC and was fined $2,000. The sentence will be served on supervised probation in its entirety.

• Lisa Marie Ventrice, 33, 1405 Elkhorn Nobles Road in Paris — possession of meth with intent to deliver.

Ventrice was sentenced to eight years in the DOC and was fined $2,000.

Her sentence will be served split with one year in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

• Joshua Lee Robins, 28, 2235 Winsett Road in Springville — possession of a controlled substance.

Robbins was sentenced to three years in the DOC and was fined $2,000.

His sentence will be served split with 47 days (time served) in continuous confinement with the balance on supervised probation.

BURGLARY/THEFT

• Stacey Leanne Bratschi, 36, Big Sandy — two counts of aggravated burglary.

Bratschi was sentenced to serve five years in the DOC on each of these charges. The sentences will be served concurrently.

Bratschi was ordered to pay a total of $510 in restitution.

• Savannah Jo Fritts, 30, Big Sandy — aggravated burglary.

Fritts was sentenced to serve four years in the DOC.

Her sentence will be served split with one year in continuous confinement and the balance on state probation. She was given credit for the 261 days she has already spent in jail.

• Daniel Russell, 26, Big Sandy — aggravated burglary.

Russell was sentenced to serve four years in the DOC.

His sentence will be served split with one year in continuous confinement and the balance on state probation. He has 261 days of jail credit.

OTHER CHARGES

• Chad Christopher Evans, 38, 716 Memorial Drive in Paris — evading arrest.

Evans was sentenced to serve three years in the DOC.

His sentence will be served split with 44 days (time served) in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

• Jenson Matthew McGarity, 21, 302 Peach Tree St. in Paris — failure to appear.

McGarity was sentenced to serve two years in the DOC. He was given jail credit for 32 days.

• Anthony Lamont Williams, 58, 158 Sparks St. in Paris — violation of the sexual offender registry.

Williams was sentenced to serve one year in the DOC and was fined $350.

His sentence will be served split with 90 days in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

Williams has 52 days of jail credit.

Why give someone 10 years if they only have to serve one tenth of it. Oh yeah, we make money when they are on probation. We will never solve our appalling drug problem unless we get some no nonsense judges and a DA who care more about the court collecting probation fees.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription