June 21, 20182:52 PM EDT


Last UpdatedJune 22, 20186:10 PM EDT

EDITOR’S NOTE: This story was updated on June 22 to reflect the fact that Charlie Tan had pleaded guilty. 


The only thing standing between Charlie Tan and a shotgun was his passport. It was February 2015 and the 19-year-old was in an upstate New York Walmart desperate to get his hands on a Remington. He tried to buy one himself. He had the money, and a clean record — he was an Ivy Leaguer. But he couldn’t do it. Not right away. He was Canadian, the salesman told him. So he’d have to wait.


What Tan did next seemed for years like a footnote. It was the kind of thing you might cut out of a story this complicated and strange. But now it’s the reason Tan sits in a New York prison. He could be there for decades to come.


Police believe Tan shot and killed his father in their family home in Pittsford, N.Y. He then allegedly fled, with his mother and older brother, to Canada, before returning days later to seemingly admit to the crime.


But Tan was not accused of murder. Not this time. Instead, he pleaded guilty Friday to the relatively obscure crimes of making false statements during the purchase of a firearm (two counts) and receiving a firearm and ammunition with intent to commit an offence. As part of his plea he acknowledged that he could face 25 years behind bars.


Tan’s story captivated Pittsford, an upscale suburb of Rochester, when it first broke in 2015. A Dateline special on his case depicted Tan, though technically a Canadian, as a model of the American dream. He was a high school class president and a football player. He served on the board of the local YMCA. He was cool, diligent and clearly headed places — including the Ivy League.








In 2013, Tan was admitted to Cornell, a few hours drive from his home town. He joined a fraternity there and the sprint football team. (A variant of the classic American game, played by lighter, faster athletes.)


Tan’s family had moved to the United States from Canada several years earlier and his father, Liang “Jim” Tan, set up a successful imaging sensor company, called Dynamex, near Rochester. Court records show it was worth more than US$2 million.


From the outside, the family appeared to be thriving. But court documents suggest that wasn’t the case.


On Jan. 28, 2015, Tan’s mother phoned the police and told them her husband had beaten and choked her. Officers went to the family home. They found some evidence of abuse, but they determined that no felony had been committed. The officers gave Qing “Jean” Tan the option of having her husband charged with a misdemeanour, but she declined, according to a summary of Tan’s case prepared by federal prosecutors. Jim Tan agreed to leave for the night and the police went home.


It was far from the first time police had heard from the Tans. Between 2003 and 2015, someone phoned 911 from the Tan household 18 times, the Democrat and Chronicle reported. But no details on those calls were ever released. At some point, Jean Tan sought an order of protection against her husband, according to one of Charlie Tan’s attorneys. She also spoke to a divorce lawyer.


But something about that night in 2015 was different. After the police left the Tan home, Jean Tan phoned her son Charlie. They spoke by phone two more times over the next several days, including once, late at night, on Feb. 4, according to prosecutors.


The next morning, on Feb. 5, Charlie emptied his two bank accounts. He told his football coach he wouldn’t be at practice the next day and then he went to buy a gun.


At Charlie Tan’s first trial, the gun, a Remington 870 pump-action shotgun, served as a constant visual prop. But few dwelled on the actual purchase of the weapon. Amid all the other details, it hardly stood out. But now, for Tan, that purchase is everything.


According to federal prosecutors, Tan entered a Walmart in Cortland, N.Y., half an hour from the Cornell campus, at just after noon on Feb. 5. He filled out the paperwork for an ATF background check and certified that he was the actual buyer of the weapon. He also indicated on the form that he was Canadian and not a U.S. citizen.


That led to a snag. Because of his citizenship, Walmart was obliged to run a second set of background checks. Rather than wait, Tan enlisted a friend to buy the gun for him.


Whitney Knickerbocker, a Cornell freshman, was pledging at Tan’s Chi Phi fraternity. He was also from Tan’s hometown. According to prosecutors, Tan was Knickerbocker’s “big brother” in the frat. Tan was supposed to look out for him and keep him safe.


Tan gave Knickerbocker $800, told him he needed the weapon for a hunting trip, then sent him into the Walmart. Knickerbocker bought the Remington and two boxes of ammunition, signed a form confirming he was the final buyer of the weapon, then handed them over to Tan.


(Knickerbocker has not been charged with any crime. He was widely expected to have been the lead witness at Tan’s trial.)


Tan then drove Knickerbocker back to Cornell, according to prosecutors, and paid him with a case of beer.


What happened over the next several days remains in dispute. The jury in a high-profile 2015 trial failed to settle the matter one way or another. And while Tan admitted Friday to the weapons offences, he did not confess to killing his father, according to local reporters who were in the courtroom.


In any case, the prosecution’s version of what happened is this:


On the night of Feb. 5, Tan drove to Pittsford. At some point on or around that same evening, someone shot Tan’s father with a shotgun three times in the chest, head and arm while he sat behind the desk at his home office.


Just before 2 a.m. the next morning, Charlie Tan and his mother drove across the border at Niagara Falls into Canada. Jeffery Tan, Charlie’s older brother, entered Canada the next day, on Feb. 7. (He flew into Toronto.)


On Feb. 9, Jeffery, Charlie and Jean drove back into the United States, across the Rainbow Bridge in Niagara Falls.


At 5:13 p.m. that same day, Charlie wrote an email to his fraternity.


“My brothers,” it read. “In the coming days, you’ll start to hear things in the news and possibly get a couple of visits from the authorities. Don’t listen to anything you hear. A few already know my true story. And in due time you will also.”


“As always,” he signed off, “fuck the haters.”


Less than an hour after Tan sent that email, at 6:09 p.m., Jean Tan phoned the police. In the 911 call, archived online by the Democrat and Chronicle, she sounds frantic. She’s sobbing and having trouble being understood.


“My name is Jean Tan,” she finally says. “I heard an argument. My son was talking to my husband.” She tells the dispatcher she heard a shot. When asked if anyone needs an ambulance she replies, “He’s already dead.”


“Who’s already dead?” the dispatcher says.


“My husband.”


In fact, Jim Tan had been dead for quite some time, a medical examiner testified at Charlie Tan’s trial.


When police arrived at the home, they found Jean and Charlie Tan standing outside. According to the Democrat and Chronicle, two deputies asked Charlie “Where is your father?” and “Where is the gun?” He allegedly replied “He’s upstairs. He’s dead. I had to do it. He was going to kill my mom.”


It seemed at that point like a slam dunk case. Charlie Tan pointed police to the murder weapon, the same Remington that Knickerbocker had earlier purchased on Feb. 5. According to prosecutors, Tan’s fingerprints were found on the spent shell casings located near the elder Tan’s body. The only question appeared to be whether the killing was justified somehow.


But it didn’t turn out to be that simple.


Prosecutors arraigned Tan on second degree murder. He went before a jury in September 2015. His trial lasted just over a week and centred on the gun, the fingerprints and the supposed confession.


At the last minute, though, Tan’s lawyers sprung a surprise. In his closing argument, James Nobles suggested Jean Tan, not Charlie, was the one to pull the trigger.


The jury deliberated for over 50 hours. When they couldn’t reach a verdict, Judge James Piampiano declared a mistrial and everyone prepared to do it all over again.


But there was one final twist. On Nov. 8, Piampiano told a stunned gallery that the prosecution had failed to adequately make its case in the first trial. He dismissed the charges and set Tan free.


In March 2017, an appeals court ruled that while Piampiano had erred in his decision, they could not overturn his verdict.


“I’d never seen anything like it,” Monroe County District Attorney Sandra Doorley later said about the original ruling. “I think there were some curse words that came out of my mouth.”


For a time, that seemed like the end of it. State prosecutors weren’t happy. But there was nothing they could do. Tan moved back to Canada, his lawyer believes he was living in Toronto, and the case slipped from the public eye.


But last September, Tan returned to the U.S. He was hoping to attend a friend’s wedding, Brian DeCarolis, one of his lawyers, said. Instead, he was arrested at the border and arraigned on federal gun offences. He’s been in jail ever since.


DeCarolis said he had no warning new charges were in the works. “None,” he said. His arrest “came out of nowhere.”


The government was aiming to prove two things. One, that Tan had Knickerbocker buy a gun for him while pretending it was for himself. And two, that he obtained the weapon with the explicit knowledge that it would be used for a crime.


His trial was supposed to begin on Monday. Instead, he pleaded guilty on Friday. The court ordered a pre-sentence report and remanded Tan into custody. He’s scheduled to return for sentencing on Oct. 18 in Syracuse.


Whatever sentence he receives, Tan will almost certainly be deported to Canada after his prison term is up.


Regardless, DeCarolis said Tan retains enormous support in his community.


Given the stakes, it’s no surprise that Tan’s case generated a mountain of paperwork and motions. Tucked into one government filing, among the dozens, was a curious irony. Later on the very same day that Tan had Knickerbocker buy him the shotgun, his own background check cleared. Canadian or no, if he’d waited, he could have bought the gun himself. If he’d done that, he’d still be free.


• Email: rwarnica@nationalpost.com | Twitter: richardwarnica

We want to improve your reading experience


23°C

Partly cloudy

Feels like 29°C