Posted: Apr 19, 2018 09:48 AM EDT

Updated: Apr 19, 2018 09:48 AM EDT

 Booking photo of Delano Grangruth. Police charged Grangruth with murder and arson after his wife, Kathleen White-Grangruth, was found dead in a Norfolk home, Tuesday, April 17, 2018. (Credit: Norfolk City Jail)  [ +  - ]

NORFOLK, Va. (WAVY) -- "I'm not a monster."


A husband faced with a murder charge in his wife's death spoke to 10 On Your Side Wednesday from Norfolk City Jail. "It's a terrible and unfortunate incident that happened to her," 58-year-old Delano Grangruth said Wednesday in an interview from Norfolk City Jail.


His wife, 61-year-old Kathleen Grangruth, was found dead Tuesday morning -- sitting in a living room chair at their Norfolk home -- after firefighters received a call about a fire. 


Delano Grangruth is also accused of setting the house on fire. Officials said the flames were contained to the area around the chair.


"I can't discuss that right now, but I can say one thing and that she is sorely missed," Grangruth added.


Delano says Kathleen was suffering from dementia and was wheelchair bound. He says he was her primary caregiver.


"I couldn't even leave the house at the end, because I just couldn't trust anyone anymore with her alone," Grangruth said.


Grangruth tells 10 On Your Side the couple had been married for more than 20 years.


"She was a United States veteran like me and a great lady," he added. "I miss her. I love her. Her family misses her. It's an unfortunate incident."


Grangruth wouldn't say if he'd be found innocent in court, but he does look forward to the truth coming out. 10 On Your Side asked if he did it.


"I can't say yes or no on that," he answered. "My day will come in court."


10 On Your Side dug into court records, which show Grangruth had been charged with assaulting Kathleen three times in the past 12 years.  


In 2006 and 2008 he was found guilty in Virginia Beach and served 45 days in jail.


In 2015, he was again charged, this time in Norfolk.  


The officer wrote Kathleen was pushed multiple times and that Delano threatened to kill her and burn the house down if she called police.  


In this case, the charge was dismissed because the victim didn't show up in court.


Grangruth says the relationship wasn't perfect and feels awful for her family.


"My heart goes out to them," Grangruth said. "I respect her family and I'm sure they are going through a lot of pain right now, as am I. I'm going through a tremendous amount of pain right now."


Grangruth is being held without bond. He has a preliminary hearing scheduled for July 18.

Copyright 2018 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.

Person shot on Summit Avenue in Norfolk

Norfolk police chief celebrates 18%...



© 1998 - 2018 WAVY.com | Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. | All Rights Reserved.