Partly cloudy. High 79F. Winds NE at 10 to 15 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 58F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:56 pm

Kendra Jenkins in a family photo with her nephew, Ryan Ringuette, in 2015. Ringuette was cleared of all charges in a bomb threat case at Gillette Stadium after prosecutors raised doubts about his guilt.

Kendra Jenkins in a family photo with her nephew, Ryan Ringuette, in 2015. Ringuette was cleared of all charges in a bomb threat case at Gillette Stadium after prosecutors raised doubts about his guilt.

FOXBORO — The case against a former part-time employee of Gillette Stadium who was accused of emailing a threat to blow up the facility is apparently a dud.

Prosecutors have dropped the case against Ryan P. Ringuette, 26, of Attleboro amid doubts about his guilt, a spokesman for the Norfolk County District Attorney’s office said Monday.

The case had been scheduled for jury trial in Wrentham District Court later this month, but both sides had it advanced on the court docket last Friday to dispose of it, according to court records.

“It is the charge and obligation of a prosecutor to seek truth in a criminal case, not simply to secure a conviction,” David Traub, a spokesman for Norfolk County District Attorney Michael Morrissey, said in a statement.

Ringuette was arrested last August amid a domestic dispute with his then girlfriend, Devon LaMarre, 23, of Attleboro, who was later charged with lying to police when she was questioned about her access to his email account, according to court records.

LaMarre’s case is still pending. She is due back in court Aug. 8 and has not been charged with the email threat.

As a result of the domestic dispute, LaMarre was charged with breaking Ringuette’s cellphone during an argument the day before Ringuette’s Aug. 7 arrest. But that case was dismissed in Attleboro District Court last month, according to court records.

Ringuette worked for a company at the stadium that performed security and guest services. He was arrested after his boss received an email allegedly from his account that read “(expletive) bitch. I’ll blow that bitch up,” according to court records.

Authorities said Ringuette had no access to bomb-making materials.

Traub said the district attorney’s office continued to work with law enforcement following Ringuette’s arrest. The investigation led to LaMarre’s arrest and “began to cast doubt on Mr. Ringuette’s factual guilt,” Traub said.

The investigation, he said, included examining “another cellular phone” with access to Ringuette’s email account, examining statements to Foxboro police by LaMarre, some text messages addressed to him, and working with his employer and defense lawyer to obtain additional information.

Traub said he could not be more specific, citing the pending case against LaMarre.

“Prosecutors cannot ethically proceed with any case where they believe the defendant to likely be not guilty of the crime alleged. At this stage in the investigation, that is the case with Mr. Ringuette,” Traub said.

Prosecutors withdrew charges against Ringuette after consulting with Foxboro police, Traub said.

“The prosecutor’s job is to find the truth and act on it promptly and ethically, and my staff knows I expect that in every case,” Morrissey said in a statement. “While probable cause for his arrest existed immediately following the incident, it is now in the interest of justice that the charges against Mr. Ringuette are withdrawn.”

After spending several days in jail before posting $5,000 cash, Ringuette was freed but had to wear a GPS bracelet with restrictions on his movements while the case was pending.

Ringuette’s lawyer did not immediately return a call from The Sun Chronicle Monday seeking comment.

Ringuette’s aunt, Kendra Jenkins, told The Sun Chronicle soon after her nephew’s arraignment last year that the arrest was a setback.

She said he had been working for a beverage distributor in Walpole as well as the stadium but was terminated from the stadium job after a background check revealed his 2012 conviction for making threats to Attleboro High School via Facebook.

Jenkins said her nephew wanted to get his life back on track and put the Attleboro incident behind him. He wanted to pursue going back to school but was struggling to pay rent and make ends meet.

David Linton may be reached at 508-236-0338.

FOXBORO — In a twist in the probe of an alleged email bomb threat to Gillette Stadium, the girlfriend of the man charged in the incident has b…


                                    
                                        Whenever DAVE LINTON posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.
