BROCKTON (CBS) – An attorney has been charged with smuggling drugs into a prison in Plymouth.

State Police arrested Elena Gordon, 43, of Bridgewater, Wednesday night, after a “several months-long investigation,” according to the Plymouth County District Attorney’s Office.

Gordon allegedly smuggled $12,000 worth of the opioid Suboxone into the Plymouth County House of Correction, a maximum-security prison.

(Photo by Spencer Platt/Getty Images)

“The investigation alleges that on May 4, 2018, Gordon, who is an attorney, utilized her attorney privileges to gain entrance to the jail, where she brought Suboxone strips in manila envelopes and allegedly passed them to an inmate,” prosecutors said in a statement.

Gordon pleaded not guilty to various drug charges and was ordered held on $1,000 bail at her arraignment in Plymouth District Court Thursday. Prosecutors said she had an accomplice who’s in the prison and a second accomplice who was arrested Thursday morning. Their investigation stemmed from the arrest of two court officers from Brockton last winter.

Elena Gordon in Plymouth District Court, May 10, 2018. (WBZ-TV)

In an unrelated case, a corrections officer at MCI-Norfolk was arrested on similar charges Wednesday.

Federal prosecutors say 51-year-old William Holts of Pawtucket, Rhode Island, allegedly told an inmate he’d smuggle in 100 Suboxone strips in exchange for $2,000.

Suboxone is a pain killer intended to treat heroin addiction, but some abuse it to get high.

TIME BBO CLEANED HOUSE AND HIRED EXPERIENCED LAWYERS…..IMO THE BBO UNLIKE WITH KLUBOCK FILLED WITH THOSE IN THE WRONG POSITIONS!

Please log in using one of these methods to post your comment:


			
			You are commenting using your Google+ account.			
				( Log Out / 
				Change )
			
			
		


			
			You are commenting using your Twitter account.			
				( Log Out / 
				Change )
			
			
		


			
			You are commenting using your Facebook account.			
				( Log Out / 
				Change )
			
			
		

Connecting to %s

 Notify me of new comments via email.


 Notify me of new posts via email.


				
				

			



