Skip to comments.

Posted on 10/26/2017 5:23:14 AM PDT by Nextrush

The evidence hearing continued for a third day (Wednesday October 25th) in Las Vegas. 


Ammon Bundy was kept out of the courtroom. He was not allowed in but his lawyers met with him in a room outside the courtroom. 


Cliven and Ryan Bundy were in the courtroom Wednesday but the US Marshals were agitated harassing them at one point taking markers being used by Ryan Bundy away from him. 


They also prevented Cliven and Ryan Bundy from looking at their family members in the courtroom. 


Carol Bundy (wife of Cliven) and Angie Bundy (wife of Ryan) were present in the courtroom Wednesday. 


Meanwhile, US District Judge Gloria Navarro has issued a written order prohibiting routine strip searches (body cavity searches) of Ammon Bundy, Ryan Bundy and Ryan Payne. 


The men are also ordered by her to be removed from the privately owned Nevada Southern Detention Center in Pahrump to the Henderson Detention Center close to the federal courthouse in Las Vegas shortly before the planned trial date next Monday October 30th. 


The word from the Bundy relatives in a video posted on the "JGrady" account on You Tube is for everyone to be ready for the trial to start next Monday October 30th. They urge everyone to show up in Las Vegas in support of the four men scheduled to go on trial (Cliven Bundy, Ammon Bundy, Ryan Bundy and Ryan Payne).

(Excerpt) Read more at nextrushfree.blogspot.com ...


 





This court appears to be way out of gear.


 What stopped you from posting the whole thing?


Today I hit the wrong button so to speak.

It is the whole thing, the whole thing.

More than that. The original post does not exist at the link.

http://nextrushfree.blogspot.com/2017/10/bunkerville-standoff-marshals-in.html?m=1


Yeah, really. I thought that you were innocent until proven guilty in this country. I think they’d need a jury selected out of New York City to get a conviction on these charges. I doubt it would fly in Wisconsin.

To goad you into another whining post.


After the 100th iteration, it becomes whining.


 Commitment. 


 Dedication. Faith and Truth.


 Call it what you will, I'm on a mission from God.


IBNG







    Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.
