Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

After years of unsuccessfully trying to overhaul Michigan's no-fault auto insurance system, lawmakers want to get rid of mandatory coverage.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Detroit drivers face the highest average insurance rates for cars and other vehicles in the country,
    Wochit

A white SUV was damaged after being involved in a crash in Detroit in May 2017. 
(Photo: Bill Eisner, Special to the Free Press)

LANSING — Michigan lawmakers have been trying unsuccessfully for years to overhaul or get rid of the state's costly no-fault auto insurance system.


Now, a bipartisan group of lawmakers thinks it has the answer: Get rid of the requirement for mandatory auto insurance coverage altogether.


The "Macomb Solution" proposal, named because the bills are sponsored primarily by representatives from Macomb County, would allow drivers to get insurance, or not. Drivers could continue to buy unlimited or limited coverage or none at all.


Only two states in the nation — Virginia and New Hampshire — have no or limited auto insurance requirements for their drivers, according to the Insurance Information Institute.


More: Michigan's no-fault auto insurance reform defeated in House of Representatives


More: Michigan potholes FAQ: Here's everything you need to know


“This package of bills is no different than going through a cafeteria line. You are only paying for the items you select. Car insurance should work the same way," said Rep. Peter Lucido, R-Shelby Township. "Those who do not have the money or wish to assume risk of loss from injury, property damage and lawsuits can choose to not buy auto insurance at all."


Since multiple proposals have failed, most recently in November when a less drastic plan pushed by the Republican leadership and Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan fell far short of the necessary votes to pass, it is unlikely that the "Macomb Proposal" will fly in this legislative session.


Other bills introduced last week:


HB 5592-5593: Allow prescribers to prescribe — and pharmacists to dispense — to school boards epinephrine to treat allergic reactions. Sponsors: Reps. Martin Howrylak, R-Troy, Jim Tedder, R-Clarkston.


HB 5594-5595: Require annual reports on the number of inspectors who are measuring asbestos emissions and disclosure of environmental violations. Sponsors: Reps. Scott VanSingel, R-Grant, David Maturen, R-Vicksburg.


HB 5596-5597: Require local government contracts with asbestos and demolition contractors to allow for withholding of payments for environmental violations and modify civil penalties relating to repeated violations. Sponsors: Reps. Gary Howell, R-North Branch, William Sowerby, D-Clinton Township.


HB 5598-5601 and 5605: Prohibit approval of teacher preparation institutions that don’t require continuing education for teachers, that don't provide a warranty program for graduates, that don't provide master teacher stipends,  practicum experience or student teaching. Sponsor: Reps. Daniela Garcia, R-Holland, Julie Alexander, R-Hanover, Kathy Crawford, R-Novi, Pamela Hornberger, R-Chesterfield Township, Jim Lilly, R-Macatawa.


HB 5602-5603: Create a master teacher program and revise the requirements for a teaching certificate. Sponsor: Rep. Tim Kelly, R-Saginaw Township.


HB 5606: Allow a licensed wine maker to sell nonalcoholic beverages. Sponsor: Rep. Jim Lilly, R-Macatawa.


HB 5607-5608: Require background investigations on public contracts for asbestos abatement projects and implement an asbestos inspection fee. Sponsors: Reps. Stephanie Chang, D-Detroit, LaTanya Garrett, D-Detroit.


HB 5609: Allow gifts with avalue of up to $100 from a property-casualty insurer to a client. Sponsor: Rep. Leslie Love, D-Detroit.


HB 5610-5614 and SB 831-834: Prohibit employers from requiring disclosure of the use or nonuse of contraceptives by employees, create reproductive health coverage and emergency contraceptive information acts and require pharmacies to provide contraceptives without bias, require insurance companies to include coverage for a 12-month supply of birth control. Sponsors: Reps. Kristy Pagan, D-Canton, Erika Geiss, D-Taylor, Tenisha Yancey, D-Harper Woods, Sara Cambensy, D-Marquette, Tim Sneller, D-Burton, Sens. Rebekah Warren, D-Ann Arbor, Coleman Young II, D-Detroit, Steven Bieda, D-Warren, Curtis Hertel, D-East Lansing.


HB 5615: Require medical control authorities to maintain and provide protocols regarding opioid antagonists (drugs that will reverse the effects of an opioid overdose). Sponsor: Rep. Abdullah Hammoud, D-Dearborn,


HB 5616-5617: Create a toll-free hotline for veterans and their families to report cases of abuse at veterans’ homes and require the veterans’ facility ombudsmen to work with the Department of Health and Human Services to investigate complaints. Sponsor: Rep. Robert Kosowski, D-Westland.


HB 5618: Limit aid to libraries to a per-capita basis for the in-state residents served by the library. Sponsor: Rep. Pamela Hornberger, R-Clinton Township.


HB 5619: Modify the priority status for providing mental health services. Sponsor: Rep. Robert Kosowski, D-Westland.


HB 5620-5621: Modify the sales and use tax exemption process after the sale at a retail store. Sponsors: Reps. Pamela Hornberger, R-Clinton Township, Sue Allor, R-Wolverine.


HB 5622: Designate a portion of M-15 as the Purple Heart Trail. Sponsor: Rep. John Reilly, R-Oakland Township.


HB 5623: Require health facilities and local health departments to establish violence prevention programs. Sponsor: Rep. Gary Glenn, R-Midland.


HB 5624: Allow plumbers to provide plumbing services while also serving as local inspectors. Sponsor: Rep. Steven Johnson, R-Wayland Township.


HB 5625: Allow for the use of mediation as a first step in mental health dispute resolution. Sponsor: Rep. Fred Durhal, D-Detroit.


HB 5626: Revise the language on regional enhancement property tax millage ballot proposals. Sponsor: Rep. Jeffrey Noble, R-Plymouth.


HB 5627-5633: Eliminate the requirement for mandatory auto insurance for drivers of vehicles, limousines, taxicabs, buses and ride-share services. Sponsors: Reps. Peter Lucido, R-Shelby Township, Steve Marino, R-Mt. Clemens, Beau LaFave, R-Iron Mountain, Patrick Green, D-Warren, Scott Dianda, D-Calumet, John Chirkun, D-Roseville.


HB 5634: Eliminate the ban on automobile window tinting. Sponsor: Rep. Julie Alexander, R-Hanover.


HB 5635: Modify the date of the regular county meetings to equalize the assessment rolls. Sponsor: Rep. Triston Cole, R-Mancelona.


HB 5636: Restore the state’s well drilling advisory board. Sponsor: Rep. Triston Cole, R-Mancelona.


HB 5637: Prohibit the placement of youth under the age of 18 with adults during confinement in jail or prison during trials or while they’re being transported. Sponsor: Rep. Fred Durhal, D-Detroit.


HB 5638: Revise the standards for determining the adverse impact from water withdrawals. Sponsor: Rep. Aaron Miller, R-Sturgis.


Senate bills


SB 830: Modify the licensing requirements for insurance providers. Sponsor: Sen. Joe Hune, R-Gregory.


SB 836: Modify the weight restrictions for tandem axle assemblies on semi-trucks. Sponsor: Sen. Tom Casperson, R-Escanaba.


SB 837: Modify the eligibility for basic driver improvement courses. Sponsor: Sen. Tom Casperson, R-Escanaba.


SB 838: Extend the time period for the state to pay off unfunded pension or post employment health care liabilities. Sponsor: Sen. Jack Brandenburg, R-Harrison Township.


SB 839: Allow amendments to a mining permit to be delivered through written notification from the state Department of Environmental Quality. Sponsor: Sen. Tom Casperson, R-Escanaba.


SB 840: Exempt waste collection or treatment facilities from permit requirements. Sponsor: Sen. Tom Casperson, R-Escanaba.


SB 841: Clarify the liability for obligations of a limited liability partnership. Sponsor: Sen. Jack Brandenburg, R-Harrison Township.


For more information or to track the progress of bills, go to www.legislature.mi.gov


Conact Kathleen Gray: 313-223-4430, kgray99@freepress.com or on Twitter @michpoligal
