
                                                            Play Now
                                                        


                                                                                        
            
            FANTASY FOOTBALL
        
    
                                                


                                                            Play Now
                                                        


                                                                                        
            
            Franchise Football
        
    
                                                


                                                                                
                                    
            Listen Live 
        
    
                                        


                                                                                
                                    
            Worryometer Wednesday 
        
    
                                        

Aggravated manslaughter charges have been filed against the brother of New York Giants cornerback Janoris Jenkins. Roosevelt Rene, 25, was found dead at Janoris Jenkins' Fair Lawn, New Jersey home on Tuesday. He was a family friend of Jenkins, according to a report. 


A cause of death was not immediately announced, but NFL Network's Mike Garafolo reported on Tuesday that "police are investigating a possible strangulation/suffocation" while ESPN's Dianna Russini reported that police have opened a homicide investigation. Late Wednesday afternoon, the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office in New Jersey announced that Jenkins' brother, William H. Jenkins, has been charged in connection with the killing. 


The announcement noted that charges are merely accusations, and that William H. Jenkins is considered innocent until proven guilty. 


#BCPONJ &amp; @FairLawnPD announce William H. JENKINS, Jr. of Fair Lawn, charged: Agg. Manslaughter for death of Roosevelt Rene. JENKINS in custody in Ontario Co., NY.  Investigation ongoing, unable to release further info. Charges merely accusations. Defendant presumed innocent.

According to ESPN's Josina Anderson, William H. Jenkins has been in custody in Ontario, New York since Tuesday, due to a parole violation. He is being held there pending extradition to New Jersey. 


I'm told after the homicide of Roosevelt Rene occurred, #Giants CB Janoris Jenkins' brother, William Jenkins, was located in Geneva, NY. He is currently being held in the Ontario county jail, pending extradition to New Jersey, per source.

Russini previously reported that Janoris Jenkins has been in Florida, where he lives during the offseason, since Giants minicamp broke, and was not in New Jersey at the time of Rene's death at his New Jersey house. 


Police sources have confirmed a body has been discovered on the property of Giants Janoris Jenkins in Fair Lawn, NJ. Jenkins is not in the state and has been in Florida since camp broke. He is aware as are the New York Giants. Told this is a homicide investigation

I’ve also learned Janoris Jenkins had family staying at that home...he had plans to return to New Jersey today to deal with this situation but he may stay in Florida. #Giants

Also worth nothing Janoris Jenkins wants to get back to NJ, he’s been advised by attorneys to stay in Florida per sources. #Giants

A Giants spokesperson told ESPN's Jordan Ranaan Tuesday that the team was "aware of and monitoring the situation."


                                            
    I agree that CBS Sports can send me the "Pick Six Newsletter" newsletter.
                    


            Jared Dubin is a New York lawyer and writer. He joined CBSSports.com in 2014 and has since spent far too much of his time watching film and working in spreadsheets.
                            
                    Full Bio
                
                    

© 2004-2018 CBS Interactive. All Rights Reserved.

CBS Sports is a registered trademark of CBS Broadcasting Inc. Commissioner.com is a registered trademark of CBS Interactive Inc.

Images by Getty Images and US Presswire