By

Valerie Edwards For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  16:32 EDT, 7 May 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  16:50 EDT, 7 May 2018







         164

View  comments

A Canadian woman was reportedly arrested in Georgia last month because she was driving with a Canadian license. 


Emily Nield, of Ontario, said the arrest 'was the most horrendous incident of my life'. 'It was mortifying. I was terrified the entire time,' she told CBC.


Nield, 27, who was charged with driving without a license, was traveling from Tennessee where she had just finished her master's degree in geology.


Scroll down for video 


Canadian woman, Emily Nield, was reportedly arrested in Georgia last month because she was driving with a Canadian license. Nield recorded video of herself sitting in the backseat of the patrol car 

She was passing through Georgia on Interstate 75 when she was pulled over for speeding. 


Nield told CBC that the officer kept telling her 'Canadian licenses are not accepted' in Georgia. 


'I was flabbergasted. I just kept saying this can't be right — a Canadian license is always valid.'


Nield said she was arrested when she was unable to give the officer a hard copy of her passport because she didn't have it with her. 


She did note that she was able to pull up copies of her passport, Nexus card, and birth certificate on her phone, but the officer refused to accept the electronic documents.


'When I failed to produce it, she reached through the window of my car and she put handcuffs on me,' Nield told the news outlet.


She was passing through Georgia on Interstate 75 when she was pulled over for speeding

Nield said she was arrested when she was unable to give the officer a hard copy of her passport because she didn't have it with her

Nield was charged with driving without a license and speeding. Police said she was doing 87mph in a 70mph zone

'She told me that I have just been arrested for driving without a license and that I needed to go to jail.'


While sitting in the back of the officer's patrol car, Nield was able to record a video that she posted on SnapChat. 


'I'm in cuffs. Help me! I don't want to go to jail,' she is heard saying in the video. 


She then had to pay $880 to get out of jail; otherwise, she would have stayed in jail until her court appearance next month

'I don't know what to do. I never committed a crime,' Nield says in the video as she breaks down in tears. 


Nield was also charged with speeding. Police said she was doing 87mph in a 70mph zone.


She then had to pay $880 to get out of jail; otherwise, she would have stayed in jail until her court appearance next month.  


Nield also had to pay $200 to get her car from the impound.


Following the incident, Nield stayed in the US and sought the help of her friend's father, who is a Virginia lawyer.


The Georgia Department of Driver Services website says that 'non-US citizens holding a valid foreign driver's licence are allowed to drive in the state of Georgia'.


According to the site, 'a law officer may consult a person's passport or visa to verify the validity of such licence, if available'.


Three days after Nield's arrest, Matthew Bennett, the Cook County probate court solicitor, agreed the charges should be dismissed and the judge signed off on it, according to CBC.


Bennett said he is working with Nield's attorney to erase her arrest record.  

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group