FONTANA, Calif. -- A disturbing and graphic video posted to social media that shows a teen boy throwing a cat into the street like it's a football is under investigation by authorities in San Bernardino County.


CBS Los Angeles writes that the approximately 10-second video -- which has been shared thousands of times on Twitter -- shows a boy holding up a cat in the front yard of a home. The boy then launches the cat what appears to be at least 20 yards. The cat can be heard screeching and whimpering as it lands in the street.


From the video, it's unclear if the cat survived the throw -- but officials said Saturday the cat did survive but has a broken leg.


CBS Los Angeles is not sharing the video due to its graphic and disturbing nature.


The Fontana Police Department tweeted Saturday that it had been contacted by several people regarding the video.


"It has been determined that the incident took place outside our city and we are working with the appropriate jurisdiction to find the cat and the suspect," police wrote.


We are aware of a video that depicts the abuse of a cat. We thank everyone for contacting our department with the video. It has been determined that the incident took place outside our city and we are working with the appropriate jurisdiction to find the cat and the suspect. pic.twitter.com/7NE2Ty48py

The Press-Enterprise newspaper reported Saturday that the user who initially shared the video identified themselves as a student at A.B. Miller High School in Fontana.


Meanwhile, Ontario police told the Enterprise that they were also investigating the incident.


Late Saturday, police said they know who their 16-year-old suspect is but have not located him. They will not release his name because he is a minor.


CBS Los Angeles spoke to neighbors in Ontario where there incident took place.


Gray reported the incident took place Friday in a quiet cul-de-sac. And the neighbors he spoke to were dumbfounded as to why anyone would do such a cruel thing to the animal, let alone share it on video.


"It's like torturing a little kid," said Brenda Perez. "It's an animal, but it's like torturing a little kid. What's the point of him  throwing an animal across the street?"


Some neighbors recognized the kid in question.


"I know who he is," said Oscar Ramos, "but I don't know his name. He hangs around here in the alley all the time. Bunch of little kids doing drugs. They think they're cool. He probably did it just to look cool on video."


"It was kind of stupid and childish," said Stephanie Roman, "I don't know what drugs he was on to do that but, it's really dumb. Yeah, he should go to jail."


The cat's owner did not want to talk on camera. She also said she didn't want to give the teen and his videographer any more attention.


She told Gray the adopted cat is okay and animal authorities were helping set the cat's fractured leg.


No arrests have been made. The suspect could be facing a felony animal cruelty charge. 



                                            These are the types of criminal allegations that need to be seen to be believed
                                    


What saved 1-year-old Manolo Gonzales was a decision by Rebecca LaSalle, a complete stranger living 700 miles away


Twelve states in the U.S. have active volcanoes, according to United States Geological Survey


"This was a real miracle for that the people were there. Everything fell into place. I am so happy. Glory to God for this"













Copyright © 2018 CBS Interactive Inc.All rights reserved.