Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 10 to 15 mph..

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:54 pm

CHARLOTTESVILLE — A former volunteer softball coach in Orange County has been charged with nearly three dozen counts involving sexual and other crimes against children, ranging from forcible sodomy and object sexual penetration to cruelty to children.

Cathy S. Rothgeb, 57, of Stanley, was indicted by an Orange County grand jury Friday and turned herself in to police the same day. She is being held without bond at the Central Virginia Regional Jail, according to Virginia State Police officials.

Rothgeb, a former youth softball coach for Orange County High School, coached youth teams from the 1980s through the early 2000s. Police said she has no current affiliation with Orange County High School.

The charges stem from an investigation begun by state police in the summer of 2016 after a female victim approached an investigator about alleged sexual abuse during Rothgeb’s tenure as a volunteer softball coach, police said.

Rothgeb is scheduled to be in court Thursday, records show.




Cathy Rothgeb, 57, will appeal conviction on 30 counts involving two girls during the 1990s.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
