


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Andrew Johnson, a county jail inmate, is now missing after authorities said he walked away from his work assignment in Glendale

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Go inside the Phoenix Fire Department 911 call center to learn about what's going on when you call 911 in the Phoenix metro area. Hannah Gaber/azcentral.com
    

Andrew Johnson is missing after reportedly walking away from his work assignment area, officials said.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A county jail inmate is missing after reportedly "walking away" from his work assignment area in Glendale Thursday morning, the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office said.


Deputies responded to the area of 59th and Olive avenues before 11:30 a.m. after reports that inmate Andrew Johnson had walked away and left the area, said Sgt. Joaquin Enriquez, a spokesman for MCSO. 


According to Enriquez, MCSO is working with local law enforcement to search for Johnson.


Inmates who are allowed work release are individually selected and classified as low risk, he said. In addition, they often have non-violent charges, Enriquez added.


It's possible that Johnson is no longer wearing his orange inmate attire, he said.


Johnson was in jail on one count of dangerous drug possession and use, he said.


Anyone with information is encouraged to contact MCSO at 602-876-1011 or 602-876-8477.


READ MORE: 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
