

Bob Christie, Associated Press

Caption


Close



stands at the gate of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints' Yearning for Zion ranch near Eldorado, Texas on May 21, 2008. Jessop says he turned away Child Protective Services caseworkers and sheriff deputies that wanted to enter the ranch to search for more children. According to Jessop, the authorities did not have a search warrant to enter the property and left without entering.


stands at the gate of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints' Yearning for Zion ranch near Eldorado, Texas on May 21, 2008. Jessop says he turned away Child Protective Services


, a Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints woman on the Yearning for Zion  Ranch, emotionally tells her story April 14, 2008, of having their children taken into state's custody.

, a Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints woman on the Yearning for Zion Ranch, emotionally tells her story April 14, 2008, of having their children taken into state's custody.

, 23, a member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints responds to a question while sitting in a school classroom on the Yearning For Zion ranch, in Eldorado, Texas on April 16, 2008. Rozie, said she was forced to leave the ranch following the April 3, raid because state officials refused to believe her age.


, 23, a member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints responds to a question while sitting in a school classroom on the Yearning For Zion ranch, in Eldorado, Texas on April 16,


, right, and Madeline, both members of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints talk with media.

, right, and Madeline, both members of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints talk with media.

, Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints member with four daughters currently in state's custody, discusses the raid in his home.

, Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints member with four daughters currently in state's custody, discusses the raid in his home.

, Yearning for Zion Ranch resident and spokesman for the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints talks briefly to the media before the grand jury proceedings at the Schleicher County Courthouse in Eldorado, Texas on July 22, 2008. A Texas grand jury indicted polygamist sect leader Warren Jeffs and five of his followers. Jeffs was charged with felony sexual assault of a child.


, Yearning for Zion Ranch resident and spokesman for the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints talks briefly to the media before the grand jury proceedings at the Schleicher


, 24, a member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints walks down a gravel road as he gives journalists a tour of the Yearning For Zion ranch on April 16. Dan, a father of two children currently in state custody, said, "It is lifeless without our kids around here" as the main temple on the ranch is seen at rear.


, 24, a member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints walks down a gravel road as he gives journalists a tour of the Yearning For Zion ranch on April 16. Dan, a father of two


, 40, a member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and a mother of four becomes emotional as she talks about a state investigation about an allegation of abuse that has left her children in state custody  on the Yearning For Zion ranch  in Eldorado, Texas on April 16, 2008.


, 40, a member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and a mother of four becomes emotional as she talks about a state investigation about an allegation of abuse that has left


, with photos of his 34 children, left the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints in 2002.

, with photos of his 34 children, left the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints in 2002.

, 3, and brother Ephraim, 7, play a game Wednesday at Yearning For Zion Ranch near Eldorado. They were among the few children who, with their parents, had returned to the 1,700-acre ranch since the April 3 raid of the polygamist site.


, 3, and brother Ephraim, 7, play a game Wednesday at Yearning For Zion Ranch near Eldorado. They were among the few children who, with their parents, had returned to the 1,700-acre ranch since the


, left, the first man to face criminal charges following the raid of a polygamist sect's West Texas ranch in April, 2008, is seen outside the courtroom during a recess in his trial in Eldorado, Texas on Nov. 5, 2009. Jessop was found guilty, the first man to face criminal charges following the raid of a polygamist sect's west Texas ranch in April 2008, was found guilty of sexually assaulting a teen with whom he had a so-called "spiritual marriage."


, left, the first man to face criminal charges following the raid of a polygamist sect's West Texas ranch in April, 2008, is seen outside the courtroom during a recess in his trial in Eldorado,


, a former member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, left the church years ago and later led the nonprofit Child Protection Project.

, a former member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, left the church years ago and later led the nonprofit Child Protection Project.

PHOENIX (AP) — A polygamist who fled to Mexico about 15 years ago with his wives and kids while facing child molestation charges in Arizona is now free after the charges were dropped months ago.

Orson William Black Jr. was arrested by Mexican authorities in the northern state of Chihuahua and handed over to U.S. officials in El Paso, Texas, last week. He was briefly held on an Arizona fugitive warrant before being released because no agency would extradite him, El Paso County sheriff's spokeswoman Chris Acosta said.

The Arizona attorney general's office charged Black in 2003 with molestation over allegations he persuaded two teenagers who later became his wives to impregnate themselves with his sperm. A review prompted by a federal inquiry led to a decision to drop the charges for lack of evidence, office spokeswoman Mia Garcia said.

The women were of legal age when they were interviewed by authorities in 2003 and said they had impregnated themselves, Garcia said. The women refused to cooperate, and because they had married Black and fled with him, state prosecutors decided in May that they didn't have enough evidence to pursue charges.

"We needed the girls to testify or in some way help us with the evidence," Garcia said. "That's really the only evidence."

RELATED: 14-year-old could face life as sex offender for sex with 12-year-old girlfriend

Black, 56, is a member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, a sect that began after the mainstream Mormon church disavowed polygamy. The sect advocates plural marriage, and its members commonly have legal marriages with their first wife and "spiritual marriages" with other wives.

The group is mainly based in the twin towns of Colorado City, Arizona, and Hildale, Utah. Its leader, Warren Jeffs, is serving a life sentence in Texas after being convicted of sexually assaulting girls he considered brides.

Records from the 2003 case show Black had been estranged from the polygamous community since the 1980s but still followed its teachings. The case was the first in a series of efforts to crack down on men in the sect and the community's police, which refused to arrest Black, said former Arizona Attorney General Terry Goddard, who brought the charges.

Goddard lamented that Black is apparently not going to face consequences.

"If somebody can just skip the country and then avoid what I believe was a very legitimate child molestation rap, that's a very sad development," he said Tuesday.

The prosecutors' office in Chihuahua, Mexico, says Black, 56, was captured in an area largely populated by Mennonites and was under investigation for the deaths of three Americans aged 15, 19 and 23 on Sept. 10. But they turned him over to U.S. authorities days later without announcing he had been cleared.

MORE FROM LMTonline: Family caught Laredo couple having sex in Peter Piper Pizza parking lot, police say 

Prosecutors did not say why Black was a suspect in their deaths, but a Mexican official said Tuesday that the case remains under investigation.

Black's whereabouts are not known. He is not in federal custody, the U.S. Marshals Service said.

Mexican authorities also handed over to U.S. officials 26 others, including Black's wives, said Pennie Petersen, sister of the two women in the molestation case. The family is supposedly on the way to the Arizona-Utah border communities where the sect is based.

Petersen, who is estranged from her sisters, said the men who were killed were two of Black's sons and his stepson. She said she was told by members of her extended family that the deaths were a drug cartel hit, possibly because Black either stole money or drugs. He wasn't home and the cartel killed the others instead, she said.

"They told the family when they killed those boys, if William doesn't turn himself into us, we're going to come back, kill everybody over the age of 6 and we're going to take everyone under the age of 6," Petersen said.

Mexican prosecutors didn't immediately respond to questions about Petersen's story.

She has started a change.org petition to try to persuade Arizona prosecutors to file charges again.

Garcia, the Arizona prosecutor's spokeswoman, said they had not given up on the case.

"We've remained in contact with (Peterson) over the years. We just need more evidence," Garcia said. "We fully intend to speak to the victims again."

___

Associated Press reporter Mark Stevenson in Mexico City and AP researcher Rhonda Shafner in New York contributed to this report.