
                                                            Politico

Shia Kapos' must-read rundown of political news in the Land of Lincoln

Get the Illinois Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

05/18/2018 07:37 AM EDT

By Natasha Korecki (nkorecki@politico.com ; @natashakorecki) and Kristen East (keast@politico.com ; @kristenicoleast) 

Good Friday morning, Illinois. 


Story Continued Below

THE BUZZ: There’s serious drama happening Downstate. A major breach in a critical 36-inch pipe has left 175,000 people with little or no water. Separately, Southern Illinois University’s president is under fire for saying in an email he sought to “shut up the bitchers from Carbondale,” in a money transfer involving two campuses. Scroll down for more on the SIU scandal. But first, the water situation. 

Marion Mayor Anthony Rinella, in an interview with POLITICO last night, expressed anger that the state hadn’t done more to help his community and surrounding towns served by the Rend Lake Water Conservancy District that are struggling with little or no water since Wednesday’s water main break. Rinella issued an emergency declaration. All schools, hotels, restaurants and other businesses were ordered closed by 3 p.m. on Thursday and were not to reopen until further notice. 

“It’s just been a nightmare,” Rinella said last night. “It’s very disconcerting that 160,000 people can be out of water and the state of Illinois has got its head stuck in the sand, like they didn’t know it was going on.”

Rinella was referring to a statement in which Gov. Rauner said “while there currently have been no requests for state assistance, state agencies are actively preparing to provide support needed to ensure the public health and safety of the many communities served by the district.” 

Rinella said someone from the governor’s administration called him around noon on Thursday and took in his concerns, and grew irked when the governor then released a statement saying no one had requested help. POLITICO read to Rinella the rest of the governor’s statement, including this section: “I want to assure everyone affected that the State of Illinois will do everything in our power to ensure public health and safety is protected until this situation is resolved.” 

To that, Rinella responded: “I’m not going to apologize for the governor. He could have taken it upon himself to make a call down here,” Rinella said. “I would think that if I was a governor and I knew that 160,000 were without water, I would have reached out.” 

Stoking frustrations? Someone else did call Rinella on Thursday: Rauner‘s November opponent J.B. Pritzker. 

“J.B. Pritzker has contacted me three times today. I know JB’s running for governor, but he was kind of wondering why the state hadn’t reached out to me,” Rinella said.

Rauner’s office earlier in the day released a statement that included this: 

“Earlier today the Illinois Emergency Management Agency convened a conference call with several state agencies and mutual aid partners to assess the whole community impacts of situation and prepare for potential deployment of state resources to impacted communities until the water supply is restored. “Our primary concern is the well-being of the people affected by this situation. I want to assure everyone affected that the State of Illinois will do everything in our power to ensure public health and safety is protected until this situation is resolved.”

On Friday, governor's office spokeswoman Patty Schuh said, "We’ve been in constant communication with communities throughout the region." 

“In addition to monitoring and emergency management coordination with Marion and other communities across the region,“ she said, “our office specifically spoke to Mayor Rinella at least twice yesterday. We’re all relieved water is flowing again.“

Today: Rauner’s Friday itinerary shows he’s in Chicago for a scheduled appearance with Polish President Andrzej Duda and the Illinois business delegation. 

— “Southern Illinois faces water shortage as Rend Lake Conservancy District rushes to fix broken pipe,” by Southern Illinoisan’s Marilyn Halstead: “Some Southern Illinois cities are out of water, schools and businesses are closing, several communities are under boil orders and many residents are being asked to conserve water after a breach in a pipe at the water plant for Rend Lake Conservancy District.” Story here 

Meanwhile in Carbondale …

SIU professor Kathleen Chwalisz’s op-ed in the Southern, published Thursday: “Dunn’s SIU agenda revealed”: “Budget-related documents acquired through the Freedom of Information Act show that SIU President Randy Dunn actively concealed from SIUC Chancellor Carlo Montemagno his plan to transfer $5.125 million from the Carbondale to Edwardsville campus. He sought to use the fictitious 60/40 split formula to — in Dunn’s words in an email exchange with Vice President Duane Stucky, SIUE Chancellor Randy Pembrook and SIUE Budget Director William Winter — ‘shut up the bitchers from Carbondale.’” Story here

— “Lawmakers call for SIU president’s resignation over ‘bitchers from Carbondale’ comment,” by Belleville News-Democrat’s Lexi Cortes: “State Reps. Bryant, R-Murphysboro, and Natalie Phelps Finnie, D-Harrisburg, each said Thursday that Dunn’s email was ‘not acceptable.’ Bryant added that Dunn should resign immediately ‘because of his obvious and blatant disdain for constituents and for the SIU (Carbondale) campus.’ Dunn didn’t address the calls for him to step down in the statement he released Thursday. But he rejected claims that he has contempt for Carbondale.” Story here 

— “Lawmaker to SIU president: ‘Go to hell, sir,’” by Chicago Tribune’s Bill Lukitsch: “Republican state Rep. Chad Hays of Catlin also called for Dunn’s resignation, noting he graduated from the Downstate campus and sends his two sons there. He brought up the school’s iconic mascot in his dismissal of Dunn. ‘On behalf of all Salukis, you go to hell, sir,’ Hays said.” Story here 

The Southern Illinois published Dunn’s entire response to Chwalisz’s op-ed: http://bit.ly/2Iux3Y3

“SIU president, Carbondale chancellor respond to explosive op-ed,” by Southern Illinoisan’s K. Janis Esch: Story here

Welcome to the POLITICO Illinois Playbook! Please send tips, events, announcements to nkorecki@politico.com or @natashakorecki SUBSCRIBE to Illinois Playbook For more Illinois news visit: http://www.politico.com/news/illinois 

OBAMA UPDATE

— “Amid heated debate, city approves plan for Obama Presidential Center,” by Chicago Tribune’s Lolly Bowean: “After more than seven hours of emotional and passionate testimony from hundreds of residents, community activists and elected officials, the Chicago Plan Commission voted overwhelmingly to approve the Obama Presidential Center on Thursday afternoon. The decision was a major hurdle for the Obama Foundation, but it is just the beginning of a long process before any construction takes place.” Story here 

STATE

— “Illinois DOC keeps people with disabilities in prison beyond release dates,” by WBEZ’s Shannon Heffernan: “A WBEZ review of facilities on a corrections department’s housing list found many did not accept people with a disability, including psychiatric disabilities. Equip for Equality, a disability rights advocacy group, said the situation could be a violation of laws meant to protect people from discrimination and costs the state more money than placing people in the community.” Story here 

— “Final Bon-Ton bankruptcy toll: More than 3,500 Illinois jobs,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Brigid Sweeney: “Once Carson's department stores and other Bon-Ton Stores-owned entities in Illinois liquidate by the end of summer, some 3,514 associates will be out of work. That number does not include at least 330 other jobs that were shed earlier this winter, when Bon-Ton Stores closed seven locations in Illinois months before declaring bankruptcy. The job losses stem from 35 stores and two distribution centers in Illinois, Carson's spokeswoman Christine Hojnacki confirmed.” Story here 

— “Gun used in Dixon High School shootout bought by shooter’s mom,” by CBS Chicago’s Mai Martinez: “The 9mm semi-automatic rifle a former Dixon High School student allegedly used to fire shots at a school resource officer on Wednesday was purchased by his mother six years ago, police said. Matthew Milby, 19, was released from the hospital Thursday morning and transferred to the Lee County Jail, where he was being held on $2 million bail. He has been charged with three counts of aggravated discharge of a firearm, and is expected to appear for an arraignment hearing on Friday.” Story here 

SPRINGFIELD

— “Madigan: Rauner’s death penalty proposal to get hearing Monday,” by State Journal-Register’s Brenden Moore: “Just days after Gov. Bruce Rauner threw a curve ball into the final weeks of the legislative session by rewriting a bill to propose reinstating the death penalty in Illinois, House Speaker Michael Madigan said the governor’s ideas ‘deserve a full hearing and consideration before the House.’” Story here 

CHICAGO

— “Man arrested in luggage scare at Ogilvie Transportation Center,” by The Daily Herald’s Marni Pyke: “Metra police arrested a Georgia man following a suspicious luggage scare that evacuated Ogilvie Transportation Center Wednesday. Rajender Chandani, 46, of Hogansville, Georgia, was apprehended after officers saw him going into the downtown station at about 8:20 p.m.” Story here 

— “United CFO stepping down,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ John Pletz: “Andrew Levy, United Airlines' chief financial officer, has left the company. Levy, 48, joined the company in 2016 amid an overhaul of the management team at the airline that ultimately included bringing in Scott Kirby from American Airlines as president.” Story here 

— “Pope slams one of Chicago’s financial engines,” by Bloomberg: “In a sweeping critique of global finance released by the Vatican today, the Holy See singled out derivatives including credit-default swaps for particular scorn. ‘A ticking time bomb,’ the Vatican called them. The unusual rebuke—derivatives rarely reach the level of religious doctrine—is in keeping with Francis's skeptical view of unbridled global capitalism. … Chicago is the longtime world capital of the derivatives market.” Story here 

DELEGATION

— “Roskam draws sharp line on taxes in re-election fight,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Greg Hinz: “U.S. Rep. Peter Roskam, R-Wheaton, says he's not backing down from a fight over the new U.S. tax law he helped write, drawing a sharp line between himself and Democratic nominee Sean Casten on tax rates for millionaires, expanded breaks for business, whether the huge changes eventually will pay for themselves and numerous other provisions. But in a phone interview today, Roskam, whose seat is considered winnable by national Democratic strategists, did wiggle a bit on one item, suggesting he favors a move to index the new $10,000-a-year cap on state and local taxes, or SALT, an action that would allow the $10,000 limit to rise with time.” Story here 

AROUND THE COLLARS

— “Attorneys reach settlement in property battle of Bull Valley mansion at center of drug bust,” by Northwest Herald’s Katie Smith: “The company that loaned convicted felon David A. Soskin money to flip a mansion police said he later used for drug trafficking will keep the 17,000-square-foot property and already has met with potential buyers who want the land for themselves. A nearly yearlong battle over the 35-acre home came to a close Thursday as final paperwork was filed with McHenry County Judges Sharon Prather and Suzanne Mangiemele.” Story here 

MAYOR’s RACE

— “Lightfoot goes on the offensive after Emanuel allies impugn her integrity,” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Fran Spielman: “Former Police Board President Lori Lightfoot said Thursday she ‘didn’t agree to a personal loyalty oath to Rahm Emanuel’ when she accepted his reappointment and it’s the ‘ultimate red herring’ for the mayor’s minions to question the integrity of the cases she handled. Lightfoot went on the offensive one day after eight aldermen, including several mayoral allies, demanded an ‘independent review’ of all Police Board cases she played a role in deciding.” Story here 

MEDIA

— “The Southern Illinoisan newsroom votes to form union,” by Southern Illinoisan: “Journalists at The Southern Illinoisan voted Thursday to form a union. The Southern newsroom’s 12 non-management employees voted unanimously to form the union, all in favor for United Media Guild Local 36047, TNG-CWA, AFL-CIO-CLC. The employees filed a petition with National Labor Relations Board to form the union on April 27.” Story here 

HOLLYWOOD CONNECTION: Big congrats to Bill Holderman, a Chicago native who comes from a Chicago legal pedigree, and wrote and directed “Book Club,” which hits the box office this weekend. Among the stars: Jane Fonda, Diane Keaton and Candice Bergen, who plays a federal judge. Credentia Inc. President Kay Hoppe (and gushingly proud mom) says her favorite character is the fluffy white cat, “Ginsberg.” 

NATION

— “Senate confirms Haspel as CIA’s first female director,” by POLITICO’s Nolan D. McCaskill: Story here

— “Freedom Caucus immigration demand could stall farm bill,” by POLITICO’s Liz Crampton, Helena Bottemiller Evich and Rachael Bade: Story here

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ...New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ...Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX 

 Want to make an impact? POLITICO Illinois has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Land of Lincoln. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: [jshapiro@politico.com] jshapiro@politico.com. 



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC