Prosecutors have filed charges against Chris Heisser months after his DUI arrest and blowout fight with fiancee Heather Locklear, RadarOnline.com can confirm.

According to documents obtained by Radar, Ventura County District Attorney officials charged Heisser, 56, with one misdemeanor count of driving under the influence of alcohol with a special allegation of driving with a blood alcohol level of 0.15 percent or higher. He also faces a second misdemeanor count of driving while having a 0.08 percent blood alcohol level or more with the same special allegation.


Heisser is scheduled to appear in Ventura County Superior court for a first appearance arraignment on April 26.

SEE THE SHOCKING COURT DOCUMENTS

The Blast was first to report the new charges.

According to a California Highway Patrol report obtained by Radar, Heisser was driving a Mercedes at about midnight on Feb. 26 and was stopped by police because he was “traveling at an unusual slow speed” on Highway 101 just south of Highway 23 in the city of Thousand Oaks.

Officers observed signs of alcohol intoxication and conducted a field sobriety test, which included two breath samples. According to police, Heisser alcohol screening result was 0.19 percent–more than twice the legal limit of 0.08 percent in California.

PHOTOS: DUIs, Nasty Fights &amp; More! Lindsay Lohan’s Top 20 Hot Mess Moments EXPOSED

Heisser’s arrest came just hours after Ventura County Sheriff’s deputies responded to a domestic violence call involving Locklear and Heisser at the Melrose Place star’s Thousand Oaks home. According to a search warrant, deputies who responded to the call on Feb. 25 found the couple arguing inside a bedroom. Heisser reportedly told deputies that Locklear bit him on the nose and that the actress was “all over him” for about 30 minutes, acting “crazy,” “angry,” and “wild.”

Although Heisser’s name was redacted from the warrant, deputes described the individual in the affidavit as the Locklear’s boyfriend. Locklear was arrested after allegedly threatening the deputies, but the she dodged serious felony charges and was only charged with misdemeanors.

Locklear, who has been rehab since the blowout fight with Heisser, did not appear in court for her arraignment on April 12. Her attorneys, William Haney and Blair Berk, however, appeared in front of a judge on her behalf and entered a plea of not guilty to four misdemeanor counts of battery on a peace officer and one misdemeanor count of resisting arrest.

PHOTOS: DUIs, Drugs &amp; More! Michael Phelps’ Biggest Secrets &amp; Scandals Exposed!

Locklear is scheduled to appear back in court on June 7 for a pretrial conference. She could face a maximum sentence of five years in jail, according to Ventura County Senior Deputy District Attorney Thomas Dunlevy.

Meanwhile, it still unclear whether Heisser’s own felony past could affect his recent DUI arrest. Documents exclusively obtained by Radar show Heisser was initially charged in January 2011 with 46 misdemeanor and felony counts, including working illegally as a contractor without a license, grand theft and forgery.

Despite his conviction and spending time in prison, Heisser is back working as a general contractor in California, Radar has learned.

Heisser remains out of jail while he waits for his arraignment next week on the DUI charges.


We pay for juicy info! Do you have a story for RadarOnline.com? Email us at tips@radaronline.com, or call us at 800-344-9598 any time, day or night.

RadarOnline has affiliate partnerships so we may receive compensation for some links to products and services.