


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Republican challenging ousted former lawmaker Don Shooter alleges Shooter doesn't live in the district where he's running for office

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Rep. Todd Clodfelter (R-Tucson) read a letter on the floor of the House of Representatives calling for the public release of all files related to the sexual harassment investigation of former Rep. Don Shooter.
    

Rep. Don Shooter  speaks during vote on whether to remove him from office on Feb. 1, 2018, at the Arizona House.
(Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

A Republican running against ousted former state lawmaker Don Shooter filed a lawsuit Friday alleging that Shooter does not live in the district where he recently filed to run for office. 


Brent Backus, a businessman who's running for Arizona Senate in Legislative District 13, alleges Shooter, also a Republican, doesn't live at the Yuma address he claims.


Backus cites a recent voter registration change made by Shooter and a house in Phoenix as evidence. Shooter responded with a taunt, questioning what his opponent was afraid of.


The district, a Republican stronghold, stretches from the Valley's western edges down to Yuma.


Shooter was kicked out of the House of Representatives by his fellow lawmakers earlier this year after a report found he had sexually harassed numerous women at the Capitol, including fellow lawmakers, lobbyists and the former publisher of The Arizona Republic.


TOP 10:  Things we learned from the Don Shooter sexual-harassment files


Despite his expulsion, he filed signatures last week to run for the Senate, saying his neighbors asked him to run and he was a "pretty effective legislator."


Backus, represented by attorney Timothy La Sota, filed the lawsuit in Maricopa County Superior Court.


Backus is one of four Republicans running for the district's Senate seat. State Sen. Sine Kerr has served as the district's senator since she was appointed to finish former state Sen. Steve Montenegro's term. Royce Jenkins also is running. 


Michelle Harris is seeking the office for Democrats.


READ THE COMPLAINT:  The lawsuit and order to show cause vs. Don Shooter


Shooter's nominating papers list his address as an apartment in Yuma.


The Arizona Constitution requires people who seek office to live in Arizona for three years before they run. Candidates for theArizona Legislature also must live in the district they're seeking for one year ahead of running.


The lawsuit alleges Shooter's primary residence is in the Biltmore area of Phoenix, not in Yuma. Shooter lists the Phoenix address as his primary residence for property tax purposes with the Maricopa County assessor, the lawsuit notes.


Backus' lawsuit also highlights Shooter's recent voter registration change as evidence he's not living in Yuma.


Shooter was ousted from office in February. He and his wife, Susan, registered to vote at their Phoenix address on April 30. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Arizona's voter registration forms emphasize people must list the "address where you live."


Shooter registered as a voter again in Yuma on May 14, according to the Yuma County Recorder's Office. 


Backus claims Shooter doesn't meet the one-year residency requirement necessary to run for office, and his primary residence isn't in the district.


"Even if he still rents an apartment in Yuma, his residence is in Phoenix," the lawsuit states. 


The lawsuit says Shooter has not lived in the district for one year prior to his election, as state law requires, so he is not eligible for run for office there.


Backus wants the court to declare Shooter ineligible for office in the district. 



    Here are some of J.D. Mesnard and Don Shooter's remarks from the vote Feb. 1, 2018. Carly Henry/azcentral.com
    

Shooter told The Republic his initial thoughts on the lawsuit: "Let's dance." 


In a text message to The Republic, he questioned what his opponent was afraid of. 


"A little competition never hurt anybody," Shooter said.


Shooter said he was traveling, but would be back at his Yuma residence next week, so Backus could serve him with the lawsuit there if he wanted. 


Questions over Shooter's residency have dogged him for years, with his critics claiming he hasn't lived in Yuma and instead lives in Phoenix. 


He has repeatedly denied these claims.


“That’s my official residence, that’s what it has been for four years,” he said in 2015. “If it’s not, I need to ask my landlord for my money back.”


The Phoenix home was initially only owned by Susan Shooter, which the former lawmaker used to defend against the residency claims. But in November 2017, Susan Shooter conveyed the property to herself and her husband, the lawsuit claims.


READ MORE:


 
