


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A U.S. District Court jury  in Phoenix will decide if George Johnson used lobbyist and wife to bribe former AZ Corporation Commissioner Gary Pierce

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Former Arizona Corporation Commission Chairman Gary Pierce and Johnson Utilities owner George Johnson were indicted on charges of bribery and conspiracy.
    Wochit

Former Corporation Commissioner Gary Pierce goes on trial on charges that he took a bribe.
(Photo: file)

Former Arizona Corporation Commission Chairman Gary Pierce went on trial Thursday in a U.S. District Court in Phoenix along with three others on charges of bribery, fraud and conspiracy.


Federal prosecutors allege George Johnson, owner of Johnson Utilities in Pinal County, bribed Pierce to get his way on a rate increase and a tax break. Johnson also is on trial, along with Pierce's wife, Sherry, and Jim Norton, a lobbyist.


“The case the United States will present is simple,” said Assistant U.S. Attorney Frank Galati in his opening statement. “In a nutshell, in 2010, George Johnson, the owner of Johnson Utilities, did not get what he wanted.”


What Johnson wanted was a rate increase for his water delivery and wastewater utility, which services the San Tan Valley area. Instead, his rate was cut. Johnson also wanted to be able to pass his personal income taxes off to the customers of his privately-owned utility, much like the larger public utilities can expense their corporate taxes.


“In a nutshell, in 2010, George Johnson, the owner of Johnson Utilities, did not get what he wanted.”


Galati spelled out the contents of the federal indictment against the four defendants: Johnson allegedly turned to Jim Norton, who he retained as a lobbyist, who had his wife Kelly Norton form a consulting firm.


Then, starting in August 2011, Johnson paid $6,000 a month over nine months to Kelly Norton, who in turn paid $3,500 a month to Sherry Pierce, wife of Gary Pierce, who presided over the very body that was supposed to regulate Johnson’s businesses.


It was a bribe, Galati alleged, and as quid pro quo, in September 2011, the commission voted to raise Johnson’s rates again.


In February 2013, the commission granted the right to private utilities to “pass-through” tax expense – with the bonus that Johnson and other utility owners would not have to document their personal tax liability. That earned the Nortons another $25,000 from Johnson, Galati said.


Furthermore, Gary Pierce was going to use money from Johnson to purchase a parcel of land in Mesa worth $350,000. The deal never went through.


On Thursday, federal prosecutors for the first time revealed that Kelly Norton, who divorced Jim Norton in 2015, is a witness in the case for prosecutors.


Beginning with the indictment and through the pretrial hearings, she never was identified but referred to by prosecutors as the “unindicted co-conspirator,” or UCC. On Thursday, Galati brought her out into the open, revealing that she will be a major witness testifying as to the conspiracy of the other four. 


Kelly Norton, Galati implied, would tell the whole story.


However, the defense – four lawyers, one for each defendant – counter that Kelly Norton had her own agenda against her ex-husband. And FBI investigators, they all maintain, were very selective in who they talked to, steering away from the other Corporation Commissioners who also voted in Johnson’s favor and other witnesses who might not buttress their version of events.


“This is an opening statement,” said Johnson's attorney, Woody Thompson. “It’s similar to a movie preview for a movie you are about to see – only it’s going to take weeks.”


If convicted the defendants could be sentenced to as many as five years for conspiracy, 10 years for bribery, and up to 20 years for mail and wire fraud.


George Johnson first applied for a rate hike for his water utility in 2008 and it took until 2010 to get to a vote by the Arizona Corporation Commission.


Utility rates are based on a “rate base,” essentially the costs of building and maintaining plants and infrastructure, among other things. 


But in Johnson’s case, commission staffers did not trust the numbers he was giving them and felt he had not sufficiently documented his costs and expenses. Instead of getting an increase, his rates were cut by 10 percent. It was a unanimous decision by all five commissioners, including Pierce.


By the next year, however, the board’s composition had changed because of an election. The chairwoman, Kris Mayes -- who was the prosecution's first witness Thursday -- was pushed out of office by term limits. Pierce was elected the new chairman. And under state law, Johnson was allowed to bring his case back before the board.


On Sept. 6, 2011, Johnson Utilities came to a vote before the Commission again, and it approved the rate increase on a 4-1 vote.


That same month, according to Galati, the conspiracy hatched.


The Nortons and the Pierces met for dinner at a restaurant in Mesa and drew up plans. The wives were supposed to make it look “legit,” Galati said, and he questioned what work Sherry Pierce actually did for the money she deposited into a joint account she held with her husband.



    The Arizona Republic's Ryan Randazzo explains what the Arizona Corporation Commission does and how these five elected officials can have a big impact on your electric bill.
    

Johnson made 12 payments to Kelly Norton between November 2011 and August 2012.


In February 2013, the tax incentive was passed in favor of Johnson and other utility owners. Shortly after, Kelly Norton received a $25,000 check from Johnson, “a thank-you from George,” as Galati called it.


Furthermore, there was the $350,000 parcel of land in Mesa that Gary Pierce wanted to scoop up to start a used-car lot, like the one he owned in Yuma since before he went into politics. Prosecutors allege that the money was going to come from Johnson as another “thank you.” 


Galati ended where he began, saying the case was simple and guilty verdicts were in order.


But the defense intends to complicate Galati's case with reasonable doubt.


“This was all paid for by check, in plain view with a paper trail,” Thompson said. “These are bona fide wages.”


Sherry Pierce’s attorney, Ashley Adams, showed the jury contracts and memoranda from Kelly Norton to Sherry Pierce outlining the latter’s job duties as a consultant. Among other things, Adams, said, Sherry Pierce was supposed to help find a candidate for Pinal County Board of Supervisors who was both female and a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 


Adams said that Sherry Pierce worked for Kelly Norton, not for George Johnson. And according to Adams, she earned her money.


“If you find she was working, there is no bribe,” Adams said.


Besides, Sherry Pierce was not the only employee on the project. A second woman was paid the same amount per month by Kelly Norton to lobby in Pinal County.


All of the defense attorneys noted that the decisions in Johnson's favor were made in open meetings and that Gary Pierce was not the only commissioner who voted in favor of Johnson’s needs. They attributed the Commission's change of heart as a question of which new commissioners were elected over the time of the Commission rulings.


The money was dutifully detailed in 1099s and reported on personal income tax forms, not hidden from detection.


Ivan Mathew, attorney for Jim Norton walked the jury through the list of witnesses interviewed by the FBI. It did not include the other commissioners who voted with Gary Pierce for the rate increase nor the other woman who worked for Kelly Norton.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

READ MORE: 
