


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A handful of schools reopened Thursday in metro Phoenix, while most in the Valley stayed closed and planned to reopen on Friday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Madison Park Middle School was one of just a handful of schools that reopened Thursday, May 3, 2018, during a statewide teacher walkout.
(Photo: Lily Altavena/The Republic)

Arizona schools are preparing to reopen Friday after a walkout shut down schools across the state for six days. 


State lawmakers passed a budget Thursday after 13 hours of debate in the House and Senate. The budget includes nearly $273 million aimed at giving teachers pay raises. Teachers in the #RedForEd movement were initially expected to return to classrooms Thursday but pushed to keep schools closed until the budget passed.


The school board president in Mesa Public Schools, the state's largest district, wrote in a tweet that the district would reopen Friday, adding, "A huge THANK YOU to everyone who kept our kids safe and fed while our educators fought their fight." Other districts have followed suits in announcing plans to reopen. 


And... we're back! Tomorrow Mesa Public Schools will REOPEN! A huge THANK YOU to everyone who kept our kids safe and fed while our educators fought their fight! #RedForEdpic.twitter.com/rWaQ7eCOeK

Some schools opened early Thursday in Arizona. 


A line of cars dropping off sleepy-eyed pre-teens at 7:20 a.m. is by no means unusual at Ingleside Middle School in Phoenix's Arcadia neighborhood. 


But on Thursday, with most of the schools in the Scottsdale Unified School District still shuttered for the sixth school day due to the #RedForEd teacher walkout, the drop-off line was an anomaly. The district announced Wednesday that all of its schools except for Ingleside and Pima Elementary School would stay closed. 


LIVE UPDATES: Budget passes as #RedForEd teachers gather for 6th walkout day


THURSDAY SCHOOL CLOSURES:  List of districts closed on Day 6 of walkout


Assistant Principal Erin Kadera enthusiastically cheered for students as they crossed through the parking lot to enter the school, huddling into a basketball court near a side entrance. 


Milissa Sackos, the district's executive director of student and community services, said the district had enough staff to open Ingleside. Some teachers called out, but Scottsdale brought in substitutes and teachers from the district office in their place.  


"Scottsdale school district has maintained all along that we would reopen our schools if we had adequate staff to ensure safety and instruction," she said. 


A line of cars waits to drop off students at Ingleside Middle School in the Scottsdale Unified School District. Ingleside was one of just two schools in the district open Thursday in the shadow of a statewide teacher walkout. (Photo: Lily Altavena/The Republic)

Madison Park Middle School in Phoenix also opened its doors Thursday for the first time in six school days. Even before the school's front office officially opened, a few dozen students stood outside dribbling basketballs, hugging each other hello and laughing. 


Madison Park was the only school in the Madison Elementary School District to reopen Thursday.


It's unclear why it was mostly middle schools that reopened while schools in many of the biggest district across the Valley stayed close. One reason for that could be because seventh- and eighth-graders are required more instructional hours under state law than students in other grades. 


Back at Ingleside, guidance counselor Cheryl Guthrie was one of the educators returning. She said she spent time at the Capitol during the statewide walkout. Now, it was time to get back to work. 


"I just want to finish the year strong for the kids," she said. 


A boy in a green jacket passed Guthrie as she waved and greeted him with a "Hello! How are you?"  


His response, a simple "Hello," surprised Guthrie. She explained it was the first time in a year since she started greeting him that he had responded. 


Reach reporter Lily Altavena at laltavena@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8927. Follow her on Twitter: @lilyalta.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.