Sunny. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mainly clear. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


Weslaco native Benita Valdez became the newest member of Tropical Texas Behavioral Health’s board of trustees after she was appointed and sworn in last week by county officials. 

HONOLULU--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jul 11, 2018--Kamu Grugier-Hill, linebacker from the reigning Super Bowl championship football team the Philadelphia Eagles, has joined together with professional athletes from Hawai‘i who are with the National Football League (NFL), Major League Baseball (MLB) and…

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

A rehabilitated peregrine falcon is released into the wild Wednesday morning near Palo Alto national Historic Battlefield in Brownsville.

A white-tailed kite is released into the wild Wednesday morning in Brownsville by Gladys Porter Zoo Senior Veterinarian Thomas W. DeMaar.

A rehabilitated peregrine falcon is released into the wild Wednesday morning near Palo Alto national Historic Battlefield in Brownsville.

A white-tailed kite is released into the wild Wednesday morning in Brownsville by Gladys Porter Zoo Senior Veterinarian Thomas W. DeMaar.

After being cared for and rehabilitated by the Gladys Porter Zoo veterinary staff since late August, a peregrine falcon and a white-tailed kite were released Wednesday back into the wild at the intersection of Old Port Isabel Road and Highway 550.


The falcon was injured at the beach on South Padre Island and was transported to the zoo by U.S. Fish &amp; Wildlife on Aug.30, and has been under care for almost a month and a half, officials said.

During its stay at the zoo, the falcon was recovering from a broken leg bone.


Gladys Porter Zoo Senior Veterinarian Thomas DeMaar said the white-tailed kite was found in Brownsville, and it was a little slow in feeding itself. The veterinary staff had been taking care of the white-tailed kite since July.

“So what we did is feed it and give it a little extra time to grow up,” DeMaar said. “It may have been separated from its parents a little bit young and it wasn’t injured but was unable to fly.”


The falcon and the white-tailed kite were released in open land because they like to hover over the fields and dive in to catch their prey.


kcontreras@brownsvilleherald.com

