Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

From bombers to escaped convicts, over the years, law enforcement and intelligence officers have tracked a host of elusive criminals.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Travis Reinking was booked into Davidson County jail on four counts of criminal homicide related to a shooting at a Waffle House in Antioch.
    

Waffle House shooting suspect Travis Reinking captured near Old Hickory Blvd and Hobson Pike, Monday, April 23, 2018
(Photo: Metro Nashville Police Department)

From bombers to escaped convicts, law enforcement and intelligence officers have tracked a host of elusive criminals.


On Monday, officials arrested the alleged gunman in a shooting at a Tennessee Waffle House that killed four people and injured several others. Travis Reinking was apprehended in a wooded area outside of Nashville after a 34-hour manhunt.


More: Waffle House shooting suspect was 'looking real nervous,' tipster says


More: Waffle House shooting suspect previously fired because he was 'paranoid'


As more details come forward, here is a look at some of the most significant U.S. manhunts of the last decade.


Re-captured: 2017


Ricky Dubose and Donnie Rowe were taken into custody Thursday night in Rutherford County, Tenn. (Photo: Tennessee Bureau of Investigation)

One-time cellmates Ricky Dubose and Donnie Rowe went on the run after killing two guards on a prison transport bus south of Atlanta. During their three-day flight, the men forced their way into a Shelbyville home at gunpoint and tied up a husband and wife. 


After three hours of terror, the convicts fled in the couple's vehicle. The husband called 911, tipping authorities to the convicts' whereabouts. Following a dramatic chase that closed I-24 in Rutherford County, the men surrendered when a citizen confronted them in his yard.


Arrested: 2017


A tip led law enforcement to a remote forest cabin in California, where Tad Cummins was arrested. (Photo: Greg Barnette / USA TODAY Network California)

A 15-year-old girl from Columbia, Tennessee, was reported missing the same day high school teacher Tad Cummins left a note telling his wife he was leaving town to clear his head. An Amber Alert was issued for the girl, who Cummins allegedly had fostered a sexual relationship with while he was a teacher at a Maury County high school.


Their disappearance spurred a five-week nationwide manhunt. A citizen's tip ultimately led law enforcement to a remote forest cabin near Cecilville, California, where Cummins and the girl had been staying. Cummins was arrested


Arrested: 2015


Dylann Roof (Photo: File / Associated Press)

A sweeping manhunt spanned two states as Dylann Roof fled from authorities. The 21-year-old gunned down nine people at a historic black church in South Carolina. The Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, the church pastor and a prominent state senator, was among the dead.


He was arrested fourteen hours later about 245 miles north in Shelby, North Carolina, during a traffic stop initiated by a tip from a North Carolina florist, who noticed Roof in his car at a stoplight. Roof was condemned to death by a federal jury in 2017.


Self-inflicted fatal wound: 2015


A makeshift memorial for WDBJ-TV reporter Alison Parker and cameraman Adam Ward gathers by a tree near the station Thursday, Aug. 27, 2015, in Roanoke, Va. (Photo: AP)

A television reporter and cameraman were shot to death during a live television interview on a CBS affiliate in Roanoke, Virginia, by a disgruntled journalist who recorded himself carrying out the killings and posted the video on social media after fleeing the scene.


Hours later and hundreds of miles away, gunman Vester Lee Flanagan II — who had been fired from the station in 2013 — ran off the road on Interstate 66 headed east toward Washington and a trooper found him with a self-inflicted gunshot wound. He died at a hospital later that day.


One convict re-captured, one killed: 2015


After busting out of Clinton Correctional Facility, a maximum-security prison in upstate New York, Richard Matt and David Sweat spent nearly three weeks on the run in the woods near the Canadian border before authorities caught up to them.


The manhunt ended on the 23rd day with one inmate's death and the other's recapture.


One suspect captured, one killed: 2013


Runners take a moment of silence as they wear blue wrist bands in honor of the Boston Marathon bombing victims at the start line during Country Music Marathon in Nashville, Tenn., Saturday, April 27, 2013. (Photo: Jae S. Lee / The Tennessean)

On April 15, 2013, two bombs went off near the finish line of the Boston Marathon, killing three spectators and wounding more than 260 other people.


After an intense manhunt, one of the suspects, 19-year-old Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, was captured alive. He had been hiding all day in a boat parked on the side of a suburban house. His older brother and fellow suspect, 26-year-old Tamerlan Tsarnaev, died after a shootout with law enforcement. 


Found dead: 2013


The nine-day hunt for Christopher Dorner — an ex-cop who was fired from the LAPD in 2008 — began when he was named a suspect in the fatal shooting of the daughter of a former Los Angeles Police Department captain and the killing of two officers.


Dorner’s abandoned truck was discovered in the mountains about 60 miles east of Los Angeles and state wildlife officers encountered Dorner on the road. Dorner barricaded himself in a cabin and a lengthy standoff ended when officers filled the cabin with incendiary tear gas and it caught fire. Dorner's charred remains were discovered inside.


Reach Jessica Bliss at 615-259-8253 and jbliss@tennessean.com or on Twitter @jlbliss.
