
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

A Gloucester County grand jury has indicted both drivers in a two-vehicle crash that left a passenger dead last year.

Lawrence G. Carlin, 57, of Williamstown, was charged with death by auto following the Oct. 22 crash on the Black Horse Pike/Route 42.

Carlin was traveling north on 42 and making a left toward Pedrick Avenue when a Dodge Durango traveling south struck the passenger side of Carlin's Chevrolet Cobalt.

Cherie L. Perez, 43, of Williamstown, was sitting in the front passenger's seat of Carlin's car and died of her injuries hours after the crash.

The driver of the Durango, Anna M. Ibrahim, 38, of Mantua, and her juvenile passenger suffered minor injuries.

The police report noted that Carlin did not stop at the median break on Route 42 before starting his turn toward Pedrick.

He was also charged with two counts of assault by auto and driving while intoxicated. His blood alcohol concentration was measured at 0.14 percent, according to his police report. A motorist is considered under the influence if their BAC is 0.08 or greater.

Authorities learned that Ibrahim was driving with a suspended license and she was also charged.

The grand jury indicted Carlin on charges of death by auto (second degree) and two counts of assault by auto (fourth-degree). Ibrahim was indicted on a third-degree charge of causing serious injury while driving with a suspended license.

Carlin remains in Salem County Correctional Facility, according to jail records. Ibrahim was released in early November.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us: nj.com/tips.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        