


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Pima County deputies arrested a 44-year-old man Friday afternoon on suspicion of killing his wife and daughter and attempting to kill his son.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Readers can send news tips to azcentral.com via the newspaper's social media channels, email or by calling the office.
    Wochit

Pima County
(Photo: azcentral.com)

Pima County deputies arrested a 44-year-old man Friday afternoon on suspicion of killing his wife and daughter and attempting to kill his son.


Pima County Sheriff's Department officials believe Hernando Enriquez killed his wife, 43-year-old Sandra, and daughter, 15-year-old Isabelle, they said in a Saturday news release. 


Deputies had responded to a call about an aggravated assault about 4 p.m. in the southeast part of the county, in an unincorporated area called Vail, south of Tucson.


There, deputies talked to Enriquez's son, who had multiple injuries. He gave a description of his father before he was taken to a hospital, officials said.


The son, who was not identified, directed deputies to the family house, where they found the bodies of Enriquez's wife and daughter, according to Deputy Cody Gress, a Pima County Sheriff's Department spokesman.


Deputies found Enriquez with serious injuries in a culvert in the northwest part of the property, Gress said. He said Enriquez and his son were still in the hospital Sunday morning.


Gress said once Enriquez is released from the hospital, deputies will book him into a Pima County jail.


Gress said he had not been briefed on injury specifics. The deaths remain under investigation. 


Return to azcentral.com for updates.


READ MORE:


Police: Tempe fire captain shot, killed in road incident in Scottsdale


Tempe police: Man arrested after fleeing from officer, crashing car


Motorcyclist dies after crashing into tour bus in Phoenix
