Andrew Spark

Last
          Updated Dec 19, 2017 5:46 PM EST

ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — Authorities say a Florida attorney who used his position to gain access to a women's jail and film himself having sex with a female inmate bragged of making a pornographic video named "Girls in Jail."


A Pinellas County Sheriff's Office news release says 54-year-old Andrew Spark was arrested Sunday and charged with soliciting for prostitution and other counts. 


Detectives began investigating Spark last month following a tip that he was soliciting sex from female inmates at the Pinellas County Jail. On Nov. 25, Spark allegedly told a 25-year-old female inmate, who turned down his request for sex, that he had met with another incarcerated woman earlier that day and was producing the pornographic video.


The release say detectives confirmed Spark had met with a 28-year-old inmate earlier that day and later determined they had had sex at least six times since her June arrest on drug charges. Spark allegedly filmed the inmate in her jail uniform and filmed her performing sex acts during the meetings, the release says.


Investigators said Spark is accused of using attorney privilege to meet with the woman in a private room, according to the release. Spark has never represented the woman, but investigators say he began paying her for sex about three years ago, before she was an inmate. 


The Pinellas County Sheriff's Office received the tip about Spark in November, allegedly saying the suspect filmed sexual acts on his personal tablet, in exchange for money that he deposited in the inmate's commissary account.  


On Sunday, investigators recorded audio in the room where Spark was scheduled to meet the inmate and, they believe, to film more pornography. Investigators entered the room after Spark allegedly exposed himself.


Detectives are trying to determine if Spark engaged in similar activity at other jails. 


Spark is free on $5,300 bail. He didn't reply to an email seeking comment. 



                                            These are the types of criminal allegations that need to be seen to be believed
                                    


Police in Albuquerque say bones found could be linked to an unsolved serial killing case that has haunted the city


Temporary shelters on federal land don't face the rigorous, often unannounced child welfare reviews done at nearly all other facilities for unaccompanied immigrant children

Copyright © 2018 CBS Interactive Inc.All rights reserved.