
			OUR PICKS:		

Modern Promos, an Edina-based brand activation agency, has promoted Robert Job to executive vice president of growth strategy. … Minneapolis-based brand consultancy Persuasion Arts &amp; Sciences has launched a new creative platform for Lowe’s-owned hardware garden supply retailer Orchard Supply Hardware.

The Minnesota Beef Council has given its “Prime Promoter Award” to the West Central Cattlemen’s Association, Maple Plain.Related Articles




			
	
				
			Despite being told to leave, electric scooter company Bird sails back into St. Paul for a second day		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota officials seek cropland for new federal conservation program		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota farm must stop interstate sales of medicated meat		

			
	




			
	
				
			Starbucks, citing ocean threat, is ditching plastic straws		

			
	




			
	
				
			After talks, NKorea accuses US of ‘gangster-like’ demands		

			
	



Heidi L. Hukriede, founder and portfolio manager at Stonebridge Capital Advisors, St. Paul, has been announced as one of the Top Women in Finance by Finance &amp; Commerce. … Jaime Proman, Securian Financial Group’s director of digital innovation, has been named one of the top 25 “Rising Stars of Innovation Under 40” by LIMRA, a research and development organization for the life insurance industry. The company also announced it has named Sid Gandhi chief strategy and enterprise technology officer. Securian is based in St. Paul. … Ameriprise Financial, Minneapolis, earned the highest level of customer loyalty among investment firms in Temkin Group‘s 2017 Temkin Loyalty Index. … Through a partnership with the Minnesota Credit Union Network, Spire Credit Union, Falcon Heights, recently had the opportunity to host 30 representatives from 12 credit unions in Kenya, where they are known as Savings and Credit Co-operatives, or SACCOs. …  Avon, Minn., native Kelly Grier has been appointed to the combined post of EY U.S. chairman and managing partner and Americas managing partner-elect. EY is an international accounting and consulting firm based in London. … American Family Insurance’s Eden Prairie regional office renovation has received the prestigious LEED silver certification. LEED stands for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design. The company is based in Madison, Wis. … Old National Bank, St. Paul, announced the appointment of Kelly Elkin, to the board of directors of its foundation. Elkin is senior vice president, nonprofit banking for Anchor Bank, a division of Old National Bank. Her term will begin in January.

Planet Fitness announced it has opened a new location at 15350 Cedar Ave. S, Apple Valley.

PreferredOne, an insurance subsidiary of Minneapolis-based Fairview Health Services, announced the following leadership additions: Stacy Mays, chief operating officer; Pete Roverud, promoted to vice president of strategy and development, and Daniel Stewart, vice president of sales. … Comfort Keepers, a provider of independent living facilities for seniors, is celebrating its 15th anniversary in Osseo/Maple Grove. … Sheryl A. Ramstad was named chief external relations officer at Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis.

Diversified manufacturer 3M Co., Maplewood, and Ceridian, a Bloomington-based human capital management technology company, were named Nos. 60 and 92 respectively on the 2018 Best Place to Work list by Glassdoor, as part of Glassdoor’s Employees’ Choice Awards. … U.S. Rep. Collin Peterson, D-Minn., has received a 2017 Franchise Small Business Award from the International Franchise Association to recognize his championing the small-business community’s biggest legislative priorities. … Ceridian, a Bloomington-based human capital management technology company, announced that it has received three recognitions from Best in Biz Awards: Kristina Cleary, chief marketing officer, won Gold for Marketing Executive of the Year. Lisa Sterling, chief people and culture officer, received an award for HR Executive of the Year, and Ceridian’s People Team received an award for HR Department of the Year. The awards are judged by an independent panel of industry analysts, including the Associated Press, Forbes and Wired.

Fredrikson &amp; Byron, Minneapolis, been named to the BTI Client Service A-Team 2018.

Lawn-care and snow-removal machine maker The Toro Co., Bloomington, announced that Michael G. Vale will join its board of directors Jan. 1, 2018; Vale serves as the executive vice president, Health Care Business Group of 3M Co., Maplewood.

Twin Cities NBC-TV affiliate KARE 11 has won a Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University Award for investigative reporting


Mid-America Real Estate-Minnesota Vice President of Leasing Jesseka Doherty was named the 30th President of the Minnesota Shopping Center Association. Mid-America Real Estate-Minnesota is based in St. Louis Park.

A Subway is opening at 915 County Hwy 10, Blaine.

WeCo, an accessibility consultant run by people with disabilities, announced that it has a new logo, website, http://theweco.com/, and address at 323 Washington Ave. North, Suite 200,
Minneapolis. … Mark Fierek of Manna Freight Systems, Mendota Heights, has been named chairman of Specialized Furniture Carriers, a division of the American Home Furnishings Alliance.

Avionté, an Eagan-based provider of technology solutions to the recruiting and staffing industry, announced the acquisition of TKO Systems &amp; Support, of Holbrook, N.Y.

EMAIL ITEMS to businessnews@pioneerpress.com.

 

As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here.
