Welcome! 

News Feed Item

Identity Guard® with Watson Reinvents Identity Protection with Revolutionary Technology, Providing Targeted Risk Alerts and Preventative Services for Users and Families

CHANTILLY, Va., March 19, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Intersections Inc. (NASDAQ: INTX) provider of Identity Guard®, the industry pioneer in identity theft protection services, today launched Identity Guard with Watson, a class-changing offering that harnesses the power of IBM Watson to provide the fastest, most comprehensive and most sophisticated identity protection services available. 


"Identity Guard with Watson is true, next-generation identity theft protection," said Melba Amissi, Intersections' Chief Operating Officer. "It goes well beyond traditional credit monitoring to provide customized preventative protection, powered by artificial intelligence and based on an individual's unique profile and actions – both online and in the real world. No other service comes close to providing the same level of financial and lifestyle protection." 


Javelin Strategy and Research found 16.4 million Americans were victims of identity theft in 2017, the highest number on record. The study also found that fraudsters are coming up with even more sophisticated and insidious means of countering fraud prevention efforts, putting at risk a much broader range of accounts than those covered by traditional credit monitoring. 


Unlike any other identity theft product, Identity Guard uses the power of IBM Watson cognitive computing to personalize and customize its protection against identity theft and misuse of personal information. Identity Guard's algorithms can predict which digital habits lead to potential vulnerabilities and provide direction on correcting those habits, and IBM Watson scans millions of news articles, posts and social media comments daily to provide warning of relevant threats. "For example, if a new phishing scam hits a member's bank, that individual will receive a custom alert. This is revolutionary, one-of-a-kind technology for preventing identity theft" said Todd Jones, VP of New Product Development at Intersections.


Identity Guard with Watson services include:


Independent third-party testing has also demonstrated that Identity Guard with Watson has the shortest average response time for inquires made with the three major credit bureaus, compared with other competitors. The earlier an alert about a potential threat involving the misuse of personal information, the better equipped an individual will be to resolve it. Components of Identity Guard with Watson provide feedback loops so consumers can alert their institutions when fraud attempts are seen as a result of warnings from Identity Guard with Watson.


"With IBM Watson, we put artificial intelligence, machine self-learning, human-computer interaction, natural language processing and data mining together into a single comprehensive service," said Todd Jones. "We monitor more data and gather more insights about threats than anyone."


About Intersections &amp; IDENTITY GUARD®:Intersections Inc. (Nasdaq: INTX) provides innovative software solutions to help consumers and businesses manage the potential risks associated with the proliferation of their data in the virtual world. Under its IDENTITY GUARD® brand, the company utilizes advanced data-enabled technologies, including artificial intelligence, to help monitor, manage and protect sensitive information. Headquartered in Chantilly, Virginia, the company was founded in 1996. 


To learn more, Visit www.intersections.com, www.identityguard.com  and  www.identityguardbusiness.com


About IBM Watson: Pioneering a New Era of ComputingWatson represents a new era in computing called cognitive computing, where systems understand the world the way humans do: through senses, learning, and experience. Watson continuously learns from previous interactions, gaining in value and knowledge over time. With the help of Watson, organizations are harnessing the power of cognitive computing to transform industries, help professionals do their jobs better, and solve important challenges. As part of IBM's strategy to accelerate the growth of cognitive computing, Watson is open to the world, allowing a growing community of developers, students, entrepreneurs and tech enthusiasts to easily tap into the most advanced and diverse cognitive computing platform available today. Watson solutions are being built, used and deployed in more than 45 countries and across 20 different industries. For more information on IBM Watson, visit: ibm.com/watson. Join the conversation at #ibmwatson.


 View original content:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/intersections-inc-launches-ai-powered-identity-theft-protection-with-ibm-watson-300615850.html


SOURCE Intersections Inc.


Published March 19, 2018 
Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2007 PR Newswire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of PRNewswire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of PRNewswire. PRNewswire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





