Welcome! 

News Feed Item

Global leader in phishing defense unveils the first-and-only industry certification for phishing simulation programs

LEESBURG, Va., March 29, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Cofense ™, the leading provider of human-driven phishing defense solutions worldwide, today introduced Cofense PhishMe™ Certification for professionals who administer phishing simulation programs to safeguard their organizations against email-based attacks. Cofense created the phishing simulation industry by launching its Cofense PhishMe solution in 2008. The company continues to pioneer in this market segment by unveiling the first and only phishing simulation certification program of its kind.   




Phishing remains the #1 cyber-attack vector and security concern for organizations around the globe, with 43% of data breaches utilizing phishing techniques.1 Security awareness and phishing simulation programs are critical in developing vigilant employees to serve as a last line of defense when technology-only defenses leave security gaps. 


The Cofense PhishMe Certification, program provides


"We are thrilled to be offering the very first professional certification for phishing awareness programs," said Rohyt Belani, Co-Founder and CEO at Cofense. "As Cofense evolves our solution offerings, our dedication to phishing awareness - the first step towards building an effective phishing defense strategy - is only getting stronger. Being pioneers in this space, Cofense PhishMe Certification is proof that we remain steadfast in our investment to innovate and expand offerings for our global customer base." 


Certification benefits both customers and partners.


Cofense customers got a glimpse of the certification course at Submerge, the company's annual user conference held in the US and UK with over 100 completing the certification. Based on the program's success to date, Cofense expects nearly 1,000 customers to finish the course this year. 

Feedback from the initial certification preview at Submerge was overwhelmingly positive. "Thank you for giving me this opportunity to get certified. GREAT information, tips, and feature explanations, great course," noted one user. 


The course is a sign of exciting things to come for Cofense partners. In the near future, Cofense plans to release a managed services certification course, along with flexible options for partners to grow their professional services offerings. 


For more information about Cofense and its anti-phishing solutions, please visit: https://cofense.com/


About CofenseCofense, formerly known as PhishMe®, is the leading provider of human-driven phishing defense solutions world-wide. Cofense delivers a collaborative approach to cybersecurity by enabling organization-wide engagement to active email threats. Our collective defense suite combines timely attack intelligence sourced from employees with best-in-class incident response technologies to stop attacks faster and stay ahead of breaches.  Cofense customers include Global 1000 organizations in defense, energy, financial services, healthcare and manufacturing sectors that understand how changing user behavior will improve security, aid incident response and reduce the risk of compromise.


Media ContactNick LagalanteGlobal Corporate CommunicationsCOFENSEP: +1-571-393-2403E: [email protected] 


1 Source: http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/cyberespionage-and-ransomware-attacks-are-on-the-increase-warns-the-verizon-2017-data-breach-investigations-report-300446807.html 


 View original content with multimedia:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/cofense-pioneers-new-phishing-simulation-certification-program-for-security-awareness-professionals-300620964.html


SOURCE Cofense


Published March 29, 2018 
Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2007 PR Newswire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of PRNewswire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of PRNewswire. PRNewswire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





