
			OUR PICKS:		

Advertising agency Russell Herder, Minneapolis, announced the promotion of Danielle Fischer to vice president of operations; joining the agency in client services is Laura Hendrickson; Samantha Ray, Project Coordinator team member; Lula Hussein, research, and Molly Gobler, senior accountant. … Martin Williams Advertising, Minneapolis, announced the promotion of Anna Stassen to vice president, group creative director.

Braun Intertec, an engineering, consulting and testing firm, announced the hire of Senior Corporate Counsel Jennifer Clayson Kraus. Braun Intertec has offices in Little Canada and Bloomington.Related Articles




			
	
				
			Despite being told to leave, electric scooter company Bird sails back into St. Paul for a second day		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota officials seek cropland for new federal conservation program		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota farm must stop interstate sales of medicated meat		

			
	




			
	
				
			Starbucks, citing ocean threat, is ditching plastic straws		

			
	




			
	
				
			After talks, NKorea accuses US of ‘gangster-like’ demands		

			
	



LS Black Constructors, Maplewood, announced the addition of Michele Ode as director of marketing and business development, a new position at the company.

Dominium, a Plymouth-based leading apartment developer, owner and manager, announced that it A-Mill Artist Lofts, an artist-occupied affordable housing development, received LEED Gold certification by the U.S. Green Building Council.

Melissa Martyr-Wagner has been named to the Century College Foundation 2017-18 board of directors, serving a two-year term for the nonprofit organization based in White Bear Lake. She is currently the director of operations at NewStudio Architecture in White Bear Lake. … Flexographic Tech, Minneapolis, announced the latest graduates of its Press Operator course: Andrew Webber, Blanco Inc.; Aaron Pitt, Computype, Xai Thao, AWT Labels &amp; Packaging, and Vang Thao,  AWT Labels &amp; Packaging.

Mike Franklin, president of the Minnesota Conservative Energy Forum, St. Paul, has
been named one of Midwest Energy News’ 40 under 40, honoring emerging leaders throughout the region and their work in America’s transition to a clean energy economy. Franklin is a city council member for Jordan, Minn., is also works as a consultant at St. Paul-based Weber Johnson Public Affairs.

Ecolab, a St. Paul-based provider of cleaning services and products to businesses and industry, announced it is launching Water University, a high-tech learning facility located in Naperville, Ill., to serve as a customer experience center and will educate businesses about water scarcity and total water management.

Mahoney, Ulbrich, Christiansen &amp; Russ, a St. Paul accounting firm, announced that CPA Marc Kotsonas has completed the Not-for-Profit Level II Certificate Program offered by the Association of International Certified Professional Accountants. … Hiway Federal Credit Union, St. Paul, has welcomed Sandy Oleson as its new mortgage sales manager. … Bert McKasy, chair of the Mairs &amp; Power Funds Trust Board of Trustees, will be retiring on Dec. 31. Mary Schmid Daugherty, a trustee of the funds since 2010 and current Audit Committee chair, will take over as board chair Jan. 1. The Board of Trustees also appointed two new trustees to the board effective Jan 1: Susan Knight, retired senior vice president and chief financial officer of MTS Systems Corp., and Mark Henneman, president of the Funds Trust and president and chief investment officer of Mairs &amp; Power. The firm is based in St. Paul. … Bridgewater Bank, Bloomington, announced that David Volk has been named to the board of directors. Volk is principal at Castle Creek Capital, Rancho Santa Fe, Calif. … Intellicents has been included in the first-ever National Association of Plan Advisors Top DC Advisor Firms listing. The company has offices in Albert Lea and Minneapolis. … Wayzata-based Merrill Lynch financial adviser Christina Boyd was named the nation’s No. 1 financial adviser as part of Working Mother Magazine’s inaugural Top Wealth Adviser Moms.

Hope House, a program of 180 Degrees, announced it has received a $450,000 grant award from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Hope House provides emergency housing for runaway/homeless youth in southwestern rural and outer-ring Twin Cities suburbs.


Nick Hackworthy, CEO of Creative Homes, Woodbury, received the first ever Vistage Minnesota IMPACT Award, recognizing local members who demonstrate the Vistage core values of trust, caring, challenge and growth. Vistage is a professional organization for support of top executives. … The St. Paul Area Chamber of Commerce announced the 2017 Deubener Awards finalists: Nonprofit Service Business: Bridging, Minnesota Children’s Museum, Springboard for the Arts; For-Profit Service Business: Chowgirls Killer Catering, Evolve Systems, Gardner Builders; Emerging Business: Optimize Social Media,  Paul Davis Restoration of Greater St. Paul, The Power House at Highland; Family Owned: HED Cycling Products, J&amp;J Distributing, Mueller Memorial; Women/Minority Owned: Afro Deli, Goodmanson Construction, Midpointe Event Center. … Midwest Industrial Tool Grinding, Hutchinson, Minn., has been named the winner of the Workforce Development Award, part of the 2017 Minnesota Business Manufacturing Awards. … Xcel Energy CEO Ben Fowke has been named Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal’s 2018 Executive of the Year. Xcel Energy is based in Minneapolis. … Metro Independent Business Alliance has announced the finalists for its 2017 Indie Business Awards: Founders: BankCherokee, Bartmann Group, Milton Investment Co.; Emerging: Healing Elements, The Herbivorous Butcher, St. Paul Media; Impact: Golden Fig Fine Foods, Peace Coffee, Wet Paint; The Gary Mazzone Award for Individual contribution: Katie Dupay, Harvey Zuckman; Nonprofit: Rêve Academy, St. Paul Almanac,Tech Dump. … JPMorgan Chase and Meda announced that UnderRecruited Preps has been awarded the $20,000 prize as the Most Innovative Minority Entrepreneur in the MN Cup competition. … College City Beverage, Dundas, Minn., received the National Beer Wholesalers Association Public Affairs Award, recognizing a company that effectively uses communications initiatives to advocate for and promote the beer distribution industry.

Moss &amp; Barnett, Minneapolis, announced that firm CEO Thomas J. Shroyer was awarded an honorary membership by the Minnesota Society of Certified Public Accountants. … Attorney Caitlin B. Houlton Kuntz has joined Fredrikson &amp; Byron as an associate in the Bank and Finance and Corporate Governance Groups. Fredrikson &amp; Byron is based in Minneapolis. … Robins Kaplan announced that Shonette Gaston has joined the firm as chief operating officer, based in the Minneapolis office. … Maple Grove law firm Henningson &amp; Snoxell announced that attorney Charles (Chuck) Hollenhorst has joined the firm as a member of the Commercial and Business Department, practicing in the areas of corporate law and commercial real estate.

Semiconductor manufacturer SkyWater Technology Foundry, Bloomington, has named Thomas Sonderman as company president.

OneOme, a Minneapolis-based pharmacogenomics company, announced it has been named a finalist for the 18th Annual Minnesota High Tech Association‘s Tekne Awards in the Healthcare category.

The Minneapolis Foundation announced Dominick Washington as its new vice president of marketing and communications, effective Oct. 30. … The St. Croix Valley Foundation, Hudson, Wis., has named James (Jim) Ellis to its board of directors. Ellis, recently retired, was vice president, Imation Global OEM.

CBRE announced that Ted Holmes has joined CBRE Capital Markets’ Debt and Structured Finance team as senior vice president, based in the firm’s Minneapolis office.

Prefer, a service that helps connect people to service professionals recommended by their friends, has launched this month in the Twin Cities. … Jenny D. Swanson has joined MDA Leadership Consulting, Minneapolis, as a senior consultant. … Business services company The Improve Group, St. Paul, announced changes to the company’s top leadership: Derek Hazeltine, chief operations officer; Maria T. Moeller, promoted to chief marketing officer; Tiana Bastian, senior research analyst, and Jennifer Franklin, senior writer and editor. … Business risk-management company Bryghtpath, Shoreview, announced that Principal and CEO Bryan Strawser has been selected as a senior fellow at George Washington University‘s Center for Cyber and Homeland Security.

Equus Holdings, a Minneapolis-based holding company with a portfolio of technology companies, announced the appointment of Rick Green as company president. … Photography technology company CaptureLife, Minneapolis, has partnered with multimedia company Cashman Photo, which has adopted CaptureLife as its primary social and mobile image delivery and engagement platform..

EMAIL ITEMS to businessnews@pioneerpress.com.

 

As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here.
