
			OUR PICKS:		

CHS Inc., Inver Grove Heights, has named Rick Dusek executive vice president for its Country Operations division, serving farmers and ranchers through locally governed ag retailers in 450 communities across 16 states. … The Cooperative Network, St. Paul, has given its 2017 Cooperative Builder Award to Randy Geiger, Ran-Rose Dairy Farms, Reedsville, Wis.; Brian Krambeer, MiEnergy Cooperative, and Michael Toelle, a diversified corn, soybean, wheat and swine business operator in Minnesota and Manitoba, Canada. The award is presented for contributions at the local, state, and/or national level to advance cooperative philosophy and ideals.

Wenck announced that Shawn Witherspoon has joined the company as business development manager. Wenck has locations in St. Paul and Golden Valley. … American Engineering Testing, St. Paul, announced that one of its founders, Chairman Terrance (Terry) Swor, is retiring on Jan. 2.Related Articles




			
	
				
			Despite being told to leave, electric scooter company Bird sails back into St. Paul for a second day		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota officials seek cropland for new federal conservation program		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota farm must stop interstate sales of medicated meat		

			
	




			
	
				
			Starbucks, citing ocean threat, is ditching plastic straws		

			
	




			
	
				
			After talks, NKorea accuses US of ‘gangster-like’ demands		

			
	



Chem/Serv, a Minneapolis-based, family-owned chemical distribution company, announced being named the 2017 Distributor of the Year by the National Association of Chemical Distributors.

Apple Valley-based Closets For Life was recognized with two Contractor of the Year awards at by the National Association of the Remodeling Industry-Minnesota chapter.

Dominium, a Plymouth-based apartment owner, developer and manager, announced that it has completed a substantial renovation of Park Haven Apartments in Brooklyn Park. … United Properties, Minneapolis, announced that Chris Pohlad has joined the company as vice president of asset management.

The Minnesota High Tech Association has named computer training program Code Savvy, St. Louis Park, as the recipient of the 2017 Tekne Award in the STEM Education category.

Advantus Capital Management, an asset management subsidiary of St. Paul-based Securian Financial Group, has promoted Dave Kuplic to president, effective Nov. 13. … Edina-based business brokerage firm Calhoun Cos. recently welcomed Brian Aagaard to the agent roster. … Bremer Financial Corp., St. Paul, announced that Erin Dady has been named chief marketing officer effective Dec. 4.

The Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting has been awarded to the City of Rosemount by the Government Finance Officers Association of the United States and Canada for its comprehensive annual financial report.

The Minnesota Super Bowl Host Committee Legacy Fund awarded a $100,000 grant to the Prairie Island Indian Community to help create a culturally-relevant recreation space a few miles from the main reservation.


Community Dental Care announced that has selected Karen Kleinhans as
chief executive officer. Community Dental Care has offices in St. Paul, Maplewood and Robbinsdale.

Dorsey &amp; Whitney announced that it has named 16 new partners effective Jan. 1; Minneapolis partners are Erik Detlefsen, Finance and Restructuring; Kathryn Johnson, Construction Litigation; Jillian Kornblatt, Labor and Employment; Tessa Mielke, Tax, Trusts &amp; Estates; Forrest Tahdooahnippah, Intellectual Property Litigation, and Cameron Wood, Mergers and Acquisitions. … Farrish Johnson Law Office, Mankato, announced the addition of attorney Kenzie J. Corrow, focusing on family law. … Fredrikson &amp; Byron shareholder Kevin C. Riach has been announced as a 2017 Attorney of the Year honoree for the second time in his career by Minnesota Lawyer magazine. Fredrikson &amp; Byron is based in Minneapolis. … Robins Kaplan announced that Breanna Johnson has joined the firm as chief strategy, pricing, and legal project management officer, in the Minneapolis office.

Jeff Koch of truck leasing agency Koch NationaLease in St. Paul, has received the NationaLease Leadership Circle Award from the parent company.

Imark Molding Inc., a plastic injection molding company, is expanding its operations in St. Croix County, Wis., expected to create 40 jobs. … The Minnesota High Tech Association has named Minneapolis-based mattress maker Sleep Number as the recipient of the 2017 Tekne Award in the Internet of Things category. … Industrial filter maker Donaldson Co. Inc., Bloomington, has elected Pilar Cruz to its board of directors. Cruz currently serves as president of Cargill’s Feed and Nutrition business. … Avantech, a Baxter, Minn.-based tool builder for the rotational molding industry, was recognized for Product of the Year tooling for the third year in a row at the Association of Rotational Molders‘ Rotoplas event in Rosemont, Ill. … Water technology manufacturer Pentair announced that it has named Lynnette Heath, executive vice president and chief human resources officer; Jon Lammers, executive vice president, general counsel and secretary, and Ben Sommerness, executive vice president, chief growth and strategy officer for Pentair’s Electrical business, which is expected to separate from Pentair’s Water business in the second quarter of 2018. Pentair is based in London with U.S. headquarters in Golden Valley. … Proto Labs, a Maple Plain-based technology-enabled manufacturer, has entered into a agreement to acquire privately held parts supplier Rapid Manufacturing Group of New Hampshire.

Center for Diagnostic Imaging announced that Glenn Galloway has been appointed chief information officer. Center for Diagnostic Imaging has offices in Mendota Heights, Woodbury and Maplewood. … Carol Ryerson, a senior principal adviser in Regulatory Affairs for the Regulatory and Clinical Research Institute, St. Louis Park, has been appointed to the board of directors of the Association of Medical Diagnostics Manufacturers, a nonprofit trade organization to advance in vitro diagnostic development.

Tiwahe Foundation, Minneapolis, announced that Melissa Anderson has joined as foundation administrator Nov. 27. … Resource Inc., a 60-year-old Minneapolis-based organization focused on recovery and workforce development, has changed its name to Avivo.

WomenVenture, Minneapolis, announced the debut of its new website, WomenVenture.org. … Sarah Curtiss, program director at Men As Peacemakers, Duluth, was named one of 21 leaders to participate in the fourth cycle of the Move to End Violence, a program of the NoVo Foundation. … Karen G. Schanfield has been appointed to the Jewish Metropolitan Council. The council was created by the Minneapolis Jewish Federation and the Jewish Federation of Greater St. Paul to help achieve collaboration and cooperation in the Twin Cities Jewish community. Schanfield is a shareholder at Fredrikson &amp; Byron, Minneapolis.

The Eagan Rotary Club distributed a total of $26,000 to 23 organizations whose programs directly benefit people in the Eagan community.

Institute of Real Estate Management Minnesota has elected Cushman &amp; Wakefield Senior Property Manager Dennis Meadows as 2018 chapter president.

The Tile Shop, a Plymouth-based retailer of manufactured and natural stone tiles, has opened two new showrooms in the Houston metro area. … Starbucks has opened a location in the Albertville Premium Outlets. … Grocery chain Aldi is opening a location at 160 Tyler Road North, Red Wing. … Schmitt Music announced that Chief Financial Officer Robert Baker has been appointed to chief operating officer. Schmitt Music, Minneapolis, specializes in band and orchestra instruments, pianos, and music education, as well as printed music, accessories, instrument repair and other support services.

MDA Leadership Consulting, a Minneapolis-based executive talent recruiting firm, announced the following promotions: Sharon Sackett to senior vice president of the firm’s CEO and Board Services practice and Global Assessment; Kevin Louiselle to executive vice president of Talent Strategy and Assessment; Jeff Stoner to senior vice president of the firm’s Leadership Development practice; Jeff Hinds to vice president of private equity; Cory Jacobson to vice president of client development.

Excelsior-based IT security company Blue Bay Technologies announced the appointment of Casey Plunkett as executive vice president of sales and marketing. …  Arcserve, an Eden Prairie-based data protection and security company, announced it has received a 2017 Tekne award from the Minnesota High Tech Association for its innovation in disaster recovery. … Technology services provider Marco, St. Cloud, announced that it has purchased BusinessWare Solutions, an IT services and managed print company headquartered in Hutchinson, Minn.

EMAIL ITEMS to businessnews@pioneerpress.com.

 

As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here.
