By

Valerie Edwards For Dailymail.com


and 
Alexander Robertson For Mailonline






  Published:
  06:09 EDT, 4 February 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  16:15 EDT, 4 February 2018







         598

View  comments

An Amtrak passenger train, that was traveling on the wrong track, slammed into a freight train parked on a side track in South Carolina early Sunday, killing two Amtrak employees and injuring more than 110 people, authorities said. 


Conductor Michael Cella, 36, and the train's engineer 54-year-old Michael Kempf were identified as the two people who died as a result of the crash, according to the Lexington County Coroner's Office.


Rail Safety Expert Michael Callanan said that Cella was a family man and had two small children, ages six and two.


'He always had a smile on his face. He was a pleasure to be in class with and Mike was a pleasure to work with,' Callanan told WLTX. 'This really hits home.' 


Cella's widow Christine Praeger Cella said: 'He was amazing and he was a loving father.'


Callanan said he and Cella, were friends, attended the same Amtrak conductor school in 2008 and worked together in Jacksonville, Florida after that.


Sunday morning's crash was the third deadly wreck involving Amtrak in less than two months. 








Scroll down for video  


Amtrak conductor Michael Cella (left), 36, and the train's engineer 54-year-old Michael Kempf (right), were both killed Sunday morning when their train collided with a parked freight train in South Carolina

The Amtrak passenger train, that was traveling on the wrong track, slammed into a freight train parked on a side track in South Carolina early Sunday, injuring 116 people, authorities said

Amtrak's Silver Star was on its way from New York to Miami with eight crew members and about 139 passengers and eight crew members around 2.45am when it plowed into the CSX train at an estimated 59mph, Gov Henry McMaster said

Amtrak's Silver Star was on its way from New York to Miami with eight crew members and about 139 passengers and eight crew members around 2.45am when it plowed into the CSX train at an estimated 59mph, Gov Henry McMaster said. 


The wreck took place around a switchyard about 10 miles south of Columbia.


The governor said investigators have yet to determine how the Amtrak train ended up on the wrong stretch of track.


'The CSX was on the track it was supposed to be on,' McMaster said.


The National Transportation Safety Board will investigate the incident and investigators are on the way to the scene. 


McMaster said 116 people were taken to four hospitals. 


McMaster (pictured Sunday morning) said the wreck took place around a switchyard about 10 miles south of Columbia. The governor said investigators have yet to determine how the Amtrak train ended up on that stretch of track




Several eyewitnesses reported that many of the 'walking wounded' were seen wandering the tracks. Photos showed severely mangled cars strewn across the railway line (pictured)

The National Transportation Safety Board are seen conducting their investigation of the deadly train crash 










President Donald Trump also repsonded to the tragic crash Sunday morning on Twitter. 


'My thoughts and prayers are with all of the victims involved in this mornings train collision in South Carolina. Thank you to our incredible First Responders for the work they've done!'


Deputy White House press secretary Lindsay Walters also released a statement, saying the president is 'receiving regular updates' about the crash.


'Our thoughts and prayers are with everyone that has been affected by this incident,' Walters added. 


Dr Steve Shelton, Palmetto Health director of emergency preparedness, said that the main trauma hospital in the area had three patients in critical or serious condition, with the rest treated for minor injuries such as cuts, bruises and whiplash.


One passenger who was injured and taken to the hospital, was Lynn Winston, 57, who was on her way home to Tampa after spending time with her daughters in New York and New Jersey.


Winston told WFLA that she is still in the hospital, but will be released soon


President Donald Trump also repsonded to the tragic crash Sunday morning

Dr Steve Shelton, Palmetto Health director of emergency preparedness, said that the main trauma hospital in the area had three patients in critical or serious condition. First responders are seen taking a patient out of the back of an ambulance 

Investigators work the scene of the derailed train in South Carolina 




Drone footage showed the locomotives of both trains crumpled, the Amtrak engine on its side

The derailed Amtrak train sits on the track in Cayce, SC  2018, on Sunday




Winston says she was in the sleeper car and had just woken up to use the bathroom when the crash happened. 


'I opened up my door to look outside to see what happened and everybody came out of their rooms and the Amtrak personnel was running back and forth saying "Everybody be calm, we may have to evacuate."'


Winston said due to pain in her leg, she had to be helped off the train. 


Drone footage showed the locomotives of both trains crumpled, the Amtrak engine on its side. 


Photos showed severely mangled cars strewn across the railway line.


Officials said that more than 5,000 gallons of fuel had leaked from the two trains but there was no threat to the public. By 7am, the leaks had been contained. 


The Red Cross opened up a reception site for the injured and family members at a nearby school. The shelter for passengers was set up at Pine Ridge Middle School.








Captain Adam Myrick (pictured speaking) from the Lexington County Sheriff's Department said in a press conference Sunday morning that all of the passengers had been removed from the Amtrak train by 7am 

Representatives from the Red Cross (pictured) said during the press conference that Red Cross opened up a reception site for the injured and family members at a nearby school

Captain Adam Myrick from the Lexington County Sheriff's Department said in a press conference Sunday morning that authorities are still working to make sure the crash site remains secure. 


'We are teaming up with state troopers to control traffic in the area,' Myrick said, adding that 'deputies have transported those who are not injured to the reception site'.


Myrick said that all of the passengers had been removed from the train by 6.45am. 


One car in the middle of the Amtrak train was snapped in half, forming a V off to the side of the tracks.


'It's a horrible thing to see, to understand the force involved,' McMaster said after touring the scene.


Many passengers were asleep when the train began shaking violently and then slammed to a halt, passenger Derek Pettaway told CBS.


'You knew we'd hit something or we'd derailed,' he said.





 Myrick said that authorities are still working to make sure the crash site remains secure. A trooper is seen preparing to direct traffic away from the site 

Another police car blocked the roadway near the crash to ensure no one traveled by the scene




Elliot Smith told The State newspaper of Columbia that he was staying with a friend when they heard what sounded like a propane tank exploding.


'The sound was so loud, you instantly knew it was bad,' he said. Smith said he and his friend saw passengers limping along the tracks, while others tried to get everyone out of the cars.


Amtrak officials gathered up luggage and other belongings and within hours put passengers aboard buses to their destinations. 


Before being sent on their way, those who were not hurt were taken to a shelter, and local businesses provided coffee and breakfast.


'We know they are shaken up quite a bit. We know this is like nothing else they have ever been through. So we wanted to get them out of the cold, get them out of the weather - get them to a warm place,' sheriff's spokesman Adam Myrick said





Lexington County Coroner Margaret Fisher confirmed that the two fatalities had occurred abroad the Amtrak service and not the freight train. This map shows the location of the collision 

Officials said that more than 5,000 gallons of fuel had leaked from the two trains but there was no threat to the public. By 7am, the leaks had been contained







It comes days after a chartered train carrying Republican lawmakers hit a garbage truck.


The impact crunched the front of the train's engine, smashed the truck, and left one truck passenger dead and at least five hospitalized. 


 And on December 18, an Amtrak train ran off the rails along a curve during its inaugural run on a route south of Tacoma, Washington, killing three people and injuring dozens. 


It was going nearly 80mph, more than twice the speed limit. 





Anyone seeking information about passengers on Train 91 should call the Amtrak info line at 1-800-523-9101. 


First responders arrive at the scene early Sunday morning  

The recent Amtrak crash (pictured) comes days after a chartered train carrying Republican lawmakers hit a garbage truck



Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group