Authorities released video of an altercation they said shows a Florida school bus aide hitting a special needs student. Surveillance video from inside the bus appeared to capture Brenda Nelson, 65, of Polk County, striking the child on the head with her hand, NBC-affiliate WFLA reported Friday. The aide was booked on child abuse charges and later released on bail.


"I’m gonna slap that tongue out of your mouth when I get up there," Nelson is heard telling the student before the altercation. In the video, Nelson appeared to approach the child from behind her seat and then aggressively yanked her head from side to side several times, police said. 





The Transportation Safety Specialist on Wednesday told police a citizen complaint was received from a witness who claimed she saw a bus attendant hit a female student on the head. The victim attends Doris Sanders Learning Center in Lakeland.


Deputies interviewed Nelson the next day and told them that she didn’t remember hitting the child on the head. She claimed that the child was disobedient and attempted to leave her seat. Nelson said she sat next to the victim for the remainder of her ride and restrained her to "limit her mobility," deputies said.


"I guess I done it. I didn't remember hitting her." Brenda claimed, "I must have just lost it. I don't remember doing that. I would never hit one of those kids."


However, further review of the video showed that the child had been wearing a harness and was not seen causing a problem, deputies said. Nelson was later arrested and booked into Polk County Jail.


The Polk County School board issued a statement regarding the matter.


"Our children are the single most precious thing on this earth. At Polk County Public Schools, our most important job is to protect them, to provide them with a safe environment in which they can grow, learn and thrive. This employee squandered the trust of the children and families in her care. She does not embody the values of Polk County Public Schools, and I will not tolerate it. I have instructed my HR staff to immediately begin the process of termination."  Superintendent Jacqueline Byrd wrote.