Lots of sunshine. High near 95F. Winds S at 10 to 20 mph..

A clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:52 pm

Sgt. Stefan Davis was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal on Wednesday during an Omaha Police Foundation awards luncheon.

Sgt. Stefan Davis was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal on Wednesday during an Omaha Police Foundation awards luncheon.

An Omaha police sergeant who helped capture the escapee who killed a Pottawattamie County deputy was named officer of the year during the Omaha Police Foundation’s awards luncheon.

Sgt. Stefan Davis was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal on Wednesday for his part in capturing Wesley Correa-Carmenaty. Davis captured Correa-Carmenaty after the car the escapee was driving hit a wall at Cuming Street and the Interstate 480 entrance ramp.

While escaping the Pottawattamie County Jail on May 1, Correa-Carmenaty shot two sheriff’s deputies, fatally wounding Deputy Mark Burbridge.

Davis was among 25 officers and two non-sworn personnel recognized during the luncheon at the Scott Conference Center. The foundation also presented a Community Impact Award to the Omaha Police Department’s forensics unit for its successful efforts to elevate the department’s labs through national accreditation.

The foundation awarded its Dr. Jack K. Lewis Memorial Scholarship to Elkhorn South High School senior Sierra Morris. She was selected based on academic performance, leadership, extracurricular activities and an application essay.

Morris said the $5,000 will help cover tuition this fall at the University of Nebraska at Kearney.

Sgt. Stefan Davis was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal on Wednesday during an Omaha Police Foundation awards luncheon.




Pottawattamie County Sheriff Jeff Danker said the jail’s new security body scanner will help prevent prisoners smuggling contraband in the future — and that such a device could have prevented tragedy a year ago.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Kevin Cole covers Omaha crime and public safety news. Follow him on Twitter @KevinColeOmaha. Phone: 402-444-1272.


                                    
                                        Whenever Kevin Cole posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


