Sunny. High near 95F. Winds S at 10 to 15 mph..

A clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:52 am

crime, police, tape,

COUNCIL BLUFFS — A Council Bluffs man charged with the attempted murder of a Council Bluffs police officer is currently being held without bond in jail.

Jamie Kennedy, 27, was transferred to the Pottawattamie County Jail on Sept. 12 in connection to a June 2 incident where he allegedly tried to run over an officer in an attempt to escape authorities, according to court records.

The police report stated officers observed Kennedy near Avenue E and 35th Street around noon on June 2. Officers recognized Kennedy, who had several warrants for his arrest.

One officer pulled up in his cruiser into the driveway where Kennedy was parked, while another officer in plain clothes but with a badge visible approached Kennedy and ordered him out of his car.

Police said Kennedy intentionally turned the steering wheel of his truck towards the officer as he accelerated at him.

The officer jumped out of the path of the truck. Despite having his pistol drawn and fearing for his life, the officer did not shoot at Kennedy for fear of hitting others in the truck or house, the report stated.

Police pursued Kennedy, who eventually rolled his vehicle on the Interstate 480 bridge. He and his wife, who was pregnant at the time, were taken to an Omaha hospital and treated for injuries. Kennedy was arrested in Omaha then held at the Douglas County Jail on Nebraska charges until he was extradited Sept. 12 to Pottawattamie County, according to police.

Among his charges, Kennedy faces counts of eluding law enforcement, reckless driving and violating his probation. His public defender, attorney Peter Tenny, was unable to be reached for comment.

crime, police, tape,

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


