Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy with isolated thunderstorms developing this afternoon. High 91F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:54 am

Virginia Tech graduate Chanz Hopkins poses with an ichthyology derby jar. It contains 40 different species of fresh water fish that undergraduates identify as part of their class.

Chanz Hopkins (right) examines a fish net while conducting candy darter research in Giles County with Mike Pinder (left), a biologist with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.

Chanz Hopkins examines walleye eggs as part of a research project through the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.

Chanz Hopkins looks at fish specimens in the Cheatham Hall College of Natural Resources and Environment collection.

Virginia Tech graduate Chanz Hopkins collects a candy darter as part of a research project in Big Stony Creek in Giles County.

Chanz Hopkins, a Pulaski County native, graduated high school in 2001 and started working at Pulaski Furniture. After a 2008 car crash and struggles following it, he went to NRCC and then to Tech where he is majoring in fish conservation. He will work for VDGIF after graduation.

Virginia Tech graduate Chanz Hopkins poses with an ichthyology derby jar. It contains 40 different species of fresh water fish that undergraduates identify as part of their class.

Chanz Hopkins (right) examines a fish net while conducting candy darter research in Giles County with Mike Pinder (left), a biologist with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.

Chanz Hopkins examines walleye eggs as part of a research project through the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.

Chanz Hopkins looks at fish specimens in the Cheatham Hall College of Natural Resources and Environment collection.

Virginia Tech graduate Chanz Hopkins collects a candy darter as part of a research project in Big Stony Creek in Giles County.

Chanz Hopkins, a Pulaski County native, graduated high school in 2001 and started working at Pulaski Furniture. After a 2008 car crash and struggles following it, he went to NRCC and then to Tech where he is majoring in fish conservation. He will work for VDGIF after graduation.

BLACKSBURG — When Chanz Hopkins breathes the air near the New River he says he knows he’s home.

The scent of the water is nostalgia for the Pulaski County native.

“I can just smell the air and I know I’m on the New River,” Hopkins said. “It doesn’t smell like any other river.”

It was the magnetism to the river, and a desire to better himself after mistakes and tragedy, that fueled Hopkins to get his bachelor’s degree in fish conservation from Virginia Tech at 34 years old.

Hopkins will walk into Lane Stadium with more than 4,800 other graduates to receive a bachelor’s degree Friday as part of the school’s commencement ceremony. After a winding journey that involves battling back from a horrific car crash and wrestling with alcohol and drugs, he says he’s living proof of what can be done through perseverance.

“You can do anything you want to do and be anything you want to be,” Chanz (pronounced ‘chance’) Hopkins said.

Those around him who have dealt with the highs and lows in his life are proud of him for achieving his dream.

“It makes me very happy. When he was younger, this was what he wanted to do,” said Chanz’s father, Mike Hopkins. “Things just didn’t work out that way. But, now they have and it’s a wonderful blessing.”

Working with fish

Hopkins is the kind of person you want in the field, said Don Orth, a fisheries and wildlife professor at Tech who hired Hopkins to work in his laboratory and help teach an ichthyology, or study of fish, class.

He can fix a boat. He can find geographic locations. He can talk to locals and convince them the importance of doing fish surveys near their land.

Hopkins’ maturity level, how he poses questions and then works to answer them is impressive, Orth said.

“He’s not the kind of student or worker I ever have to be worried about,” Orth said. “He does things the way a scientist should do things.”

Hopkins has also become a master of time management, working full-time the entire duration he’s been enrolled at Virginia Tech. He has a young daughter at home and another child on the way.

But with all that, he’s still shown a knack for research projects.

As an undergraduate, Hopkins took it upon himself to measure fish populations in Back Creek, the waterway he used to play in as a child. He talked to farmers and measured fish populations with the help of a fellow student Paul Weiss and Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries biologist Mike Pinder, who Hopkins has worked for as an aquatic technician in the past and will do so again after graduation.

“He has this built-in drive to get things done,” Pinder said.

Hopkins has a love for fish. Assisting in Orth’s ichthyology class means he has to be able to identify fish species, and it’s something he does with ease, Orth said.

“He just knows a lot about fish,” Orth said.

A winding path

As a kid, Hopkins played in creeks and waterways where he grew up — on Cloyd’s Mountain near Dublin. He also spent time learning how to fish on the New River with his father.

A 2001 Pulaski County High School grad, Hopkins attended New River Community College for about a year and a half before dropping out. He took a job at Pulaski Furniture, first in the lacquering room at the plant before transferring to the company’s outlet store.

As it looked like the former furniture behemoth would pull out of Pulaski, Hopkins began hopping around different industrial and manufacturing jobs in his home county. But work, though he was dedicated to it, wasn’t really what he cared about.

“I was more into partying,” Hopkins said. “I wasn’t a model citizen.”

In May 2008 Hopkins was on his way home from work after working a double shift. That night he said he’d won tickets to a concert in Lynchburg to see the band Drowning Pool. He was tired, though, and he fell asleep at the wheel, crashing in the Poplar Hill area of Giles County on the way back to his then-home in Hollybrook in Bland County.

He was taken by a helicopter to Roanoke where he remained in a coma for a couple weeks. He broke both ankles, fractured a vertebrae in his back, shattered both femurs. He still has scars on his face.

Mike Hopkins and his wife were working at Volvo at the time — and the company had previously announced layoffs. They wanted to be at their son’s bedside constantly, but couldn’t take time off work because they were about to lose their jobs and needed to continue to get their paychecks due to the situation. So, the pair spent hours driving back and forth between Dublin and Roanoke when their shifts ended.

When Chanz Hopkins came out of his coma, he moved back home with his parents in Pulaski County. He needed a wheelchair to stay mobile, but over the course of two years he rehabbed himself through hard work and physical therapy. He’s still nagged by some injuries to this day.

“It felt like my life was over,” Hopkins said.

It was also during that time that Hopkins said he turned to pain pills. And that led to other problems as he battled addiction. By 2012, though he could walk again, his life had spiraled out of control.

He and his father said Chanz began committing crimes associated with addiction. Most of those crimes were against his own parents. So his father said he did “the most difficult thing I’d ever had to do.”

Mike Hopkins called the police for help. His son was arrested.

Chanz Hopkins was charged for a litany of crimes related to writing bad checks and theft and he ultimately pleaded guilty to 17 felony counts of forgery and theft. He served seven months in jail and then entered the 18-month treatment program New Life.

Another chance

In New Life, Hopkins said, things began to turn around. He got a job moving furniture at the Designer Consigner in Christiansburg. The store’s owner, Randy Jamison — a 1975 Tech graduate — recognized Hopkins could do more in life than work at his shop where he said “I don’t pay too well.”

“I don’t know that I pushed him to go to Virginia Tech,” Jamison said. “He had certain goals. The New River was something he was raised on and with. He had a close connection so I just encouraged him to go back and finish his associate’s degree.”

It was that pushing, and steady work, that gave Hopkins the stability in life that he needed.

Hopkins got that associate’s degree from New River Community College. Along the way, Jamison said, he gave him flexible hours so he could keep a job while going to school.

Hopkins ended up working for Jamison for more than four years.

The next hurdle would come from getting into Jamison’s alma mater.

Hopkins thought his criminal record would make admittance to Tech difficult. Sure, he had the community college grades, but what about the run-ins with the law? But Jamison continued to encourage him.

After applying, Hopkins had his case reviewed by a community standing board at Tech, which ultimately ruled he should be allowed to enter the school.

Hopkins credits his success in New Life and the support of his parents, friends and other family members for getting him to college in Blacksburg.

“You know that saying ‘it takes a village?’ ” Hopkins said. “I’m evidence of that.”

Once in college, Hopkins was a successful student from the beginning, his professors said.

“He’s pretty much the ideal student I would wish to have in my class,” said Leandro Castello, a fisheries and wildlife professor who taught Hopkins.

Castello said he sometimes worries about transfer students’ abilities to adapt to a rigorous Virginia Tech schedule. That was no problem with Hopkins, who relished the opportunity to be in the classroom learning about conservation.

For Hopkins, it was just an honor to be in the classroom. He admires the professors he has in Tech’s highly rated College of Natural Resources and Environment. So studying fish and learning the best ways to be a conservation scientist came naturally.

“It’s been a lot of work to get this degree,” Hopkins said. “But this is the American dream.”

A future with fish

After graduation Hopkins will work temporarily as an aquatic technician for the Virginia Department of Game an Inland Fisheries. He held the job last summer, too.

Mike Pinder, a field biologist for the state agency, has worked with Hopkins in the past. Giving him another go at the role in the field seemed natural.

“Chanz is awesome,” Pinder said. “He’s a really hard worker. He is very enthusiastic, he’s very knowledgeable of the resources.”

The job isn’t full-time and it doesn’t have benefits. But Hopkins hopes it’ll lead something more. He loves the area and wants to keep his young family around their relatives, so he’ll keep looking around.

Though Hopkins had job offers outside Virginia in private industry, he couldn’t turn down the opportunity to stay in the area he’s always lived.

He thinks taking part in the community here is important. He’s an active member of Unity Christian Church in Radford and has had his voting rights restored.

He just has to keep the same mantra in mind he did during college as he pursued his degree: An attitude of realistic perseverance.

“The bills don’t stop so the work can’t either,” Hopkins said.

Virginia Tech graduation


Where: Lane Stadium, Virginia Tech campus


When: 8:30 a.m.


Who: Gov. Ralph Northam will address more than 4,800 Virginia Tech graduates for the commencement ceremony.

Robby Korth covers higher education at Virginia Tech and Radford University.


                                    
                                        Whenever Robby Korth posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
