Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 10 to 15 mph..

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:54 pm

Brittney Tilson

Brittney Tilson

PULASKI — A former Dublin Middle School teacher whose husband caught her in bed with a student was given a year behind bars Wednesday.

Wednesday’s hearing in Pulaski County Circuit Court was an appeal by Brittney Faye Tilson, 27, of Fairlawn who was arrested in August and convicted in November in the county’s Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court of two counts of contributing to the delinquency of a minor.

In circuit court, Tilson pleaded guilty, apologized and asked for a sentence shorter than the six months in jail that she’d been given in juvenile court. Her attorney, Jimmy Turk of Radford, suggested a suspended sentence or house arrest.

But Assistant Commonwealth’s Attorney Travis Epps — and the mother of the boy involved with Tilson — asked that Tilson be given the maximum sentence of a year on each count.

Summarizing the case he would have presented if Tilson had not pleaded guilty, Epps said that in the summer of 2017, Tilson spotted a former student of hers out walking. The boy was 15 years old. Tilson began sending texts and online messages to the boy, and eventually invited him to her home when her husband was working.

The Roanoke Times does not identify the victims of sex crimes.

Epps said that the boy visited Tilson several times. Then, Tilson’s husband came home early from work one day and found the pair in bed, fully clothed. The husband called the Pulaski County Sheriff’s Office.

Tilson at first told investigators that she and the boy had only kissed. But she eventually admitted, and the boy corroborated, that Tilson had twice had sex with the boy after taking him to her father’s house in Pulaski County.

Tilson took the witness stand to testify that she and her husband now are working to rebuild their marriage. She said that she is 10 weeks pregnant with their third child.

Tilson said that her decision to pursue a 15-year-old was influenced by depression after the birth of her second child in January 2017, by her husband’s frequent work-related absences and by isolation that came from caring for two young children and quitting her church attendance.

“I just abandoned my world and made the biggest mistake of my life,” Tilson said.

Will Tilson also testified, saying that before his wife’s affair, he had been unhappy with his life’s direction and that “I brought this home … This definitely affected Brittney and both of our children.”

Will Tilson said that he is now trying to regain trust in his wife, and that the couple is back with Blue Ridge Church in Christiansburg and meeting regularly with its pastor for counseling sessions. He said that he also is seeing another counselor. He asked that his wife not be sent to jail, saying “it would devastate all of us.”

Two friends of Brittney Tilson’s, and Scott Obenchain, pastor of Blue Ridge Church, testified that Britney Tilson seemed to have turned her life around since last summer.

The mother of the boy testified that he also is undergoing counseling. Other students found out about Tilson and have ridiculed him, she said. He has been angry and punched holes in the walls of their home, she said.

Judge Bradley Finch told Tilson that as a teacher, she had been in a position of trust. Yet she had actively pursued the boy. There needed to be consequences for her actions, Finch said.

“Your behavior was deplorable … This was not just one bad decision on your part. This was multiple bad decisions,” Finch said.

The judge sentenced Tilson to a year in jail on each count, then suspended six months of each term. The sentences will run consecutively for a total of a year to serve in jail, Finch said.

The remaining time will be suspended for three years, with the probation office supervising Tilson during that period, Finch said.

The judge ordered that Tilson have no contact or communication of any sort with the boy and his family, warning that if she did, he might re-impose the suspended jail time.

Roanoke Times librarian Belinda Harris contributed to this story.

Brittney Tilson

Mike Gangloff covers crime, breaking news and courts in the New River Valley. 



                                    
                                        Whenever Mike Gangloff posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
