MAKATI CITY, PHILIPPINES – Valero Grand Suites by Swiss-Belhotel recently announced that the property has received a TripAdvisor® Certificate of Excellence.



Now in its eighth year, the certificate celebrates businesses that have earned exceptional traveller reviews. Certificate of Excellence recipients include accommodation providers, restaurants and attractions located all over the world that have continually delivered a quality customer experience.


“TripAdvisor is excited to announce the recipients of the 2018 Certificate of Excellence, which celebrates travel companies and experiences that have consistently received strong praise and ratings on the world’s largest travel site,” said Heather Leisman, Vice President of Industry Marketing, TripAdvisor. “This recognition allows us to publicly honor businesses that are actively engaging with their customers, using feedback to help travelers identify and confidently book their perfect trip,” she added.


Garry Garcia, General Manager of Valero Grand Suites by Swiss-Belhotel said: “We are honoured to be highly rated by travellers and delighted that our efforts are recognized. We always stress to the team that our reward is that our most valued guests will happily return. This is the ultimate compliment to our staff, our management and to Swiss-Belhotel International.”

The Certificate of Excellence recognizes for the quality, quantity and relevance of reviews submitted by travellers on TripAdvisor over a 12-month period. To qualify, a business must maintain an overall TripAdvisor bubble rating of at least four out of five. It must also have a minimum number of reviews and must have been listed on TripAdvisor for at least 12 months.

* Source: comScore Media Metrix for TripAdvisor Sites, worldwide, November 2017

** Source: TripAdvisor log files, average monthly unique visitors, Q3 2017

ADVT

Subscribe to INQUIRER PLUS to get access to The Philippine Daily Inquirer &amp; other 70+ titles, share up to 5 gadgets, listen to the news, download as early as 4am &amp; share articles on social media. Call 896 6000.

We use cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our website. By continuing, you are agreeing to our use of cookies. To find out more, please click this link.