Scattered showers and thunderstorms. High near 90F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 69F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:54 pm

Candles with a photograph tied purple ribbon of Heather Ciccone were passed out during a vigil at Harrison Road Park in Spotsylvania on Wednesday, Dec. 9, 2015.

Vejarano

Vejarano

Candles with a photograph tied purple ribbon of Heather Ciccone were passed out during a vigil at Harrison Road Park in Spotsylvania on Wednesday, Dec. 9, 2015.

Jonathan J. Vejarano's attorneys wasted no time Tuesday in attacking the credibility of felons who are expected to be key prosecution witnesses in his murder trial.

Vejarano, 29, is charged with first-degree murder and other offenses in connection with the Dec. 6, 2015, slaying of Heather Ciccone, who was shot in the back of the head in a driveway on Piney Branch Road in Spotsylvania.

His trial started Tuesday in Spotsylvania Circuit Court with jury selection and opening statements and is scheduled for eight days. Commonwealth's Attorney Travis Bird and prosecutors Angela O'Connor and Ryan Mehaffey put  Ciccone's father and sister on the stand Tuesday before Judge Ricardo Rigual sent the jurors home for the evening.

Prosecutors are alleging that Vejarano carried out a hit that had been ordered by Joshua Christopher Williams in exchange for $5,000 worth of marijuana and admittance into Williams' gang, the G-Shyne Blood.

Williams, 30, known as "Face," was convicted of first-degree murder in December and is serving a 38-year prison sentence.

The only direct evidence against Vejarano in Williams' trial came from inmates who were incarcerated with him in the Rappahannock Regional Jail during the investigation. The inmates claimed that Vejarano confessed to carrying out the hit at Williams' request and complained that he was having nightmares about it.

In his opening argument, defense attorney Vincent Robertson called the inmates "liars, thieves and cheaters" who would say anything to improve their own legal situations.

"They can't sit with you in that jury box because the law presumes they cannot be trusted," Robertson said.

Robertson accused Spotsylvania detectives of trying to "ram a square peg into a round hole" in part because they got upset when Vejarano exercised his Miranda right when they tried to talk to him about the case.

Evidence at the Williams trial showed that Ciccone was part of a love triangle that included Williams and the mother of Williams' two children, Danielle Long. Witnesses said Long became irate after learning about Williams' involvement with Ciccone and threatened her on social media and one time went to Ciccone's home to confront her.

Prosecutors have accused Long of pressuring Williams into getting rid of Ciccone in part by telling him that Ciccone was working for the police as a drug informant. Long has been charged with several counts of perjury, but has not been charged with being involved in the actual slaying.

The evidence also showed that Ciccone was trying to broker a marijuana deal at the request of Deandre "Lego" Scott, who was seeking a half-pound of marijuana. She eventually asked Williams to fill the request.

Prosecutors allege that Williams used that to lure Ciccone to her death. The evidence also showed that Scott was planning to rob Ciccone instead of paying for the marijuana.

Robertson, who is being assisted by attorney Melissa Danjczek, told the jurors that Vejarano had no role in the love triangle or the planned drug deal. He also pointed out that Vejarano's phone number did not show up on any of the 148 telephone contacts that Williams made on the day Ciccone was killed.

Dennis Ciccone, the victim's father, and Courtney Foster, her sister, testified briefly Tuesday about an incident in October 2015 when they said Long showed up at their home and threatened Heather Ciccone's life. Dennis Ciccone said Long also alleged that the victim had given Williams a sexually transmitted disease; Dennis Ciccone said that was not true.

Keith Epps: 540/374-5404


kepps@freelancestar.com

Vejarano


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




