Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Leonard Mazzarisi, who formerly lived in Holmdel, was charged in connection with three separate incidents where he allegedly targeted Neuhaus Realty.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Crime and arrests were down in 2015, the most recent year with available data.
    Alex N. Gecan | Wochit

Laurel police issued this photo to show the comparison between a Colt .45 semi-automatic handgun and an altered BB gun.
(Photo: LAUREL POLICE DEPARTMENT)

HOLMDEL - A former Holmdel man has been charged for deliberately setting two fires and firing a BB gun into the same township business over a nine-month period, according to authorities. 


Leonard Mazzarisi was charged with two counts of second-degree aggravated arson, second-degree possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose, third-degree unlawful possession of a weapon and third-degree criminal mischief, Monmouth County Prosecutor Christopher Gramiccioni announced in a news release Friday.


The charges stem from three separate instances from August 2017 to last month, in which Mazzarisi allegedly targeted Neuhaus Realty. It wasn't immediately clear whether Mazzarisi had any connection to the firm.


The first incident occurred on Aug. 19, 2017, when Holmdel police responded to a report of a possible arson at Neuhaus Realty’s former location at 51 Main St. Authorities determined the fire, which damaged part of the back of the building, was deliberately set by a man captured on surveillance cameras.


More: Aide charged with striking patient with cellphone at Holmdel nursing home


More: Kenilworth superintendent accused of Holmdel HS pooping offers no explanation


Holmdel police responded to a second fire at the same location on Jan. 27. The second blaze fully engulfed the building and caused extensive damage. The Monmouth County Prosecutor’s Office, the Holmdel Township Police Department and the Monmouth County Fire Marshal’s Office determined the second fire was also an act of arson, similar to the first blaze.


After Neuhaus Realty was forced to relocate following the January fire, Mazzarisi allegedly targeted the same firm at its new location on South Holmdel Road. Police were called to the building May 29 after a BB gun was fired into the building and determined Mazzarisi shot the gun through a window of the building after reviewing surveillance footage, according to the release.


Authorities also found that he was driving a vehicle that matched surveillance footage from the January arson at the firm’s prior location, according to the prosecutor’s office.


The next day, police arrested Mazzarisi at a hotel where he was staying in Fredericksburg, Virginia, on outstanding warrants resulting from the prosecutor’s investigation. He was held at the Rappahannock Regional Jail in Stafford, Virginia, until he was extradited back to New Jersey on Tuesday.


He is set to appear at a detention hearing in Monmouth County Superior Court next Tuesday.


Police ask anyone with information relevant to the case to contact Det. Brian Weisbrot of the Monmouth County Prosecutor’s Office at 1-800-533-7443, or Det. Sgt. Theodore Sigismondi of the Holmdel Township Police Department at 732-946-4400.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Andrew Goudsward: @AGoudsward; 732-897-4555; agoudsward@gannettnj.com



Download our apps &amp; get alerts for local news, weather, traffic, more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in app store or use these links on your device: iPhone app | Android app | iPad app. Subscribe for full access. Follow us on Facebook

 
