Scattered showers and thunderstorms, especially during the evening. Low 68F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%..

Scattered showers and thunderstorms, especially during the evening. Low 68F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:54 pm

Jerrell C. Richardson

Jerrell C. Richardson

A South Carolina man is accused of leading Virginia State Police on a Christmas Day pursuit from Henrico County up Interstate 95 — with speeds topping 120 mph — before being shot after firing at troopers in Spotsylvania County.

The suspect, Jerrell C. Richardson, 21, of Greenville, S.C., was wounded during an exchange of gunfire with one of the troopers, state police said.

Richardson was treated and released at a hospital for injuries that were not life-threatening. He is now being held at the Rappahannock Regional Jail in Stafford County on charges of eluding police, felony assault of a police officer, possession of marijuana, driving without a valid license, reckless driving and operating a vehicle without headlights. Additional charges are pending, police said.

Police said the chain of events unfolded about 8:40 p.m. Monday when state police received a bulletin from the Dinwiddie County Sheriff’s Office to be on the lookout for a 2015 Ford Escape.

About one hour later, Henrico police and state troopers located the vehicle at a gas station at Chamberlayne Avenue and Route 1. When a Henrico officer and a trooper approached the car, the suspect vehicle fled the parking lot, police said.

State police initiated a pursuit of the vehicle, which had been reported stolen at gunpoint at a gas station earlier Monday evening in Thomasville, N.C.

Police said the pursuit continued north on I-95 with the suspect reaching speeds in excess of 120 mph. As the vehicle entered Spotsylvania, police said it rammed a trooper’s vehicle at least twice.

At the 119 mile marker, the driver — later identified as Richardson — jumped from the vehicle as it was still moving and ran toward the median. Police said Richardson fired shots at troopers as they pursued him on foot. One trooper returned fire, but Richardson continued to run into the wooded median.

Police were forced to close I-95 in both directions for the safety of motorists, and officers established a perimeter to contain Richardson within the median.

State police K-9 and tactical teams, along with the Fairfax County Police Aviation unit, responded to search for Richardson. At about 12:50 a.m., he was located and surrendered. He was taken into custody without further incident.

State police said they recovered a firearm and marijuana from inside the stolen Ford Escape.

“At the time of his arrest, it was discovered that Richardson had been shot during the exchange of gunfire with the trooper,” state police spokeswoman Corinne Geller said in a statement. “He was immediately transported to Mary Washington Hospital in Fredericksburg, Va., for treatment of non-life-threatening injuries.”

Geller said no state troopers or motorists were injured during the pursuit or shooting.

The investigation into the incident remains ongoing, Geller said. State police also are checking with multiple law enforcement agencies in South Carolina, North Carolina, and Virginia about possible criminal incidents involving Richardson.

mbowes@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6450


                                    
                                        Whenever Mark Bowes posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




