By Andrea Leinfelder

Caption


Close

The world swooned as SpaceX Falcon Heavy lifted off from a Florida launchpad with a cherry-red sports car in the hold. Gilberto Salinas savored the moment from his office in Texas, having helped lead the effort to convince Elon Musk and his groundbreaking company to do some of its work in the Rio Grande Valley.

Salinas had spent three years negotiating with SpaceX to build a launch facility on the Gulf Coast near Brownsville - while at the same time talking up the company to local businesses, churches and even knitting clubs. His task was tall: generating support for Musk, a dreamer who frequently opines on the importance of traveling to and living on other planets.

"This was before he became the rock star he is today," Salinas, interim executive director of the Greater Brownsville Incentives Corp., said following last week's launch.

As SpaceX announced plans to build a launch facility at Texas' Boca Chica beach in 2014, the state approved $15 million in incentive money. Construction has been delayed, but that will likely be overlooked in light of the company's recent success and its announced plans to potentially test an even bigger rocket at Boca Chica.

Skyward: Falcon Heavy launch fortifies resolve of other commercial space projects

Through the Cameron County Spaceport Development Corp., SpaceX is now requesting an additional $1.2 million.

Meanwhile, SpaceX has built up its McGregor test facility to the company's second largest in terms of employees. All of its engines must pass through Central Texas for testing before hurtling toward the heavens.

Yet despite the jobs and prestige SpaceX has brought to Texas, some worry about losing future innovators to states with more vocal politicians and looser purse strings. Last year, those factors contributed to Blue Origin selecting Huntsville, Ala., instead of Houston for a rocket engine manufacturing facility.

"We really need to re-establish the efforts that brought the Johnson Space Center here to begin with," said George Abbey, senior fellow in space policy at Rice University's Baker Institute for Public Policy.

SpaceX CEO Elon Musk's Tesla Roadster is orbiting the earth, with a mannequin named "Starman" in the driver's seat. The Falcon Heavy rocket, powered by 27 engines and three boosters, lifted Musk's Tesla Roadster into orbit on Tuesday. (Feb. 7)

Public support

Salinas was at a Chuck E. Cheese to celebrate his child's birthday when the governor's office called to say SpaceX was looking to build a launch site, and Texas had a shot of winning the business. It was 2011, and Elon Musk had yet to capture the public's imagination. Steve Jobs was the innovation hero.

As Salinas set to work, people asked if he had better things to do with his time, if this was the right call for Brownsville. All told, he presented to nearly 5,000 people either individually or in groups.

Over time, the jokes and snide comments stopped. Of the 1,000-plus people who showed up at a 2013 public meeting to present an environmental report on the SpaceX project, Salinas said, only one person spoke against it. He and SpaceX had won over the public.

Boca Chica beach proved an ideal place to launch rockets, thanks to its remote location, ability to launch over the ocean and proximity to the equator, said Bill Ostrove, a space market analyst for Forecast International. The earth's surface rotates faster at the equator, and the spin gives rockets an additional boost to escape gravity and stay in orbit.

SpaceX is permitted to launch up to 12 rockets a year. Two of those can be night launches and two can be Falcon Heavy launches. None have occurred so far.

Construction was delayed when SpaceX discovered the ground was unstable. The company had to truck in 310,000 cubic yards of soil, enough to cover a football field that's 13 to 14 stories tall. It was put on top of the sand and left to settle and compress before construction.

Plus, anomalies during a flight to the International Space Station in 2015 and a launchpad test a year later also forced the company to put Boca Chica on the back burner. Both incidents grounded SpaceX launches temporarily.

Still, some work has begun. There's a staging area for equipment, and solar panels are being installed to augment electricity. The STARGATE Technology Center - a partnership between SpaceX, the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley and the Greater Brownsville Incentives Corp. - is expected to be used to track SpaceX missions ferrying astronauts to the International Space Station as well as other missions.

Salinas also noted that S-Band tracking antennas, measuring some 30 or 40 feet tall, have been installed. The rocket company last week reaffirmed its intentions.

Fire it up: SpaceX engineers put rocket engines through their paces 

"SpaceX is committed to building the world's first commercial orbital launch complex in South Texas," spokesman John Taylor said in a statement. "We have invested millions into the project, hired new full-time employees."

More ask for money

Most of the money pledged to SpaceX, $13 million, came from the Texas Spaceport Trust Fund for distribution through the Cameron County Spaceport Development Corp. It has received $2.6 million in reimbursements to date.

Due to the soil issues and mission anomalies, SpaceX did not spend as quickly as it expected.

The Texas Enterprise Fund, designated for companies creating a large number of high-paying jobs, pledged another $2.3 million and gave SpaceX $400,000 for jobs created in the Brownsville area. However, SpaceX gave the money back and terminated that agreement, in part because newer technology means launches don't require as many workers.

Lawmakers appropriated $5 million more for the Spaceport Trust Fund last year. The Cameron County Spaceport Development Corp. has submitted an application for $1.2 million at the request of SpaceX.

The Waco-based McLennan County Spaceport Development Corp. also applied for money. In addition to SpaceX in McGregor, the county has L3 Technologies, which has done work for NASA and Virgin Galactic, and some educational resources that could benefit from the trust fund. Kris Collins, the development corporation's executive director, didn't specify where the money would be spent.

Incentive money is part of what attracts space companies to a state. Vocal and informed politicians help, too. Some fear that Texas isn't stacking up in either category.

We got it: Aerospace talent in Texas lauded 

The Texas Spaceport Trust Fund received an appropriation of $15 million in 2013. In addition to the $13 million for Cameron County, the Midland Spaceport Development Corp. got $2 million.

The Midland International Air &amp; Space Port used the money for Phase 1 work such as roads, water and sewer lines, and a parking lot. That project also hit delays, so the development corporation didn't request additional funds this past round, said J.Ross Lacy, a city councilman and president of the Midland development corporation.

Lacy said low oil prices and the resulting economic downturn have made it difficult to fund the Spaceport Trust Fund. Yet, the political will is there.

Bob Mitchell, president of the Bay Area Houston Economic Partnership, added that it's difficult to get money in the Spaceport Trust Fund because the state has so many different commercial sectors. If legislators give handouts to space companies, then energy, health care and aviation companies will ask for money.

"We don't do it because if the state gives it to one they have to give it to all," Mitchell said. "That has been their stance for years."

More incentives?

Competition will be stiff from other states offering economic incentives, said Alexander William Salter, an economist and faculty member with Texas Tech University's Space Hub Research Group.

"Whoever gets the reputation of being the new place to do space commerce first is going to have a big advantage," he said.

Alabama offered $39.4 million in tax breaks and a $10 million grant to win the Blue Origin rocket engine manufacturing facility. Similarly, it offered $21.6 million in tax breaks, an $8 million grant and $6.5 million in workforce development services to Aerojet Rocketdyne for building a rocket engine manufacturing facility in Huntsville and relocating some programs from California.

Texas is a wealthier state and could afford to offer more incentives than Alabama, said Rice's Abbey, a former director of NASA's Johnson Space Center.

The future: SpaceCom panelists ponder regulatory future of private space 

He said Texas' congressional delegation needs to be more vocal. When the lawmakers support space projects, they need to be aware of where those jobs will materialize. They supported NASA's Space Launch System rocket, for instance, but that work isn't being done in Texas, he said.

In fact, a lot of work that used to be done in Houston for the Johnson Space Center has moved out of Texas over the past 20 years. Abbey said Texas should be more active in supporting university laboratories that could be used to perform more NASA-level work. This would also prepare the state's future workforce.

"Having access to a good pool of talented young people is going to be critical to the future," he said.

Still, some elected officials touted Texas' work in attracting commercial space companies. Gov. Greg Abbott's office said the state's diverse workforce as well as its low tax and business-friendly economic environment as reasons why commercial space companies would be interested in Texas.

U.S. Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson, D-Dallas and a member of the Committee on Science, Space and Technology, pointed to Jacobs Engineering moving its corporate headquarters to Dallas after having been in Pasadena, Calif., since its founding in 1947.

The congresswoman called commercial space one of the fastest growing industries in the U.S. The Falcon Heavy rocket showcases advances that can be made through public and privately driven innovation, she said.

The popular reaction to Tuesday's test launch, and the sight of a gleaming Tesla sports car silhouetted against the earth, spoke loudly as well. In offices across the world, workers paused to watch the historic flight. A YouTube video of the launch had been viewed 17.7 million times as of Friday night.

"It basically told me the future is here," Salinas said. "Looking back at 2011, the future is here and in a roundabout way, Brownsville, Texas, is a part of that. A part of making history now."

Business Reporter, Houston Chronicle

© 2018 Hearst Newspapers, LLC.