Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy with a slight chance of thunderstorms. High 88F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:54 pm

William Sherman Randall Jr.

William Sherman Randall Jr.

A man has been arrested and charged in connection with a rape reported in July on the Blue Ridge Parkway.

William Sherman Randall Jr., 44, is being held in jail without bond on charges of rape, sodomy, sexual battery and unauthorized use of a vehicle, according to Roanoke County Circuit Court and Western Virginia Regional Jail records.

This marks the second time Randall has faced charges in this case. He was initially arrested and held in July when the victim filed a report with police.

That case was withdrawn last month as officials were still awaiting the results of lab tests and the prosecution was butting up against speedy trial requirements.

The charges were re-filed this month, and Randall was arrested again Tuesday. Earlier court records list him as having a Roanoke address but his most recent arrest papers described his status as transient.

In an affidavit filed with a search warrant seeking a DNA swab from Randall, investigators wrote that a woman was found on the parkway in July, bruised and partially naked. She was found near mile marker 125 in southwest Roanoke County, a few miles south of U.S. 220 and about one mile north of the Masons Knob Overlook.

A spokeswoman for the Roanoke County Police Department said the woman apparently met Randall in downtown Roanoke earlier that night and they took her car to the parkway.

Randall was located with the woman’s car about a mile away from where she was found, according to the search warrant affidavit. He told authorities that he was given the car, investigators wrote, and admitted to taking money from the woman but said he didn’t engage in sexual activity with her.

No court hearings in Randall’s case were immediately set.

Randall is listed on Virginia’s sex offender registry stemming from a 1999 conviction in Maryland, according to the state database.

William Sherman Randall Jr.

Alicia Petska covers what's happening in Roanoke County and the City of Salem.


                                    
                                        Whenever A Petska posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
