By

Associated Press





  Published:
  15:40 EDT, 17 November 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  15:45 EDT, 17 November 2017






FRENCH CAMP, Calif. (AP) - The Latest on the escape of a man from a psychiatric hospital in Hawaii and his capture in California (all times local):

12:40 p.m.

A man who walked out of a psychiatric hospital in Hawaii and made it to California before being captured says he's surprised his escape worked.

This Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017, image made from a video camera inside a Charley's Taxi shows escaped mental patient Randall Saito boarding a taxi in Honolulu, en route to Honolulu airport and a flight from Oahu to the neighboring island of Maui, then boarding another plane to San Jose, Calif. Saito on Sunday left the 202-bed Hawaii State Hospital outside Honolulu, where he has been committed for 36 years since being acquitted of murder by reason of insanity. Saito was captured in Stockton, Calif., Wednesday. (Charley's Taxi via AP)

Randall Saito spoke to The Associated Press at a jail near Stockton, California, before a Friday court appearance.

Saito left the hospital in suburban Honolulu on Sunday, got a taxi to the airport and took a charter plane to Maui. From there, he caught a flight to San Jose.

Saito says he used a fake ID and was expecting to be nabbed on almost every leg of the journey.

He was caught Wednesday when a taxi driver in Stockton saw a TV report about the escape and realized Saito had been in her cab.

He was committed to the hospital after being found not guilty of a woman's death by reason of insanity.

Saito says he's contrite for the nearly 40-year-old killing but that he faked mental illness to get out of a prison sentence.

___

12:03 a.m.

A man who acknowledges killing a woman nearly 40 years ago says he escaped from a Hawaii psychiatric hospital to prove that he could behave properly out in the community.

Randall Saito tells San Francisco television station KGO-TV in a jail interview that the Hawaii State Hospital wouldn't give him a chance. He says each time he applied for release, officials made him "sound like a bad guy."

So he plotted an escape, which he carried out Sunday.

He walked out of the hospital, got a taxi to the airport and took a chartered plane to Maui, where he caught another flight to San Jose, California.

Saito was captured Wednesday in Stockton after authorities got a tip from a taxi driver.

He's scheduled to appear in court for a hearing Friday.

This photo provided by the San Joaquin County Sheriff's office shows Randall Saito being arrested in Stockton, Calif., Wednesday, Nov. 15, 2017. Saito, who escaped from a psychiatric hospital in Hawaii, was captured as the result of a tip from a taxi cab driver. (San Joaquin County Sheriff's Office via AP)

FILE - This undated file photo provided by the Maui Police Department shows Randall Toshio Saito. Saito, acquitted of a 1979 murder by reason of insanity who escaped from a Hawaii psychiatric hospital over the weekend, was arrested in California on Wednesday, Nov. 15, 2017. (Maui Police Department via AP, File)

FILE - This Tuesday, Nov. 14, 2017, file photo shows the Hawaii State Hospital in Kaneohe, Hawaii. Randall Saito, acquitted of a 1979 murder by reason of insanity and escaped from the hospital Sunday, Nov. 12, was arrested in California on Wednesday, Nov. 15. (AP Photo/Caleb Jones, File)

Sorry we are not currently accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group