Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The allegations are in a lawsuit filed Monday against the Rev. Robert DeLand. He has pleaded not guilty to the criminal charges.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Roman Catholic priest Robert DeLand is arraigned Monday, Feb. 26, 2018, on one count of attempted second-degree criminal sexual conduct, one count of second-degree sexual conduct and one count of gross indecency between male persons via video from the Saginaw County Jail in the courtroom of Saginaw County District Judge M. Randall Jurrens in Saginaw, Mich.
(Photo: Jacob Hamilton, The Saginaw News)

SAGINAW, Mich. — A teenager says a Michigan priest charged with sex crimes fondled him, provided cash and requested that they "party together" with drugs.


The allegations are in a lawsuit filed Monday against the Rev. Robert DeLand. They match some allegations made by authorities when the 71-year-old priest was charged last month with criminal sexual conduct in Saginaw County.


More: Diocese: Catholic priest charged with sex crimes was cleared in 2005


More: Bishop urges sexual assault victims to come forward after priest charged


More: Saginaw Twp. priest arrested on sexual assault allegations


The lawsuit says the boy met DeLand last May at a funeral. DeLand later invited him to perform community service at St. Agnes Church in Freeland.


By the end of the year, DeLand was calling or texting the teen at least 17 times a day, according to the lawsuit. The boy says he fled the priest's apartment in February following unwelcome touching.


The priest has pleaded not guilty to the criminal charges.
