Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds light and variable..

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:54 pm

Police taped off the front office of the Starlite Motel after an incident left one man dead and another person injured.

Police believe the suspect drove this car to the scene and crashed before the attack at Starlite Motel.

A Roanoke man has been charged with murder in connection with the death of the owner of the Starlite Motel.

Timothy Mwandi Church

Timothy Mwandi Church

Police taped off the front office of the Starlite Motel after an incident left one man dead and another person injured.

Police believe the suspect drove this car to the scene and crashed before the attack at Starlite Motel.

A Roanoke man has been charged with murder in connection with the death of the owner of the Starlite Motel.

A Roanoke man has been charged with murder after a man died and two women were beaten with a baseball bat at the Starlite Motel on Tuesday, Roanoke police said.

Timothy Mwandi Church, 26, is being held without bond at the Roanoke City Jail in connection with the death of the owner of the motel, police said Wednesday.

Police responded to the motel in the 4400 block of Melrose Avenue Northwest at 7:48 p.m. after receiving a report of a robbery in progress.

Dispatchers told officers that the caller was in the motel’s office, and that they could hear a “loud, violent disorder in the background,” according to a news release. The caller had stopped talking to dispatchers but had left the line open. Police declined Wednesday to release the audio of the 911 call.

When the officers arrived, one saw through a window a man holding a baseball bat and standing over two huddled women. One of the women had visible serious injuries, and the other woman also appeared to be injured.

Through a side door, the officer could see a man on the floor who was not moving and had “obvious signs of a critical injury,” police said.

Police tried to get into the office but the exterior door was locked. As one officer tried to open the door, one of the women ran toward the door and also tried to open it. The man with the baseball bat grabbed her and kept her from opening the door.

The officer then began kicking at the door and pulling it apart by hand. The man tried to stop the officer from pushing the door open, but the officer continued tearing apart the door until police could get into the office, according to the release.

The man dropped the baseball bat, ran through the business and dove through a glass window and ran away. Police took the man into custody after a foot pursuit that ended at the nearby intersection of Pilot Street and Melrose Avenue.

Ishvarlal Kuvarji Patel, 60, of Troutville, was pronounced dead at the scene. He died of blunt force trauma from being beaten with a bat, police said.

The two women — both relatives of Patel and who also worked at the motel — were taken to Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital. Police said they were both struck with the bat. Police would not identify them.

One woman was still at Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital on Wednesday evening, police said. Her condition was unknown. The other woman has been released from the hospital.

Church was treated at Roanoke Memorial before being taken to the jail.

Police spokesman Scott Leamon said detectives are still working to determine if or how Church knew the victims.

A Buick Verano was found crashed into a retaining wall Tuesday night. Police believe Church drove the car there and crashed before the attack at the Starlite Motel.

On Wednesday afternoon, the motel was open for business.

Church does not have a violent criminal history in Virginia, according to online court records. In 2014 in Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, he was charged with misdemeanor simple assault, but it was amended to disorderly conduct by engaging in fighting. The case was dismissed after he completed a rehabilitative program for those with no or limited criminal records, according to online court records.

Patel’s death marks the second recorded homicide in Roanoke this year. Michael Cardona Santamarina, 22, died Jan. 9 after he and another man were injured on Jan. 5 during a shooting in southwest Roanoke.

In 2017, the city recorded 16 homicides, four more than the previous year. Roanoke has averaged 10 homicides annually for the past five years.

Staff reporter Amy Friedenberger contributed to this report.

Timothy Mwandi Church

One person was found dead and another person was taken to the hospital after an incident at …

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
