Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 10 to 15 mph..

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:54 pm

The hedges at the corner of Easy Street and Maggodee Ridge Lane in Boones Mill as they appeared Oct. 17. The hedges drew complaints as a traffic safety issue, and they have been trimmed once since an October council meeting.

Bill Cleaveland

Melvin Hill

Randy Foley

Gerald Duncan

Dana Partin

Rep. Bob Goodlatte

Bill Cleaveland

Melvin Hill

Randy Foley

Gerald Duncan

Dana Partin

Rep. Bob Goodlatte

The hedges at the corner of Easy Street and Maggodee Ridge Lane in Boones Mill as they appeared Oct. 17. The hedges drew complaints as a traffic safety issue, and they have been trimmed once since an October council meeting.

Since 2009, we’ve reserved the final column of the year to celebrate inanity, nonsense, occasional empty threats and other moronic endeavors. Those lucky enough to be singled out are bestowed with the widely coveted Dano Award for glaring public stupidity. Think of them as the Appalachian Oscars.

It’s named after yours truly, because as my wife and offspring long have noted, I exemplify all those magnificent traits. And like an Oscar, the prize is a golden statue (cartoon) — one with a physique that’s as cringe-worthy as the tribute.

There was no shortage of nominees in 2017. So imagine a cymbal ride, a drum roll and let’s get straight to the honors.

The Dano for Longest Deliberations by an Elected Body Over Residential Bushes goes to the Boones Mill Town Council. For months, certain residents in the tiny Franklin County hamlet complained about hedge heights outside a home owned by the mayor’s girlfriend.

The bushes blocked motorists’ view at the intersection of Maggodee Ridge Lane and Easy Street, leaving some folks uneasy about potential accidents.

After much prodding, the council in September adopted an ordinance allowing it to order hazardous hedges trimmed. In October, the council debated the bushes for nearly 40 minutes in tones that grew increasingly personal and sarcastic. In November, the council voted 5-0 to order the hedges in question cut 3.5 feet. By this point, the Virginia Department of Transportation and Boones Mill’s police chief had become involved.

On Nov. 26, Mayor Ben Flora finally cut the foliage to the town-ordered height. Peace of mind and traffic safety now reign on Easy Street. And nobody involved in this yard-care brouhaha was arrested or hauled off to the hoosegow.

That actually has happened. For an example:

The 2017 Dano Award in the category Not So Neighborly goes to Botetourt General District Court Judge Bill Cleaveland. According to a long-running lawsuit resolved earlier this year, the judge swore out a warrant against his neighbor, Michael Vaughn, on April Fool’s Day 2015. But it was no joke.

At 10 that night, sheriff’s deputies rousted Vaughn from his $363,000 home, handcuffed him in front of his family and arrested him on two misdemeanor charges. More or less, those amounted to trespass by mowing.

The cops took Vaughn to jail, where he was fingerprinted, photographed and released after posting $1,000 bond. All of it was over less than a tenth of an acre to which Vaughn held title but which Cleaveland claimed he owned.

A special prosecutor brought in from Lynchburg dropped the charges the following month. Vaughn sued Cleaveland for malicious prosecution and sought $850,000 in damages. Cleaveland sued Vaughn for ownership of the disputed plot where their yards adjoined, over which they’d tangled since 2013.

Both sides withdrew their claims in April. It’s unclear whether Vaughn got any money in this fiasco — nobody’s talking. A settlement order indicated he granted Cleaveland an easement for the disputed slice of land.

You might have noticed the Democratic Party is on the ascendancy in the Old Dominion. That’s not necessarily true here in the Star City. Remember when Roanoke had an all-Democrat City Council? Now, independents hold four of the seven seats. For this, the Roanoke City Democratic Committee wins the Dano Award in the category, How to Wreck a Political Party by Barely Even Trying.

Why has this come to pass? A combination of factors is to blame. But fundamentally, one could argue the Democrats are putting up less-than-electable candidates. The most recent example was their 2017 nominee for commonwealth’s attorney, Roanoke lawyer Melvin Hill.

Independent incumbent (and ex-Democrat) Don Caldwell easily won November’s election. And that might have been fortuitous. Shortly before Election Day, word emerged Hill owed at least $165,000 in unpaid federal taxes stretching to 2010, perhaps longer.

Had Hill won, he might have become the first Roanoke prosecutor to have his wages garnished by the IRS to satisfy federal tax liens. Imagine those headlines.

The Dano for Bad Luck (but Good Sense) by a Drunk Elected Official goes to Salem Mayor Randy Foley. He got in trouble early one Sunday morning in September for trying to do the right thing. But he didn’t quite succeed.

Foley had been at a friend’s house celebrating a football win by his alma mater, the University of Virginia. He’d been drinking and wisely decided not to drive home. Instead, he walked across Roanoke College’s campus, the most direct route.

Oops! A campus police officer busted Foley for public intoxication. The embarrassed mayor apologized to his colleagues and, in October, paid a $25 fine and $91 in costs to Salem General District Court.

As someone who’s walked under the influence on certain occasions without a second thought that it might be illegal, I can sympathize. Jeez, considering all the elected officials over the years who’ve been busted for driving under the influence, Foley deserves an award for footing it. And here it is.

It’s likely you’re acquainted with the notion of “double dipping.” Usually, that happens when a public employee retires, begins drawing a taxpayer-financed pension, then takes another government job.

Gerald Duncan, Giles County’s elected treasurer since 2000, didn’t wait until retirement. While still working as treasurer in Pearisburg (annual salary: $100,779), Duncan accepted a $40 per hour part-time gig as Craig County administrator. Thus he was collecting paychecks from taxpayers in two different jurisdictions at the same time.

For that, Duncan earns the 2017 Dano Award for Moonlighting by a Public Official (Temporary). We’ve added that qualification because Duncan quit the Craig County job earlier this month, after only five weeks. He explained it was “more involved” than he had anticipated.

The Dano for Most Florid Example of Resume Inflation by a Politician goes to Montgomery County School Board member Dana Partin. While running for the seat (against a former Roanoke Times reporter), Partin claimed she had an associate’s degree in business management and finance from New River Community College.

She did not. But on and off, Partin took classes there from 1987 to 1996. (Just for that she deserves an award for Longest Attendance at a Junior College Without Earning a Degree.)

Anyway, Partin got caught fudging the day before Election Day. The excuses she offered were silly. Nevertheless, she won the race. In a Facebook post, she shrugged it off as an attack by the “liberal media” on “a strong conservative woman.”

In other words, she played the “fake news” victim card in a local school board race, when the only fake thing was that degree. What a hoot. She deserves a scholarship to Trump University.

The Dano of the Year Award deservedly goes to Rep. Bob Goodlatte, R-Roanoke County. That’s because the longtime 6th District congressman has earned three distinct Danos this year.

One is Driving with the Most Miscalibrated Speedometer in Virginia History. In April, the powerful House Judiciary Committee chairman was stopped on U.S. 29 in Lovingston by a Nelson County sheriff’s deputy and cited for driving 69 mph in a 35 mph school zone.

Later, the charge was amended to driving with a defective speedometer. Golly, if it was registering only half his car’s speed, it must have been REALLY out of whack. Oddly, the court file contained zero evidence of malfunction. The congressman ended up with a $238 fine plus a $64 “processing fee” — same as it would have been for speeding — but with no points for the infraction.

Meanwhile, the Dano for Best Traffic Court Work in Nelson County by a Roanoke Real Estate Lawyer goes to Maryellen Goodlatte, Congressman Bob’s wife. She’s the crackerjack counsel who persuaded the Nelson County commonwealth’s attorney to reduce the charge.

It might not have been difficult. A Nelson prosecutor said he would give the same deal to anyone under similar circumstances. If you believe that, the next time you’re caught driving double the limit through Lovingston, tell the judge: “I want the deal Goodlatte got.” Good luck with that!

Bob’s second Dano Award is for Most Hypocritical Legislation Ever Introduced in Congress. It’s the Balanced Budget Amendment, which Goodlatte has repeatedly, shamelessly and futilely flogged since 2007. Here’s how he argued for it this year:

“We should not pass on to our children and grandchildren the bleak fiscal future that our unsustainable spending is creating. It is time for Congress to finally put an end to fiscal irresponsibility and stop saddling future generations with crushing debts to pay for our current spending.”

That has a noble ring — until you consider Bob’s “aye” votes just last week to cut taxes on corporations and the rich. Those will make future federal budgets even more unbalanced — to the tune of at least $1 trillion over the next 10 years. That provides fuel to cynics who’ve long maintained that not even Goodlatte believes the decade-long pap he’s spouted about a balanced budget. “Bleak fiscal future,” indeed.

Finally, who can forget Bob’s memorable pledge during his first campaign, in 1992, to serve no more than six terms in the House of Representatives? Finally — midway through his 13th term — Goodlatte announced he won’t seek reelection. For that he earns the Dano for Lawmaker Most in Need of Kindergarten Counting Lessons.

But hey, Bob’s retiring, so maybe he could skip them.

That’s it for 2017, folks. The column will return in January, when we’ll begin accepting nominations for the 2018 Dano Awards.

See you then!

Bill Cleaveland

Melvin Hill

Randy Foley

Gerald Duncan

Dana Partin

Rep. Bob Goodlatte

Dan Casey knows a little bit about a lot of things but not a heck of a lot about most things. That doesn't keep him from writing about them, however. So keep him honest!


                                    
                                        Whenever Dan Casey posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Find your new home in the Roanoke, New River Valley, or Smith Mountain Lake area.

New River Community College’s Office of Workforce Development fosters economic growth and development by helping provide an appropriately trained workforce for the New River Valley and the Commonwealth. Services include credentialing, a wide range of training opportunities, skills upgrading …

Don’t leave it up to fate. Investing just a minimum of $5,000 puts you on track toward higher earnings, guaranteed. And with a rate like 1.55% APY for an 11-month term, in less than a year you’ll be thanking your future self for making such a wise investment. 

If you are in the market to buy or sell a home, I will put my 13 years of real estate expertise to work for you! 

Angie McGhee and her Franklin County Home Team are ready to help you move! Visit our website today to find your next home.  

See why more people choose Commonwealth Roofing!  We match any price! Call 540-759-1825 today for a quote! View Our Profile 

Featuring programs in: Business, Counselor Education, Culinary Arts, Gerontology, Nursing, Social Work, Teacher Licensure &amp; many more! 