Scattered showers and thunderstorms. High 91F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 40%..

Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Low 69F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:54 pm

Conservation Police Officer Shannon Smith with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries checks on a coyote huddled behind a recycling bin behind the Roanoke City Jail on Friday morning.

Conservation Police Officer Shannon Smith with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries checks on a coyote huddled behind a recycling bin behind the Roanoke City Jail on Friday morning.

Ricky Clemons ran into something unexpected near downtown Roanoke early Friday, something lingering in the shade of city's multi-storied jail and state courthouse buildings.

A full-grown coyote.

Clemons, who works for the city’s Solid Waste Management department, said he encountered the animal crouched near a recycling bin. It snarled at him, its hair standing on end, he said, then it withdrew somewhat but didn't run.

The discovery prompted a small stand-off of sorts that lasted more than two hours and drew an audience of courthouse employees, sheriff’s deputies and other onlookers.

They watched as officials with Roanoke’s Animal Protection and Services Unit, and from the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, set up nets to contain the coyote, then ultimately opted to use a tranquilizer dart to take it into custody. It was asleep and caged by 11:30 a.m.

VDGIF Conservation Police Officer Shannon Smith said the coyote was an adult and speculated it was on the higher end of average size, about 35 pounds.

Although coyote sightings are rare in this area, Smith said it’s not uncommon for coyotes to be in or around the city, where they can find food and cover. But he felt it was unusual to encounter one in such a populated location, not displaying fear of humans.

“Usually they’re elusive. When there are other people around, they’re going to turn and run the other way,” Smith said.

He said the animal showed signs of being sick and was slated to be euthanized sometime Friday afternoon.

“It’s not one we would want to release,” he explained, and said the nature of the coyote’s illness wasn’t known. “Many times, people jump to the conclusion that a sick animal is rabid. Distemper is also a very common illness that we run into. The health department usually won’t test them if nobody’s been exposed.”

Nobody involved was bitten or scratched or injured during the incident, or Smith said.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




