Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph..

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 6:54 pm

William Thomas Sprouse

William Thomas Sprouse

Three people were injured late Sunday in a hit-and-run incident in southwest Roanoke.

The suspected driver is in custody.

Officers responded about 10:45 p.m. to the 1900 block of Memorial Avenue, where they found three men who had been struck by a vehicle, according to Roanoke police spokesman Scott Leamon.

Witnesses told officers that the victims had been struck by a white vehicle while on the sidewalk. The car fled headed south on Winborne Avenue.

Moments later, police were dispatched to the 1700 block of Windsor Avenue, about a half-mile away and just west of Evergreen Cemetery, where a white 2006 Dodge Stratus had hit a parked vehicle.

According to the criminal complaint, the officer wrote the driver was seen exiting the car and attempted to flee but fell over. The officer wrote in the complaint that the man, William Thomas Sprouse, 35, smelled of alcohol, had red and watery eyes, slurred speech and was unsteady on his feet. “When asked, Sprouse stated that he had consumed a considerable amount of alcohol that evening while visiting three separate venues,” the officer wrote. “Sprouse also made spontaneous statements that he knows he should not have been driving.”

Sprouse submitted to various field sobriety tests, “where considerable signs of intoxication were present,” according to the complaint. He blew a preliminary breath test, which returned a blood-alcohol content of 0.304 percent, which is more than three times the legal limit of 0.08 percent in Virginia.

Sprouse was arrested and charged with DUI, three counts of felony hit-and-run related to the pedestrians, and a misdemeanor count of hit-and-run related to the parked car, Leamon said. Sprouse was briefly hospitalized for evaluation and was then transferred to the Roanoke City Jail.

Police identified the three injured pedestrians as Christopher Eric Lafon, 35, and Nathaniel Caleb Perry, 31, both of Roanoke, and Antonio Christopher Napper, 33, of Goodview. These men were taken to Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital.

On Monday, a hospital spokeswoman said both Perry and Napper had been discharged but she did not have information regarding Lafon.

Leamon said Sprouse and the three victims were acquainted and had been together before the incident occurred, and the preliminary investigation indicated the collision involving them was intentional.

Staff reporter Amy Friedenberger contributed to this report.

William Thomas Sprouse

A 35-year-old Roanoke man was found guilty Monday of striking three men with a car in Grandin Village after a night of heavy drinking. 

Neil Harvey covers state courts in Franklin County and the cities of Roanoke and Salem. He has written for The Roanoke Times since 2001.


                                    
                                        Whenever Neil Harvey posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
