Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Mainly cloudy. A few peeks of sunshine possible. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 89F. Winds NW at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:54 pm

Nickalas Nathaniel Lee, 17, was fatally shot in June 2017. No arrests have been made.

Nickalas Lee posted a video on Feb. 3, 2017, of himself with people authorities say are Rollin’ 30s Crips.

Nickalas Nathaniel Lee, 17, was fatally shot in June 2017. No arrests have been made.

Nickalas Lee posted a video on Feb. 3, 2017, of himself with people authorities say are Rollin’ 30s Crips.

On a Thursday night last June, members of a violent street gang took 17-year-old Nickalas Lee to an apartment complex in northwest Roanoke so he could make amends for associating with an archrival gang.

The leader of the Rollin’ 30s Crips ordered Lee to kill a new member as part of his gang initiation, according to federal search warrants. The new member had refused an earlier order to kill Lee.

On June 15, shortly after midnight, Lee faced the 21-year-old man he had been directed to kill. Instead, Lee signaled for the man to flee.

Consequently, Lee was shot multiple times. Police found his body in the 2300 block of Tuckawana Circle, a housing community that includes apartments near William Fleming High School.

Lee — who had graduated two weeks earlier from Patrick Henry High School — died at the hospital within an hour. No arrests have been made in his death.

The details of what happened that night and the apparent motivation behind Lee’s killing was revealed in search warrants filed last month in federal court in Roanoke and made public last week.

They offer a rare glimpse into a street gang that authorities say is responsible for a portion of the city’s violent crime and believe will continue to escalate.

An officer assigned to the Central Virginia Safe Streets Violent Crimes Task Force wrote in a search warrant that the FBI is looking into two killings — including Lee’s — over the past nine months that are believed to be linked to the Rollin’ 30s.

The officer, who is employed with the Roanoke County Police Department, is part of a task force aimed at cracking down on street gangs and drug-related violence by combining the region’s resources. It’s working with Roanoke police on Lee’s case. The task force, formed in 2016, led to the arrests of two people in a 2010 cold case in Roanoke.

The Rollin’ 30s Original Harlem operates out of Lansdowne, Roanoke’s oldest and largest public housing development, according to the search warrants. It’s also known as the “Dirt Gang” and is a notoriously violent street gang with a nationwide presence. The Rollin’ 30s is a subset of the larger Crips gang. Despite having Harlem in its name, the Rollin’ 30s branch appears to have originated out of Los Angeles.

The Rollin’ 30s emerged in Roanoke recently. The search warrants identify as its local founder and leader a man who got out of prison in December 2014 for participating in kicking a man to death over a $5 debt more than a decade ago.

The gang generates income from drug trafficking and other criminal activity, and Roanoke police say members have committed armed robbery, shootings, assaults and homicides. The search warrants name 16 people — including Lee — who police believe are affiliated with the gang.

The gang has infiltrated Roanoke Valley high schools to recruit young people, according to the search warrants. Lee joined while a student at Patrick Henry, they say.

The Rollin’ 30s have an active social media presence. In photos and videos on Lee’s social media, he and others use one hand to form a “C,” apparently for the Crips, and press their knuckles together and put two thumbs up to illustrate an “H” for Harlem.

In various photos, Lee wears a blue bandana on his head and poses with a gun. Photo captions often include emojis of a thumbs-up and handicap icon, which symbolizes “cripple to Crip.”

“If you ain’t 30s, you ain’t nothing,” the man identified as the gang’s leader says in a video Lee took and posted to social media in February 2017. Several others gather around, chanting “Dirt Gang” and flashing gestures during a house party.

Following Lee’s death, friends told The Roanoke Times that they were concerned about Lee’s intrigue with street life. A family in Garden City adopted Lee when he was 3 years old.

His parents told police they knew he had been recruited into the gang, according to the search warrants. The family didn’t respond to a request to talk about the case.

The gang’s leader began questioning Lee’s loyalty after discovering Lee was spending time with another local gang — specifically, the rival Bloods, the search warrants said. Lee has a cousin in Roanoke who is a known Bloods member, according to the warrants.

This is apparently what led to the order to have Lee killed. But when Lee indicated he wanted to rejoin the gang, the leader ordered Lee to kill the man who had refused to kill him, according to the warrants. It’s unclear if Lee knew this about the man.

The man whom Lee was supposed to kill was injured in a shooting about a month later. It’s unclear why he was shot — police currently believe a Bloods member shot him in retaliation for Lee’s death — but the search warrants note that the “larger point is that gang violence in certain neighborhoods in Roanoke is a growing threat.”

Roanoke police have said a small number of people have driven the violent crime rate in northwest Roanoke, which is higher than that in other parts of the city. Officers regularly patrol Lansdowne, and an officer recently picked up a manual there for new members of the Rollin’ 30s, according to the search warrants.

Police have not publicly identified any suspects in Lee’s death, but the search warrants name two men as the likely shooters. They also identify a third Rollin’ 30s member — but not the leader — at the scene of the killing. The search warrants sought to gather information from Facebook accounts for various alleged gang members.

Police have filed numerous other search warrants to gain access to Facebook accounts as well as to search homes and phones. The Roanoke Times is not identifying any of the people of interest in the investigation because they have not been charged in Lee’s death.

The Roanoke Police Department did not respond to a request for comment about the investigation on Monday.

One of the two men identified by police as a possible shooter was arrested on unrelated charges after police spotted him in an SUV along with two others believed to be affiliated with the Rollin’ 30s. The 28-year-old man is no longer in custody; his charge of carrying a concealed weapon was dropped in court.

The other man named as a possible shooter, who is 20, is being held at the Roanoke City Jail. He was convicted of robbing two people at gunpoint in 2016 and received five years in suspended time.

He’s serving 90 days of revoked time for violating his probation, according to court records. He also faces two federal charges: threatening someone and cyberstalking.

The third person placed at the scene of the shooting by the warrants faces unrelated federal charges of attempted robbery and possession of a firearm.

The 27-year-old man identified by police as the gang’s leader is being held at the Roanoke City Jail without bond on unrelated charges of eluding police and possession of a firearm and ammunition as a violent felon.

Court records show he has been found guilty of those charges and is scheduled to appear in Roanoke Circuit Court next month for sentencing. He also faces the possibility of having time revoked for his second-degree murder charge.

The federal search warrants don’t specify the other homicide that the FBI is probing, but the second possible shooter in the Lee case has been eyed by Roanoke police as a suspect in the fatal shooting of Markel Girty, 23, according to other search warrants filed in Roanoke Circuit Court. Girty was shot near Lansdowne on Feb. 9. No arrests have been made in his death.

Anyone with information on any Roanoke homicide or the Rollin’ 30s Crips may call the Roanoke Valley Crime Line at 344-8500. Tips can be anonymous.




Nickalas Nathaniel Lee was fatally shot early Thursday morning in northwest Roanoke. He had graduated from Patrick Henry High School two weeks ago.




Friends of 17-year-old Nick Lee, who was shot to death last week in Roanoke, gathered for a candlelight vigil to remember him.

Police recovered evidence that belongs to a 21-year-old man being held in the Roanoke City J…

Several people were armed with firearms and shooting them when 17-year-old Nickalas Lee was …

The revelation that a 17-year-old Roanoke boy might have been killed amid gang turmoil illuminated one of the starkest cases of such activity …

Amy Friedenberger is the politics reporter for The Roanoke Times. She's been a reporter here since 2014. Previously, she worked for newspapers in Pennsylvania. Follow her on Twitter at @ajfriedenberger.


                                    
                                        Whenever Amy Friedenberger posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
