Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Some clouds. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph..

Some clouds. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:54 pm

Conservation Police Officer Shannon Smith with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries checks on a coyote huddled behind a recycling bin behind the Roanoke City Jail on Friday morning.

Roanoke sheriff’s deputies and city employees watch from a window Friday as officials with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries worked for more than two hours to corral, tranquilize and capture a coyote outside Roanoke City Jail.

Conservation Police Officer Shannon Smith with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries checks on a coyote huddled behind a recycling bin behind the Roanoke City Jail on Friday morning.

Roanoke sheriff’s deputies and city employees watch from a window Friday as officials with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries worked for more than two hours to corral, tranquilize and capture a coyote outside Roanoke City Jail.

Ricky Clemons ran into something unexpected near downtown Roanoke early Friday, something lingering in the shade of the city’s multi-storied jail and state courthouse buildings.

A full-grown coyote.

Clemons, who works for the city’s Solid Waste Management department, said he encountered the animal crouched near a recycling bin. It snarled at him, its hair standing on end, he said, then it withdrew somewhat but didn’t run.

The discovery prompted a small stand-off of sorts that lasted more than two hours and drew an audience of courthouse employees, sheriff’s deputies and other onlookers.

They watched as officials with Roanoke’s Animal Protection and Services Unit, and from the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, set up nets to contain the coyote, then ultimately opted to use a tranquilizer dart to take it into custody. It was asleep and caged by 11:30 a.m.

VDGIF Conservation Police Officer Shannon Smith said the coyote was an adult and speculated it was on the higher end of average size, about 35 pounds.

Although coyote sightings are rare in this area, Smith said it’s not uncommon for coyotes to be in or around the city, where they can find food and cover. But he felt it was unusual to encounter one in such a populated location, not displaying fear of humans.

“Usually they’re elusive. When there are other people around, they’re going to turn and run the other way,” Smith said.

He said the animal showed signs of being sick and was slated to be euthanized sometime Friday afternoon.

“It’s not one we would want to release,” he explained, and said the nature of the coyote’s illness wasn’t known. “Many times, people jump to the conclusion that a sick animal is rabid. Distemper is also a very common illness that we run into. The health department usually won’t test them if nobody’s been exposed.”

Nobody involved was bitten or scratched or injured during the incident, Smith said.

Neil Harvey covers state courts in Franklin County and the cities of Roanoke and Salem. He has written for The Roanoke Times since 2001.


                                    
                                        Whenever Neil Harvey posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Find your new home in the Roanoke, New River Valley, or Smith Mountain Lake area.

Summer inventory now in stock!  Boots, Gardening Gear &amp; Quality Animal Feed available! 

Hallmark Gold Crown now available at Hollins, Brambleton and Ridgway NW Hardware locations. We accept Crown Rewards. 

The Treasure Trove, a nonprofit thrift store, now has a second location. 

If you are in the market to buy or sell a home, I will put my 13 years of real estate expertise to work for you! 

Featuring programs in: Business, Counselor Education, Culinary Arts, Gerontology, Nursing, Social Work, Teacher Licensure &amp; many more! 

Call today for special pricing! Live the life you deserve at Honeywood Apartments. 