Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy with afternoon showers or thunderstorms. High near 90F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 9:54 am

Demetrius Nathaniel Evans

Demetrius Nathaniel Evans

A second man has been charged with second-degree murder in connection to a fatal shooting in Salem earlier this month.

Demetrius Nathaniel Evans, 29, of Roanoke is also charged with use of a firearm in the commission of a felony and reckless handling of a firearm in the death of 32-year-old Anthony Joseph Trovata, city spokesman Mike Stevens said. Evan is being held at the Western Virginia Regional Jail without bond.

Trovata, of Shawsville was shot outside a convenience store in the 1900 block of West Main Street shortly after 2 a.m. May 8.

Mark Allen Bell, 32, of Roanoke also has been charged with second-degree murder and multiple firearm offenses in connection with the case. He’s being held at the Western Virginia Regional Jail without bond.

Lauren June Leffler, 27, of Bedford who was with Bell at the time of his arrest, has been charged in Montgomery County General District Court with one count of possessing a controlled substance.

A companion of Trovata’s at the time he was shot, Angela Woolwine, 29, of Roanoke was charged with drug possession after the incident.

Demetrius Nathaniel Evans

Amy Friedenberger is the politics reporter for The Roanoke Times. She's been a reporter here since 2014. Previously, she worked for newspapers in Pennsylvania. Follow her on Twitter at @ajfriedenberger.


                                    
                                        Whenever Amy Friedenberger posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
