Sacramento County Jail policies are under scrutiny after a transgender woman was briefly booked in the male section of the jail after being arrested during a protest of the shooting death of Stephon Clark, KOVR-TV reported.

The woman, Ebony Harper, was protesting with others in front of the Sacramento district attorney’s office Thursday. She was one of two people arrested, booked on charges of failing to disperse during a protest and resisting an officer.

Harper was born a man and said she identifies as a woman. When she was arrested, she said the way she was searched and where she was held was uncomfortable and caused her to fear for her safety.

“My humanity was stripped,” Harper told KOVR. “I was searched by men, and they videotaped me, I began to cry because I didn’t feel comfortable being searched by a guy.

“I have some female body parts; I just felt dehumanized.”

Harper criticized the “hostile” society of oppression against transgender people.

“We live in a hostile society. It’s hostile to our existence,” Harper said. “The way law enforcement handles us, it’s just one more notch on the belt of oppression.”

A spokesman for the Sacramento County Sheriff’s Department said the policy is for transgender inmates to be booked separately from the general population.

He also said that even though Harper was booked on the male side of the jail, she was placed alone in a holding cell separate from others.

“It could have been borderline dangerous,” Sacramento County Supervisor Phil Serna said. “If there’s any kind of confusion as to how that happens, I think we need to make sure there is no confusion.”

In New York City and San Francisco, among other places, transgender inmates have the option to be housed with whichever gender they identify with.

“Respecting someone’s gender identity or gender expression is key in making sure that everyone in New York City is living with dignity and respect,” New York City Commissioner of Human Rights Carmelyn Malalis told The Associated Press. “The fact that somebody’s incarcerated or not doesn’t really change that.”

Approved posts to MyVoice will be live on the site within a few hours. MyVoice is for posting intelligent, engaging, entertaining and thought-provoking commentary and stories, so following these guidelines will help get your post prioritized and noticed.

Moderators assign strikes for violations of our comment policy. Strikes will disappear automatically in 24 hours, provided you have no further violations. However, if you earn three strikes within 24 hours, your account will be temporary suspended.

Please email moderation@theblaze.com to let us know you would like it removed.

If you notice something is not working as expected, please email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

You can report offending posts by clicking on the little flag icon below every post. This will automatically inform our moderators. If you spot a troublemaker, you can also email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

Speak your mind. Please be respectful of our rules and community. No spam, abuse, obscenities, off-topic comments, racial or ethnic slurs, threats, hate, comments that incite violence or excessive use of flagging permitted.

Please be respectful of our community and spread some love. Any of the following may result in a permanent ban:

For more information, please see our Terms of Use. Now, go have fun and speak your mind!