
                                SAM KILMISTER
                            


                            
                            Last updated 18:49, January 12 2018
                            


                Sheryl Wishnowsky created Turtle Rescue Manawatū after she was given a turtle by someone who could no longer look after it.
            

A Feilding home that acts as a safe haven for wayward, homeless and unwanted turtles is at near-full capacity.


Sheryl Wishnowsky started Manawatu Turtle Rescue in her living room in 2015 after she was given a turtle by someone who could no longer look after it.


She soon learnt there was a demand for such a recovery centre and, within months, it outgrew the confines of her home. 

Sheryl Wishnowsky created Turtle Rescue Manawatu in 2015 after she was given a turtle by someone who could no longer look after it. She now looks after 39 turtles. 

Its considerable interest forced her to buy a larger tank, which she placed outside. But it wasn't long before she created a small, man-made pond in the backyard.  Then she created another pond, which was even bigger. 


READ MORE: * Feilding home a safe haven for turtles


In December, she installed her fifth and largest pond yet, a 10 metre-long sand and stone lagoon with a filtration system. It's even hooked up to the computer so she can monitor waterflow and temperature. 

Wishnowsky's Feilding home provides a safe haven for turtles, but it at full stretch.  

She has 39 turtles from throughout the lower North Island. Her eldest is Madam, a 33-year-old red-eared slider. 


Most of them were retrieved from the side of the road, likely dumped by their owners. Some of them are from the SPCA. 


Wishnowsky had loved turtles since she was a young girl and was given two of her own as a child. But raising them could be draining because they lived so long and people got bored of them, she said. 

One of Wishnowsky's 39 turtles - a red-eared slider. 

"Some of them have been dumped," she said. "That concerns me because we're always here for them to be dropped off." 


She opposed the title 'turtle whisperer', but conceded it was better to be a "crazy turtle lady than a crazy cat lady". 


"I love turtles. I always have. They're very strong personalities, they're friendly and they enjoy company.

Turtles wait to be fed. 

"It's just so therapeutic. I could spend all day out here." 


Wishnowsky has opened her doors to allow children and parents to hold, feed and interact with the turtles all year round. 


They're given a feed of lettuce, fish or watercress every two days. 


Wishnowsky works closely with the Massey University Veterinary Hospital, and even let the it take 14 turtles to put to sleep for research. 


She was happy to pass on the knowledge she had gained about turtles and to educate people who had them as pets. She's even had a couple of vets contact her for advice.  


While she said she did not know everything, most of the time people could ask her questions and she would be able to answer them.


She hopes to one day install a camera above the enclosure to live stream footage to Youtube. But, because the haven was a not-for-profit organisation money was hard to come by, she said. 


People can purchase Wishnowsky's turtles for $80 through her Facebook page. 


 


​​


 


 


  


 



                
                     - Stuff
            

Myrtle rust found in New Plymouth's Pukekura Park 

Environment Homepage


            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            