SORRY, No RESULTS FOUND

Well sometimes you need coffee and the rest of the times you’re probably asleep.

If you think that you’re basically Lorelai Gilmore from the famous Gilmore Girls and need coffee in an IV, well, you’ve found a gem. We understand that the monotony of life is often too much for most of us and so, the last thing we want is for our coffee to get monotonous.



Unsplash

That said, we have brewed some recipes to fuel your disturbing coffee addiction.

Note: The quantity of ingredients is for one glass and depending on your taste, especially sugar. Unless specified, hit it according to your own need and preference.




Unsplash

Pour some ground coffee in a large bowl and add some piping hot water to it. Now leave it aside and go live your life. Come back to it after a few hours, ideally eight, and pass it through a french press or sieve with six layers of cheesecloth.


Add ice cold water to your strained coffee, sugar and add 1-2 spoons of sweetened condensed milk. Also, hit it with ice cubes if you like.

Happy Monday everyone! Start your week off right 👊 . . . #daark #daarkespresso #icedlatte #icedcoffee #icedlattes #goldcoast2018 #goldcoastcoffee #goldcoastcafe #destinationgoldcoast #coffeelife #coffeecup #coffeefix #coffeefirst #happymonday #mondaycoffee #beanhunter #coldcoffee

A post shared by  Daark Espresso (@daarkespresso) on Feb 18, 2018 at 3:38pm PST

Take some espresso (1 shot for one glass), crushed ice, condensed milk (1 teaspoon)  and 1 cup of regular milk. Throw all of this in a jar and blend it. Blend it for a few more minutes and serve it chilled.

If you want to make this experience a little too exotic, add a scoop of vanilla ice cream and watch the magic unfold.


Hi @instagram! Have a good week you all! #food#cappuccino#coffee#love#hello#goodmorning#cafe

A post shared by  Cooking &amp; Bon Appétit (@cookingbonapp) on Feb 19, 2018 at 4:09am PST

Bring one cup of water to a boil and add 1 teaspoon of coffee granules and sugar to taste. In another pot, bring milk to boil. Now transfer the boiled milk into a sealable jar and fill it halfway.  Seal the container tightly then shake it hard for twenty seconds, or until a froth forms.

Now pour the hot milk into the mug and mix it with coffee. Also, add a scoop of the foamed milk out of the container and top your drink with it.



Unsplash


To make a basic glass of homemade iced coffee, start with a double-strength brew and throw in some sugar syrup. To make an extra-cold drink, combine the coffee, milk, and sweetener in a cocktail shaker with ice; shake, and strain into a glass over more ice.



Unsplash

To make a VICWHWC, you need  2 cups of heavy cream and about  1/4 cup sugar. As for the frappe you need 4 scoops of vanilla ice cream,  coffee, 1 cup ice cubes, 1/3 cup 2% milk caramel syrup.

Now you know the drill. To make the whipped cream, mix sugar syrup with heavy cream until it takes a form. For coffee, mix ice cubes, vanilla ice cream, coffee, milk. Pour the drink into a jar and top it with heavy cream.




Unsplash

This is how you can make a perfect glass of Irish coffee.

Take a tall glass and fill it with boiling water, leave it for 2 minutes and then pour it away. Now, whip the cream until bubbles disappear and put it in the refrigerator. Once done, dissolve sugar to taste in hot water and bring it boil.

Add some freshly brewed rich coffee and stir and remove the sugar syrup from heat. Pour this mixture into the bottom of the pre-heated glass and pour the cold cream from the refrigerator and pour over this. Grate nutmeg on top to make it even better.



Unsplash


Summers are just around the corner and it’s about time that you give your coffee a spin.Add some coffee granules to sugar syrup and mix it well with hot chocolate. Once done, pour some milk in it and let it chill for a while.

Now whisk some heavy cream. Bring a tall glass and add the coffee-sugar-milk syrup to it. Top it with some ice-cream and whisked cream. Serve it immediately.

Two things...one I'm trying some beverage shots out for the portfolio so you might see more drinks up in here and two, another shot from the 6 food photography tips video I uploaded yesterday on YouTube link in my profile, if you haven't had a chance to checkout my channel over there I have some cool tutorials on shooting food and other fun photography stuff so stop by there and say hi. Hope you had a wonderful weekend. . . . . . . . . . .. #beautifulcuisines #realfood #eatlocal #onthetable #canon #comfortfood #healthyfood #buzzfeedfood #buzzfeast #huffposttaste #foodandwine #fwhealthy #soulfood #f52grams #food52 #feedfeed #lifeandthyme #vscofood #vsco_food #bonappetit #foodphotographer #foodstyling #foodphotography #soularty #coffee #icedcoffee

A post shared by  Skyler Burt (@we.eat.together_) on Feb 18, 2018 at 6:50pm PST

Blended Iced Cappuccino is probably the easiest on the list.

Take 2 teaspoons of ground coffee and add cold water to it. Mix it well and put it in a glass jar. Lock the jar with the lid and wrap aluminium foil on its mouth to avoid air passing through it. Leave it overnight. 


With the help of a sieve, separate the ice cold coffee water. Add sugar and milk to taste. The ideal way to serve this is with some ice-cubes.  



Unsplash

Take 2 scoops of ice cream and ½ cup of iced coffee to it. Blend it on high power until the mixture gets smooth. Add more coffee to reach desired consistency, if needed. Now break down some cookies and mix it well with whipped cream. 

Take a tall glass, add the coffee and top it with the whipped cream mixture. Serve immediately.



Unsplash


Keep ice, a glass, coffee concentrate, sweetened condensed milk, caramel syrup, milk and sea salt handy.

Now, fill a glass with ice and about 3/4 coffee concentrate to it. Add  3-4 teaspoons sweetened condensed milk, 2 teaspoons caramel syrup, and a pinch of sea salt. Mix it well and serve. You can add more sweetened condensed milk and salt if you need.



Unsplash

Not a fan of spiced coffee, maybe because you never had one. Well, give this recipe a try! 

Take some coffee and mix it well with 1 ½ teaspoon cardamom powder and ginger. Take 1-litre water and bring it to boil. Also, heat milk and sugar until a scalding point. Mix some hot coffee with the milk and add whipped cream to it. Mix in 1/2 tsp cardamom powder.

You can also grate some chocolate on top. 

AD: STATE FARM INSURANCE


AD: KETTO


AD: Godrej Properties


AD: Joyville by Shapoorji Pallonji


AD: Milaap


AD: FROPKY


STATE FARM INSURANCE

Qatar Airways

KETTO

SLING INTERNATIONAL

CricUnion