West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures hit their highest level since November 2014 at $71.17 per barrel, up 2.8 per cent.



London, May 9


 Crude oil prices jumped back to 3-1/2-year highs on Wednesday after President Donald Trump pulled the United States out of an international nuclear deal with Iran, while the dollar continued its tireless ascent and world stocks held steady.


Trump's move sparked worries about fresh tension in West Asia and uncertainty over global oil supplies.


Demand for safe-haven assets remained limited, however, as the price of gold retreated and bond yields fell. The US 10-year Treasury breached the key 3 per cent level once more and was last at 3.0080 percent, a two-week high, supported by expectations of higher interest rates.


Caroline Simmons, deputy head of the UK chief investment office at UBS Wealth Management, said that while generally central banks tend to look through the oil price in terms of its impact on inflation, it is still of note to market watchers.


“In an environment where the Fed, particularly, is already at its inflation target and people are closely watching the pace of the monetary tightening, something like this which could possibly nudge inflation a little bit higher is going to be quite interesting for the market,” Simmons said.


“That's why you're seeing the yields go up a little bit on the bonds.”


Brent hits 3-1/2-year high


The impact of Trump's decision remained broadly limited to oil markets and energy-related stocks. West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures hit their highest level since November 2014 at $71.17 per barrel, up 2.8 per cent. Brent crude futures jumped as much as 2.8 per cent to a 3-1/2-year high of $77.20.


“There is still an interim period before sanctions kick in. And other signatories and Iran want to keep the deal going so there is a period where things could be hammered out,” said Benjamin Schroeder, rates strategist at ING.


“But I would have expected a bit of a safe-haven bid this morning,” he added, referring to bonds.


The MSCI world equity index, which tracks shares in 47 countries, was flat in percentage terms and continued to trade in a narrow range. The pan-European STOXX 600 meanwhile rose 0.2 per cent as oil majors gained and earnings from Siemens and Imperial Brands dominated the market action.


“In the very short-term, it looks as if the impact of heightened geopolitical worries was limited to oil markets. But that is not the end of the story,” said Norihiro Fujito, senior investment strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities.


“US sanctions could affect various industries. And tensions between Iran and Israel look set to intensify. Those will begin to cap share prices,” he added.


US-Iran ties to be hit


The reaction in Asian markets was more pronounced as renewed US sanctions on Tehran were seen as disruptive for many companies that have deals with Iran. Trump's move is also seen as likely to worsen already-tense relations between Iran and US allies in the region.


MSCI's broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan was flat, while Japan's Nikkei fell 0.4 per cent.


Iran, the third-biggest producer among the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, produces about 3.8 million barrels per day (bpd), or about 4 per cent of the world's oil supplies.


The US Treasury said it will reimpose a wide array of Iran-related sanctions after the expiry of 90- and 180-day wind-down periods, including those aimed at Iran's oil sector and transactions with its central bank.


Dollar steams ahead


The rise in Treasury yields helped fuel the dollar's rally, with the greenback trading at a fresh high for 2018. The dollar's index against a basket of major currencies was last up at 93.264, and has risen 1.2 per cent so far this year.


Souring risk sentiment is hitting emerging markets, which have been clobbered in recent weeks by concerns about capital outflows, as the prospect of higher US interest rates lures investors back to US bonds rather than riskier assets.


Countries with high perceived political risks, such as Brazil and Turkey, were among the worst hit.


The Brazilian real hit a near two-year low and the Turkish lira reached a record low. Since the start of this week, those currencies are both down around 1 per cent. The Indonesian rupiah hit a 2-1/2-year low, and has slid 1 per cent this week.


Among major currencies, the risk-sensitive Australian dollar hit an 11-month low of $0.74130 and last stood at $0.74315. The euro continued to slide to a fresh 4-1/2-month low of $1.1821 and last stood at $1.1841, having declined more than 4 per cent in the past three weeks.


Political impasse in Italy


The currency was hit by increasing prospects of another election in Italy as the political impasse there has continued since early March’s inconclusive ballot.


The British pound stood at $1.3538, near a four-month low of $1.3482 touched on Tuesday. The dollar rose 0.5 per cent to 109.70 yen, edging near its three-month high of 110.02 yen touched last week. 

Previous Story
STOXX 600 jumps to fresh 3-month high


Next Story
 Lack of information and high debts stalling vibrant municipal bond market: Report


Get more of your favourite news delivered to your inbox

Please enter a valid email address. Thank You.

₹2146 • HDFC Bank S1S2R1R2COMMENT 2135212221602175 Fresh long positions ...

₹2146 • HDFC Bank S1S2R1R2COMMENT 2135212221602175 Fresh long positions ...

₹2146 • HDFC Bank S1S2R1R2COMMENT 2135212221602175 Fresh long positions ...

Orient Green Power will see a change in promoters, the company informed the ...

Prabhudas LilladherTCS (Accumulate)CMP: ₹1,979.6Target: ₹2,080TCS delivered ...

Mitsu Chem Plast has permanently closed the manufacturing unit at Rungta ...

Harsha Ramdas Bhatkal, promoter of Talwalkars Better Value Fitness, has ...

Shree Ajit Pulp &amp; Paper has received an export order worth ₹4.06 crore. 

The board of HCL Technologies will meet on Thursday to consider a share ...

The respective boards of Cyient and Karnataka Bank will meet on Thursday to ...

The board of HIL on Wednesday gave consent to acquire the entire stake in ...

Investors with a short-term perspective can sell the stock of Bank of India ...

₹2146 • HDFC Bank S1S2R1R2COMMENT 2135212221602175 Fresh long positions ...

Orient Green Power will see a change in promoters, the company informed the ...

Prabhudas LilladherTCS (Accumulate)CMP: ₹1,979.6Target: ₹2,080TCS delivered ...

Mitsu Chem Plast has permanently closed the manufacturing unit at Rungta ...

Harsha Ramdas Bhatkal, promoter of Talwalkars Better Value Fitness, has ...

Shree Ajit Pulp &amp; Paper has received an export order worth ₹4.06 crore. 

The board of HCL Technologies will meet on Thursday to consider a share ...

The respective boards of Cyient and Karnataka Bank will meet on Thursday to ...

The board of HIL on Wednesday gave consent to acquire the entire stake in ...

Investors with a short-term perspective can sell the stock of Bank of India ...

FlightPlan offers a new column on the milestone moments in the life of aviation stalwarts. Here’s the first ...

The ability of CEOs to make tough calls and avoid feel-good short-term decisions often decides their legacies, ...

As the SC verdict on Wednesday gives the Delhi government more teeth, a look at the power struggle in the ...

For the last six years, Sudhanshu Vats, Group CEO, Viacom 18 Media Pvt Ltd, has been busy turning the ...

 A good bet to cash in on market rallies and cap losses during choppy markets

Schemes have delivered an average negative return of 15.7% over the past six months

I am 33 years old; married without kids. I have monthly savings of ₹15,000. I also have ₹4 lakh in my savings ...

Investors with a short-term perspective can sell the stock of Bank of India at current levels. Since ...

As trees stand on shaky ground in our cities, a shave away from the axe of development, a meditation on their ...

In keeping with the rest of the issue, this week’s quiz is all about trees. 

Last week’s visit to Boston with my sister Su was built around my trial-by-visa at the Spanish Consulate. All ...

The World Cup upsets show that Messi and Ronaldo, the greats of their time, can thrive only with an able ...

The explosively growing food delivery business in India is going upmarket, getting specialised and dishing out ...

Cashing in on the popularity of videos, Facebook’s Instagram has launched IGTV, a platform where videos can ...

The extent of impact and scalability were at the centre of conversations

There will be $24 billion in net new advertising investment this year, the best annual increment since the ...

In this concluding series on jobs, BusinessLine finds that while small units have been hit all over the ...

The pejorative jokes on pakoda sellers apart, the Centre has been keen on pushing self-employment in a country ...

TeamLease Services, a recruitment and consultancy concern, has been an observer-participant in India’s labour ...

In the first of a two-part series on skills and jobs, BusinessLine examines the angst and aspirations of ...

Click allow to get news alerts from The Hindu BusinessLine

You can manage the notifications any time from your browser settings.