Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Proceeds from Tri-Star fundraiser will go toward Cheatham County women and children's shelter.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


October is Domestic Violence Awareness Month
(Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

October is Domestic Violence Awareness Month, and Cheatham County will do its part to bring the issue to light at the second annual Harvest Fest, a fundraiser sponsored by Tri-Star Ashland City Medical Center. Proceeds from the event will go to Courtney's House, a women and children's shelter, which is part of Safe Haven Cheatham County.


"We're trying to raise the level of awareness in the community," said Frances Wright with Tri-Star. "As nurses, we see the direct effects of domestic violence."


The fundraiser takes place at Riverbluff Park Oct. 14 from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Guests can receive information on domestic violence assistance and Safe Haven, enjoy a bite to eat from food trucks and do a little shopping from the vendors.  Live music will also be on site.


"This is the perfect opportunity for Ashland City and Cheatham County to reach out and support the only domestic violence shelter we have in the county," said Wright. "Domestic violence touches all types of people."


Wright said that Tri-Star employees help support Safe Haven throughout the year, collecting items such as toilet tissue, laundry detergent and soap for the women and children at the shelter. During the holidays, they also sponsor families and purchase gifts for the children at the shelter.


To show your support for the shelter, visit Safe Haven's Facebook page for ideas on what items to donate. Currently, they are looking for laundry detergent, cleaning supplies, shampoo, conditioner, body washes, towels, paper towels, toilet paper, spiral notebooks or journals, gently used purses, hair accessories and makeup of various sorts. 


The event takes place on the same day as Ashland City's Music on Main event, but Wright said that they will have different vendors and music.


"This is a win-win for everyone," she said. "People can go to Music on Main and stop by Riverbluff Park. We're hoping people will flow back and forth between the two events."


• According to domestic violence national statistics obtained from www.ncadv.org, a woman in the U.S. is assaulted or beaten every nine seconds.


• You can help by volunteering or donating.


• Or, invite Safe Haven board members to speak at your next civic meeting.


• For more information or to request a speaking engagement, call Kathryn Mitchem at 615-792-3534.
 


Amy Nixon, editor of the Ashland City Times, can be reached at anixon@gannett.com or 615-946-7549.
