
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

A Sicklerville man who choked and cut a woman told his victim he intended to cremate her, according to police.

Before he could carry out his alleged threat, a cop stopped the man and rescued the woman after a car chase.

Tomas O. Aponte, 36, is charged with attempted murder, assault and eluding following an incident that began Monday on Beach Hill Road in National Park, Gloucester County.

Aponte allegedly cut the woman's neck and fingers repeatedly using a folding knife, causing "severe lacerations," according to a criminal complaint. He also placed the woman in a chokehold, the victim told police.

During the assault, he told the woman that "he was going to kill her and cremate her body," police said.

Authorities described this as a domestic violence incident.

Aponte apparently placed her in a vehicle and left the area, and that's when West Deptford Township Patrolman Justin Hilt got involved.

Hilt tried to stop the motorist for failure to maintain lane on Columbia Boulevard, but Aponte refused to pull over. West Deptford provides police services for neighboring National Park.

As Hilt pursued Aponte, a rear passenger door opened and a woman stuck her hand and leg out of the vehicle, the officer reported.

The chase ended on Creek Road in Bellmawr, where Aponte was arrested and the victim was found in the back seat with her hands "partially tied with a rope."

She was taken to Cooper University Hospital for medical treatment.

Aponte was jailed in Salem County Correctional Facility pending court proceedings.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us: nj.com/tips.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        