
    
        
            By Chris Sheldon


            NJ Advance Media for NJ.com
            

One of four men charged with aggravated assault has been charged with murder Thursday in connection with a fight that ended in the fatal stabbing of a teenager in Paulsboro, authorities said.

Kishon Pierce, 18, of Paulsboro was charged with murder in the May 20 stabbing of Amir Tarpley, 19, of Paulsboro, according to a release from the Gloucester County Prosecutor's Office.

Tarpley was stabbed during an altercation outside of his home on West New Street. Responding officers found Tarpley suffering from multiple wounds. He was pronounced dead a half hour later at Inspira Medical Center Woodbury.

An autopsy determined Tarpley died from a stab wound to the chest, authorities said.

Pierce, who was jailed at the Salem County Correctional Facility, has also been charged with possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose, "specifically a knife used to stab Tarpley in the chest," Gloucester County Prosecutor Charles A. Fiore said in the release. Pierce was also charged with unlawful possession of a weapon, the release states.

Fellow Paulsboro residents Aaron Hickox and Archie Hickox, who are 18-year-old twins, and Arteste J. Ruffin, 42, were charged with aggravated assault, the Gloucester County Prosecutor's Office said on May 22.

The Hickox brothers are being held in the Salem County Correctional Facility and Ruffin is scheduled for a pre-trial detention hearing on June 1.

The incident is still under investigation by the Gloucester County Prosecutor's Office and the Paulsboro Police Department.

Chris Sheldon may be reached at csheldon@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @chrisrsheldon Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        