
    
        
            By Chris Franklin

cfranklin@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

In their former jobs, these fire hoses saved lives -- helping rescue people in Salem County during emergencies. Now in retirement, the hoses have found a new purpose, and law enforcement officials say they could be just as critical to protecting those in danger.  

Decommissioned fire hoses will now be used at Salem County Vocational-Technical High School in Mannington Township as an added layer of security during emergencies, such as active shooter situations, law enforcement officials from various agencies announced last week.

How does it work? The hose, or "sleeve," is placed over the hydraulic device at the top of the classroom doors, and acts as another doorstop to prevent someone from coming inside. The idea, officials said, is to used the recycled hoses to keep active shooters out.

"It's a device that can be used very easily by any teacher or staff member of the schools," Salem County Sheriff Chuck Miller said. "It can be slipped over on top of the hydraulic hinge device on all the doors that have them. It's a layer of protection that we in law enforcement feel it will be necessary for help protecting our kids."

He also pointed out the security measure would cost the schools nothing.

The idea for the recycled purpose, officials said, started when Chief Fire Instructor Leroy Pierce was doing some maintenance at the drill ground facility at the fire academy and saw a decommissioned fire hose that was destined to head to the landfill.

"In past years, the hoses were taken by marinas who would use them for bumpers on the docks," Pierce said. "I saw departments out west...had partnered with the school districts and came up with the idea with slipping the hose sections over the hydraulic closure."

Pierce reached out to several chiefs in Salem County to see if the departments were interested in partnering together to create the safety devices, and many said they were in need of a way to recycle their old hoses.

Pierce took the hose from the academy to the Salem County Correctional Facility, where the inmates cut 245 12-inch sleeves out of the fire hose. The inmates also used bleach and water to remove any potential carcinogens that may have remained on the hose from its days fighting fires.

Salem Superintendent John Swain said every school in the county is continually thinking about safety and security. Beyond providing students with an education, he said, ensuring the safety and security of students, staff, and parents that come to the buildings is vital.

"The decommissioned fire hose that was previously used to save lives by putting out fires is now being repurposed to continue to provide shelter and provide safety to our students and our staff by adding additional security to a locked door," Miller said.

Salem County Vocational-Technical High School will be the first to use the sleeves and have them immediately available. Miller said more sleeves should be set up in other schools around the county by the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year.

Chris Franklin can be reached at cfranklin@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @cfranklinnews. Find NJ.com on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        