
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

A former student was arrested for allegedly posting a social media threat about a shooting at his old school, police said.

Amante Brice, 19, of Clayton, posted a photo of Clayton High School on Instagram, along with the caption "revenge is a (expletive) the next S.S." The post included a few gun emojis.

S.S. denotes school shooting, police said. The caption included several gun emojis.

District officials learned of the post Friday morning, contacted police and placed the school on a "lock in place" for 10 minutes. A lock in place is a heightened level of security in which visitors are not allowed into the school and students are kept out of hallways, while teaching and all other school operations continue as normal.

That status remained in place for only 10 minutes, police said.

Within an hour, Brice was located in Vineland and arrested. He was charged with terroristic threats, causing a false public alarm and disorderly conduct. 

Brice was placed in Salem County Correctional Facility, police said.

His Facebook profile indicates he previously attended the school.

In a message to parents, Clayton Superintendent Nikolaos C. Koutsogiannis described "a few tense minutes" in the combined high school and middle school complex on Friday, but praised students for reacting calmly and following all directions.

"Unfortunately, these are the times that we live in and, as a consequence, we have to take all threats seriously," he wrote.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us: nj.com/tips.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        