Gallery: Dante Spence in court for detention hearing, Nov. 6, 2017


    
        
            By Bill Gallo Jr.

bgallo@njadvancemedia.com

 For NJ.com

SALEM -- A dispute over drugs lead a man to kill another person and then try to hide their body in an apartment closet for several hours, according to prosecutors.

The suspect, Dante Spence, 31, then allegedly called his stepmother seeking help in disposing of the body of the victim, Gary Carter, 45.

Spence's defense attorney, Leslie McNair-Jackson said Spence's actions were a case of self-defense. 

But Superior Court Judge John Eastlack on Monday, who found there was probable cause for the case to move forward, ordered Spence held in jail until trial saying Spence posed a danger to the community and was a flight risk.

Carter was murdered on Oct. 30 at the Penn Terrace Apartments on Meadow Road in Pennsville.

Salem County Assistant Prosecutor Geoffrey Gleason said authorities learned about the killing thanks to a tip that Penns Grove Chief of Police John T. Stranahan Sr. had received.

The stepmother of Spence had called a Penns Grove council member and told them that her stepson had told her "how he had just stabbed and killed a man and it was over drugs," Gleason said.

He also allegedly told her he had stuffed the man's body in a closet.

Spence allegedly had asked his stepmother in that phone call "for help to get rid of the body" according to Gleason.

That information was relayed to Stranahan who, in turn, notified Pennsville police.

Officers arrived at the Pennsville apartment complex around 7 p.m. and found Spence outdoors and took him into custody.

Man fatally stabs mom, police say

Inside they found Carter's body in a closet, his head down and his feet up against the wall covered with a sheet and clothing, the court was told.

Spence told police, Gleason said, that Carter had come to his house carrying a baseball bat and demanding money. Spence allegedly told authorities he felt threatened by Carter and grabbed a knife to defend himself "and used it."

After he placed Carter in the closet Spence told police he had gone back "multiple times multiple times during the day and there was no movement so he assumed (Carter) was dead," Gleason said.

Spence allegedly told police he had hit Carter with a bat as well as stabbed him.

According to the timeline laid out by prosecutors, Carter was killed approximately seven hours before Spence is said to have made the call to his stepmother.

The knife and baseball bat allegedly used to kill Carter were found in the apartment, authorities said. Carter suffered stab wounds to his back and blunt force trauma, believed to be from the bat, to the back of his skull, authorities said.

McNair-Jackson argued that Spence was justified in trying to protect himself against Carter who allegedly came after him swinging the bat.

"Mr. Spence had to act to defend himself," McNair-Jackson said.

Noting that Spence had little criminal past it was "not appropriate to assume someone charged with murder will do it again."

Eastlack was not swayed and ruled Spence will remain in jail.

Along with first-degree murder, Spence is charged with aggravated manslaughter, aggravated assault, two counts of possession of weapon for an unlawful purpose, two counts of unlawful possession of a weapon, two counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, disturbing/desecrating human remains, hindering and tampering with evidence.

Spence is being held in the Salem County Correctional Facility, Mannington Township.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        