Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

"They're here for you whenever you need it," Westmoreland Food Bank client Jill Lyons said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Westmoreland Food Bank provides a variety of goods from United Way.
(Photo: Jen Todd / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Volunteers of local food banks know firsthand hunger doesn't discriminate.


Often in Sumner County, it hits senior citizens who are on fixed income. 


"We were finding many senior adults in the community didn't have family here or their family moved away, and they had to choose to eat, pay bills or pay for medicine," said Portland C.A.R.E.S. director Penny Martin.


But food bank clients can also include people who got laid off, who haven't yet been approved for food stamps, who are raising their grandchildren and can't work, or had to receive medical treatment. 


"I know firsthand, one ER visit can set finances back for months," said LeEllen Claud, food bank manager at the Hendersonville Samaritan Association.


It even affects veterans and children.


"A lot of students are in need over the weekend," said Hendersonville Samaritan Association executive director and alderman Stephen Brown. 


►More: Reading to cats, talking to seniors: how kids can give back in Sumner County


But for all those in need, there are food banks and pantries all over Sumner County to help.


Area grocery stores like Publix and Fresh Market donate their day-old breads and desserts to the Hendersonville Samaritan Center. (Photo: Jen Todd / The Tennessean)

One recent Tuesday, Jill Lyons walked through the Westmoreland Food Bank, browsing its cereal and drink options. 


While the cancer survivor doesn't come often, she sometimes needs some help to get her through the month. 


"They're here for you whenever you need it," she said.


The dedicated volunteers at the Westmoreland Food Bank have given food to all ages and family sizes. 


"I didn't know the depth of the problem here until I became involved in it," said volunteer Isabel LeBeau, who also volunteers for Habitat for Humanity of Sumner County.


Although the first week of the month is typically the busiest, every week new clients sign up for a variety of reasons.


"They're not judgmental at all, which is nice," Lyons said. "Most of the people here use this. You're not judged or criticized."


Wanda Flowers mans the freezers at the Westmoreland Food Bank. (Photo: Jen Todd / The Tennessean)

Martin with Portland C.A.R.E.S. hasn't had to rely on Second Harvest Food Bank in approximately eight years, thanks to the Portland community. 


►More: 10 ways to give back this holiday season in Sumner County


"If I put out cry in the community that I need something, it's because we really need it," she said. 


Hunters for the Hungry has even donated fresh venison meat that hunters didn't want to Portland C.A.R.E.S. 


"We depend totally on good hearts of Sumner County residents and business owners," said James Gill, executive director of the Sumner County Food Bank. 


Any Sumner County resident can use this food bank, which takes place the third Tuesday of each month to help residents get through the last 10 days of the month, typically when their supply is low. 


"I'm just proud to say no family in Sumner County can honestly say they cannot have quality food on their table," Gill said.


The food pantry for veterans, run by the Vietnam Veterans Chapter 240 and Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 9851 in Hendersonville, also cooperates with area organizations. 


About 18 veterans and their families use the pantry, so leftovers go to churches. 


►More: How Sumner County organizations, businesses work toward same goal: help veterans


"We don't let anything go to waste here," quartermaster Bob Bentrem said. "We get a lot of bread and cake from the local stores. We give them to churches."


While all food pantries serve nonperishable goods such as canned vegetables, pasta and rice, they often get other treats depending on the supply from their donors, Second Harvest or United Way. 


Recently, Westmoreland Food Bank's freezers included 3-pound hams and even Halo Top low-calorie ice cream. 


Brauer Material Handling Systems has donated turkeys to VFW Post 9851 for the holidays. 


Many grocery stores also donate day-old breads and desserts. 


To curb abusers, several food banks require a photo ID and proof of income or proof of the crisis which caused the person to need food. 


"I don't let anything get past me," Westmoreland Food Bank volunteer Deloris Garrison said. "That's why United Way gives us so much."


But most are honest, she and Claud of the Hendersonville Samaritan Association said. 


"Some crises are not resolved in a week," Claud said.


Reach Jen Todd at 615-575-7143, jtodd1@gannett.com or on Twitter @jentoddwrites.
