Lots of sunshine. High near 95F. Winds S at 10 to 20 mph..

A clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:52 pm

Eric Scott

Eric Scott

The mid-drive escape of an inmate Wednesday on a pastoral Nebraska road will trigger a review of the Dodge County Sheriff’s Office’s transportation protocol.

The examination will focus on the circumstances that led Eric Scott, who was spotted and arrested Thursday near Council Bluffs, to be able to gain control of a car and leave a deputy on the side of a road near Ceresco.

On some of the hundreds of trips he has made for the Dodge County Sheriff’s Office transporting inmates, the deputy who was driving Scott on Wednesday has had a second deputy with him, Sheriff Steve Hespen said.

At times, he has used a car that had a barrier between its front and rear seats.

But on Wednesday, for reasons unclear, the deputy was alone with nothing to separate him from the back of the sedan, where Scott, 37, freed himself from his handcuffs and pulled his leg iron chain around the deputy’s throat as he drove, drawing his body against the headrest.

It was unclear how Scott managed to remove his handcuffs, which were attached to a restraint belt.

A spokeswoman for the Nebraska Department of Correctional Services said policy dictates that inmates such as Scott be strip-searched by corrections employees before being transferred into another agency's custody. Dawn-Renee Smith said that law enforcement officers who take custody of inmates for transport are also allowed to do their own strip search if they deem it necessary.

Pottawattamie County sheriff’s deputies arrested Scott about three miles north of their office near Council Bluffs. He had the Dodge County sheriff’s deputy’s handgun in a duffel bag, Pottawattamie County Sheriff Jeff Danker said.

The arrest capped nearly a day of searching since Scott took control of the Dodge County Sheriff’s Office car Wednesday.

The deputy, whose name Hespen declined to release, is a 30-year veteran of the Dodge County Sheriff’s Office. He was driving Scott from a Lincoln prison to the Dodge County Jail to face charges of child sex assault. Scott was scheduled to have a preliminary hearing on the charges Thursday.

The deputy threw his .40-caliber Glock semi-automatic handgun and a rifle from the car in an attempt to prevent Scott from using them, but Scott later found the handgun.

The deputy suffered bruising on his neck, Dodge County Attorney Oliver Glass said, and was home Thursday recovering.

The unmarked vehicle with government plates was found Wednesday night in the parking lot of Nebraska Furniture Mart at 700 S. 72nd St.

Before noon Thursday, someone called 911 to report a man walking near Joslin Avenue and Borden Road north of the Bluffs. Pottawattamie County deputies surrounded Scott just after 12:10 p.m. and arrested him.

“I’m just glad that he’s arrested and off the street, because there’s a lot of real potential danger with him out on the street knowing he has a firearm,” Danker said. “It’s just good to have him arrested and back in jail.”

Scott was being held at the Pottawattamie County Jail on Nebraska charges of escape and false imprisonment. He is awaiting an extradition hearing.

Scott eventually will head back to prison to serve out his time on a fifth-offense DUI, then face charges in either Saunders County or Dodge County in connection with assaulting the officer and escaping, Glass said.

The escape was the second time within five months that an inmate has escaped from local authorities while being transported. Both went on the run and crossed the Missouri River.

In May, Wesley Correa-Carmenaty shot two Pottawattamie County sheriff’s deputies, killing one, after the deputies brought him back to jail from the Pottawattamie County Courthouse. He then crashed an inmate transport van through the jail garage door, ditched the van, shot a man during an attempted carjacking and kidnapped a woman, forcing her to drive him to Omaha. He then left the woman in north Omaha and drove away in the car. He was caught by Omaha police after a chase.

Correa-Carmenaty will serve a life sentence for the murder.

Brian Styskal, Saunders County’s jail director, said that because of what happened in Pottawattamie County, Saunders County officials ordered extra equipment to decrease the likelihood of escapes during transport. All inmates must, at minimum, be handcuffed in cuffs connected to a waist chain and leg irons, Styskal said. The handcuffs soon will be fitted with a handcuff cover box that prevents inmates from having access to the cuffs’ keyhole.

Styskal said he has heard of inmates creating makeshift keys out of aluminum pop cans.

“Inmates are very smart on concealing contraband,” Styskal said, adding that it’s important for authorities to do thorough searches.

Rusty Ringler, a training specialist with the Iowa Department of Corrections, said escapes are high-risk on return trips or when an inmate knows he faces life in prison. If Scott is convicted on the Dodge County child sex assault charges and given the maximum sentence, he could spend the rest of his life in prison, Glass has said.

Ringler said officers who transport inmates must stay alert throughout the ride.

“Complacency kills,” Ringler said. “When you drop your guard, when you start assuming that everything’s going to be OK, that’s going to be a recipe for disaster.”

alia.conley@owh.com, 402-444-1068

Eric Scott




Eric Scott, 37, escaped Wednesday while being driven from the Nebraska State Penitentiary by a Dodge County deputy.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


