Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Yaron Steinbuch


		
		
		
		
	


									February 15, 2018 | 7:42am
											| Updated February 15, 2018 | 9:25am
												

The 19-year-old suspect in the Florida high school mass killing was booked into jail early Thursday on 17 counts of premeditated murder after being questioned for hours by authorities.

Nikolas Cruz was captured on camera as he was led barefoot and in a hospital gown by Broward County sheriff’s deputies to the county jail in Fort Lauderdale.

He is expected to appear later Thursday in court.

Cruz initially was taken by ambulance to Broward North hospital for treatment for labored breathing after his capture about two miles from Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, officials said.

He was then taken to the sheriff’s headquarters for questioning overnight.

Cruz bought the AR-15 assault rifle in the past year after passing a background check, a US official briefed on the investigation told CNN.

Jim Lewis, a lawyer for the family with whom Cruz has been living, said the family made him store the weapon in a gun cabinet at their house, but that he had a key.

Counselors are being made available for students, teachers and staff, but the school will remain closed as the investigation continues.

Broward Sheriff Scott Israel said the bodies of 12 of the 17 victims were found inside the building. Two other bodies were discovered outside the school, another was found nearby along a local road and two others died at a hospital.

Dr. Evan Boyer, medical director at Broward Health North’s Department of Emergency Medicine, told reporters that the suspect was among 17 patients taken to local hospitals after the shooting.


			Read Next
		


			
				Female student identified as 1st victim of Florida massacr...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Female student identified as 1st victim of Florida massacr...			
		

Share Selection

75,249

52,090

51,945

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters