


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Acting Sheriff Richard Schmidt outlined what he called "transformational changes" he's introduced at the Milwaukee County Jail.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Acting Milwaukee County Sheriff Richard Schmidt is among 18 applicants seeking appointment as interim sheriff to replace David A. Clarke Jr.
(Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Overtime is down and morale is up among staff at the Milwaukee County Jail, acting Sheriff Richard Schmidt said Thursday at a news conference about what he called  "transformational changes" at the facility. 


The news conference followed Schmidt's announcement Wednesday that he had committed a command-level sworn law enforcement official to act as an "inmate wellness monitor" at the jail, one of what will now be six sworn law enforcement staff, lieutenants and higher ranks, assigned to the jail.


Schmidt said that was just the latest move to overhaul the leadership at the jail, which has endured scrutiny over seven inmate deaths the past two years.


One of the deaths, that of Terrill Thomas, was the subject of an inquest that revealed poor decision-making that led to his death by dehydration after water to his cell was turned off. The jury recommended several jail employees should face criminal charges.


Historically, problems at the jail have been attributed in large part to understaffing, resulting in lots of mandated overtime. Schmidt said that in recent months, the office has increased the correctional officer staffing by 19%, resulting in much less overtime.


He credited jail administrator Aaron Dobson — whom he said he fought to "triple promote" from sergeant to deputy inspector about nine months ago — for helping pick new administration for the jail. He named several who were present at the news conference.


Schmidt said the new wellness monitor, Capt. Michael Rewolinski, has 28 years of experience and will go cell to cell daily among the jail's mental health, medical and discipline units, talking with inmates, assessing their general conditions and concerns, and then acting as a liaison with the correctional officers and contracted health care staff.


RELATED: Gov. Scott Walker names five finalists for appointment as Milwaukee County sheriff


RELATED: Acting Milwaukee County Sheriff Richard Schmidt nabs reckless driver on I-43


On a typical day, he said, 22% of the jail's 960 inmates are on medications to treat mental health conditions, and another 20% have severe medical issues, a reflection of the opioid abuse and addiction plaguing the community.


Last year, there were more than 34,000 bookings into the jail, mostly pre-trial detainees who "are innocent until proven guilty," and whose loved ones deserve to know they'll be treated appropriately while incarcerated.


He said he couldn't address specifics of jail deaths still under investigation, citing the potential for litigation, but noted that in two completed reviews, no jail staff were found to be at fault.


Schmidt, who was the jail administrator from 2004 to 2010, took over as sheriff when David Clarke resigned at the end of August.  He said he has not heard anything about whether Gov. Scott Walker will appoint him the interim sheriff for the rest of the year. The office is on the November ballot.



	
Sun Prairie firefighter killed by explosion that destroyed his own bar





Tensions boil in tiny Northwoods school district after board member asks about finances




	
'Pivot counties' will be key in fight for Senate control



A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 


 


 
