Posted: May 02, 2018 12:03 PM CDT

Updated: May 02, 2018 07:53 PM CDT

FORT SMITH, Ark. (KFTA) - UPDATE: The suspect in a Fort Smith bank robbery has been caught and is a registered sex offender.


David James Howell, 48, was arrested on suspicion of aggravated robbery. Howell, a Level 2 sex offender, was also arrested on a related warrant for absconding, according to Cpl. Anthony Rice, public information officer for the Fort Smith Police Department. 


"He's not registered as a sex offender in Fort Smith but is in Pine Bluff," Rice said.


Howell was arrested at a restaurant in the 2500 block of Rogers Avenue after he was spotted by someone who recognized him from a Fort Smith police social media post about the robbery that occurred at BancorpSouth in the 3100 block of Rogers Avenue Wednesday morning. That person contacted police, Rice said.


A police officer also recognized the suspect upon seeing an email sent throughout the Police Department, Rice said.


Howell didn't use a weapon in the robbery.


"He simply told them he had a weapon and demanded money," Rice said.


When asked if the stolen money was recovered, Rice said there's an ongoing investigation into the stolen money.


Rice said he's not sure if Howell is living in Fort Smith or passing through. 


Howell is currently at the Sebastian County Detention Center, Rice said.


ORIGINAL STORY: 


Fort Smith police are looking for a man who is considered armed and dangerous following a bank robbery on Wednesday morning, according to Cpl. Anthony Rice.


Police say a white male, medium build with gray hair walked into BancorpSouth located at 3100 Grand at in Fort Smith and said he had a gun, but it was not used. 


Police say the man left the scene with an undisclosed amount of money. 

Copyright 2018 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.




A convicted teen killer attempted multiple times to grab a…




A man was arrested in Little Flock for stabbing a woman in the back…




Uber is going to add the ability to find a scooter in its app, part…

© 1998 - 2016 NWAHomepage.com | Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. | All Rights Reserved.