Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

6 Big Dance seeding scenarios, potential opponents, and who Seton Hall fans should root against this weekend.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Watch scenes from the Senior Night ceremony as Seton Hall seniors Angel Delgado, Khadeen Carrington, Desi Rodriguez and Ish Sanogo were honored prior to the Butler game.
    Jerry Carino

Seton Hall coach Kevin Willard talks strategy during a game earlier this season.
(Photo: Thomas  J. Russo, Thomas J. Russo-USA TODAY Sports)

The sentiment was expressed by senior Khadeen Carrington late Thursday night amid a disappointed locker room in Madison Square Garden: After two years of tough draws, Seton Hall basketball is due for a break in the seeding process.


On Friday, the Pirates may have gotten one.


San Diego State knocked off mid-major power Nevada in the Mountain West Conference Tournament, allowing the Hall to hold steady as a No. 7 seed in the latest round of bracketology.


How important is the seed and the draw? It killed the Pirates two years ago, when they got shipped to Denver to face under-seeded Gonzaga. Last year their first-round draw was fairer in Arkansas, but the winner had to take on eventual champ North Carolina in the Tar Heels’ backyard.


Seton Hall fans, get ready to travel to Nashville, Detroit, Charlotte or Pittsburgh. (Photo: Vincent Carchietta, Vincent Carchietta-USA TODAY Sports)

Seton Hall (21-11) will be making a third consecutive NCAA Tournament appearance for the first time since P.J. Carlesimo guided the program to four straight from 1991-94. The Pirates have not won a game in the Big Dance since beating Arizona as a No. 8 seed in 2004.


The unspoken goal of this senior-driven group is to make the Sweet 16, which the Hall last did in 2000. They will watch the selection show privately at head coach Kevin Willard’s Westfield home.


Seton Hall hoops: Former guard could use assist


The Pirates' good fortune continued Saturday as three teams in their seed vicinity lost: Providence, St. Bonaventure and Alabama. As a result, Seton Hall is holding onto a No. 7 seed in just about every notable bracketology today. 


As Sunday’s NCAA Tournament selection show draws closer (6 p.m., TBS), here is a look at the Hall’s potential first-weekend draws. This is with input from local bracketologist Brad Wachtel (read his work at www.factsandbracks.blogspot.com).


Seton Hall Pirates head coach Kevin Willard talks with starters before the game against the St. John's Red Storm (Photo: Anthony Gruppuso, Anthony Gruppuso-USA TODAY Sports)

Potential first-round opponents: Florida State, Oklahoma, UCLA, St. Bonaventure, Alabama, Texas, N.C. State, Kansas State.


Scenario 1: In Detroit (Friday and Sunday) with Purdue as the No. 2 seed. This would be a favorable two-game draw. The Boilermakers are horrendous on the glass and skilled but soft inside; Hall big man Angel Delgado could have a field day. Purdue relies heavily on the 3-point shot so the Pirates' sometimes-shaky perimeter defense would be tested.


Scenario 2: In Nashville (Friday and Sunday) with Duke as the No. 2 seed: This assumes North Carolina -- not Duke -- gets to stay in Charlotte with Virginia. Duke is loaded with talent and scoring ability, but this team is young and its defense has been spotty (though better of late). Tough draw but playing the Blue Devils in Nashville is better than doing it in Charlotte. 


Scenario 3: In Charlotte (Friday and Sunday) with North Carolina as the No. 2 seed. The experienced Tar Heels, defending national champions, survived the nation’s toughest schedule and beat Duke in the ACC Tournament semifinals. Of the four draws in this group, this is the toughest scenario. 


Scenario 4: In Pittsburgh (Thursday and Saturday) with Cincinnati as the No. 2 seed. If Xavier gets planted in Pittsburgh as a No. 1 along with Villanova (which certainly will be there), that would eliminate this site for the Hall because the selection committee tries to separate conference rivals for as long as possible. But if Xavier gets shipped to Detroit, which is possible, then Cincinnati likely moves here. This could be Seton Hall's best-case scenario. The Bearcats are relatively untested by the American Athletic Conference’s schedule. It’s worth noting that their coach, Mick Cronin, is good friends with Willard. They were assistants together at Louisville under Rick Pitino.


Seton Hall hoops: Gut-punch loss to Butler


Potential first-round opponents: Virginia Tech, Florida State, N.C. State, UCLA, Alabama, Missouri, Nevada.


Since the committee would not place the Pirates near presumed No. 1 seeds Villanova and Xavier, this would leave two scenarios, both of which are brutal.


Scenario 1: In Charlotte (Friday and Sunday) with Virginia as the No. 1 seed. This is the worst draw in the entire bracket. The nation’s top-ranked team has a rabid fan base that can take over the arena, and the Cavaliers play the kind of defense that could grind an undisciplined offense to a halt.


Scenario 2: In Wichita (Thursday and Saturday) with Kansas as the No. 1 seed. It’s better than Virginia in Charlotte, but playing a top seed in its backyard is never ideal.


Staff Writer Jerry Carino: jcarino@gannettnj.com.
