
                                                            Play Now
                                                        


                                                                                        
            
            FANTASY FOOTBALL
        
    
                                                


                                                            Play Now
                                                        


                                                                                        
            
            Franchise Football
        
    
                                                


                                                                                
                                    
            Listen Live 
        
    
                                        


                                                                                
                                    
            Worryometer Wednesday 
        
    
                                        

Odds: Check Sportsline's College Basketball pick sheet for all your daily odds.  


Analysis: Seton Hall is fresh off an emotional overtime loss to Big East bully Villanova, ending a 3-game winning streak for the Pirates. So how will they respond in the final home stand of the season? Will be a major storyline to track as Butler rolls into town as the Bulldogs, too, are fresh off an extra period game in which they lost in double overtime to St. John's.


Butler needs this one a smidge more than the Pirates to get off the dreaded bubble it finds itself on in Jerry Palm's latest Bracketology.


                                            
    I agree that CBS Sports can send me the "CBS Sports HQ Daily Newsletter" newsletter.
                    

© 2004-2018 CBS Interactive. All Rights Reserved.

CBS Sports is a registered trademark of CBS Broadcasting Inc. Commissioner.com is a registered trademark of CBS Interactive Inc.

Images by Getty Images and US Presswire