


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Spencer Brasch threw five touchdown passes and ran for one as the Higley Knights with a 50-0 victory over the Seton Catholic Prep Sentinels.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Higley's Draycen Hall rushes for a touchdown against Seton Catholic Prep during the 1st quarter at Higley High School on Friday, Oct. 27, 2017 in Gilbert, Ariz.
(Photo: Sean Logan/azcentral sports)

Spencer Brasch threw five touchdown passes and ran for one as the Higley Knights defended their home turf and secured first place in the 4A Desert Sky with a 50-0 victory over the Seton Catholic Prep Sentinels.


The Knights exploded out of the gate and didn’t give the Sentinels one second to breathe. Brasch outran the Seton defense for a 41-yard rushing touchdown on the second play of the game.


Higley defensive back Jacob Rowland deflected a long, would-be touchdown pass from Seton quarterback Vincent Wallace.


Draycen Hall rewarded his team’s defensive effort with a 67-yard rushing touchdown to put Higley up 14-0.


Brasch connected with Hall over the middle on the very the next drive, and Hall found an extra gear on a 97-yard touchdown reception to bring Higley’s lead to 22 points.


The Higley quarterback finished his dominant first quarter with three more touchdown passes: a 53-yard pass to receiver Danny Kittner, a four-yard fade to tight end Ty Robinson and an electric 36-yard score via hook-and-lateral in which offensive lineman Matthew Hicks scored. 


On the other side of the field, Wallace just couldn’t find his rhythm, as a myriad of Knight defenders were consistently in his face immediately after he received the snap.


The Sentinel signal-caller lost one fumble, threw a pick and ate plenty of sacks.


Brasch played one series in the second half that culminated in an 11-yard touchdown pass to receiver Keith Wesley.


Higley freshman quarterback Kai Millner got valuable varsity experience under center and played out the remaining quarter-and-a-half.


Neither team scored and Higley finished off the shutout when defensive back Anthony Natale grabbed an interception with less than a minute to play.


Spencer Brasch – Higley High School QB – Brasch set the pace of play early and never took his foot off the gas pedal. The junior quarterback added six total touchdowns against Seton Catholic Prep to complete a regular season in which he threw 25 touchdowns, rushed for 11 more and did not throw a single interception. 


Ty Robinson – Higley High School TE – The six-foot-six-inch tight end climbed the ladder and used every inch of his frame to haul in a four-yard touchdown pass on a fade route.


Matthew Hicks – Higley High School OT – The Higley offensive tackle protected Brasch from pressure all night and was rewarded when he found himself on the lateral end of a hook-and-lateral trick play. The lineman rumbled his way into the end zone for a 36-yard touchdown. 



    Higley beat Seton, 50-0
    Robert Gundran/azcentral sports/

Draycen Hall: Higley’s star running back showed early and often why the Knights work to get him the ball at every opportunity. Hall scorched the Seton defense on his rushing and receiving touchdown. Once he found open field, the Sentinels couldn’t lay a finger on him.


“Everyone executed perfectly. From the offensive life, to the running backs to the receivers. Everyone did it all right,” said Brasch.


Hard to argue that a team didn’t play a perfect game in which the offense put up 43 points in the first quarter and the defense pitched a shut-out with three takeaways. 


“It makes us a lot more calm on offense knowing that we can play our game and if it doesn’t work, we don’t have to stress about it because our defense is there for us,” he said.


This is the ninth game in which Higley has had a running clock work in their favor. That’s right, the Knights have held a 42-point lead or more in some point during the game.


It’s also the eighth time they’ve scored 50 or more points.


A 50-0 win also propelled their season point differential to a massive +395. 


Seton suffered their second defeat of the season, and fell to 8-2 overall and 3-1 in section play and will likely play host in the first-round of the 4A playoffs next week.


Higley end the regular season with a 9-1 overall record, and finished section play undefeated at 4-0.


Higley should be in line for a home game next week to start the 4A playoffs.


Both teams will know their opponent when the brackets are revealed on Saturday.


 
