Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Desi Rodriguez was spectacular, right through the game-winner, but it took all hands to bring this home.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Watch Seton Hall basketball freshman Shavar Reynolds, a Manchester H.S. grad, see his dad for the first time in 11 months -- at the end of the Pirates' Friday practice.
    Jerry Carino

Seton Hall Pirates forward Desi Rodriguez (20) dunks against the Louisville Cardinals
(Photo: Jamie Rhodes, Jamie Rhodes-USA TODAY Sports)

There is no way to overstate this: Seton Hall basketball registered an enormous win Sunday.


The Pirates prevailed at Louisville for the first time since 1952, posting a 79-77 verdict at a hostile Yum Center. That’s two straight triumphs over ranked opponents for the Hall (7-1), which will burst back into the Top 25 Monday. 


A driving layup by senior wing Desi Rodriguez (29 points) as the Pirates spread the floor broke a tie with seven seconds left. The result is the program's biggest non-conference road win since a 2005-06 victory at 15th-ranked North Carolina State.


Seton Hall Pirates center Angel Delgado (31) and forward Ismael Sanogo (14) battle for the ball with Louisville Cardinals forward Anas Mahmoud (14) (Photo: Jamie Rhodes, Jamie Rhodes-USA TODAY Sports)

1. This is a championship-caliber win. Sure 17th-ranked Louisville (4-2) doesn’t have Rick Pitino, but the Cardinals are loaded with talent and have a fantastic home court, where they’d won 22 straight vs. non-conference opponents. Biggest road win ever for Kevin Willard, who gets A’s across the board for preparation, adjustments and the game-winning play call. On Selection Sunday this is going to carry a ton of weight --ranked win, road win, non-conference win. It’s the type of resume item that gets you a top-4 seed.


Seton Hall basketball: For guard from Manchester, a reunion with military dad--at practice


2. Desi Rodriguez, take a bow: He set the tone with 19 first-half points, then delivered the decisive blow. In a breakout season, this was by far his best game because it wasn’t just scoring: 29 points on 12-18 shooting, eight rebounds, four steals. Does anyone have a defender who can match up with him? Haven’t seen it yet.


3. The little things mattered. Angel Delgado’s heady passes out of double-teams, Ish Sanogo’s deflections, Myles Powell recovering from a rough start with a huge bounce-pass assist and 3-pointer late, Khadeen Carrington committing just two turnovers against intense pressure, freshman Myles Cale supplying aggressive defense off the bench. The entire rotation stayed poised. That’s how you win a game like this -- and it’s also how you advance deep into March.


Seton Hall basketball: Red-hot Pirates torch Texas Tech, nation's stingiest defense


(Kevin Willard’s radio interview with Gary Cohen and Dave Popkin)


1. Overall thought on the win: “It was a good one. I thought both teams played at a really high level. That was the best I’ve seen Louisville play. They were really engaged defensively. Any time you get a road win like that, it’s gold. Proud of the guys. We were a little emotionally spent from the Texas Tech game. For a quick turnaround, really proud of our effort.”


2. On the unsung contribution of freshman sub Myles Cale: “When we got down seven, he checked in and got two huge deflections, got us out on the break, and all of a sudden he gave us good juice off the bench.”


3. On his team’s poise in a hostile environment: “Three of (the plays Seton hall scored on late), we just put those in this week. The fact that they executed them, knew them so well off short notice, was really good.”


And the bonus quote (he draws the foul…)


4. On why he loaded up the non-conference schedule: “I wanted to challenge them, wanted to give them a chance to play against other great players, to show everybody what they’re all about.”


Staff writer Jerry Carino: jcarino@gannettnj.com. 
