


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Big 12 and Big East take center stage this weekend in college basketball with contests between West Virginia and Texas and Xavier and Seton Hall.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' Lindsay Schnell and Scott Gleeson discuss why predicting this year's tournament favorites is harder than ever.
    USA TODAY Sports

West Virginia guard Jevon Carter passes the ball during the first half against Baylor.
(Photo: Ben Queen, USA TODAY Sports)

With conference play in full swing midway through the month of January, showdowns in the Big 12 and the Big East highlight that games we are watching this weekend in college basketball.


There's also an intriguing matchup in the Mountain West that is flying under the radar.


A breakdown of the top five matchups:


Saturday, 2 p.m. ET, CBS


In a packed conference like the Big 12, it doesn’t take long for fortunes to change. The Mountaineers have gone from first place to trying to stop a two-game skid in less than a week. Their Monday night home loss to Kansas in which they squandered a 16-point advantage was especially hard for fans to swallow. The young Longhorns, meanwhile, are coming off a big home victory against Texas Tech that evened their conference record. Can they manage another, this time on the road?


WOODEN WATCH: Will Oklahoma's Trae Young run out of gas?


LONGHORNS REPEAT: Texas tops No. 8 Texas Tech for another Top 25 win


Saturday, 2:30 p.m. ET, Fox


The Musketeers righted the ship at home after dropping a pair of Big East road contests, helped by rebound performances by Trevon Bluiett. They’ll try again to figure out how to win away from Cincinnati. The Pirates were throttled at Creighton last time out but can retain at least a share of second in the league if they can bounce back with a win.


Saturday, 4 p.m. ET, CBS


After a dismal start, the Cardinal are suddenly the hottest team in the Pac-12. They extended their winning streak to five with Wednesday night’s triumph against Arizona State. The Wildcats appear to have figured some things out themselves following a disastrous trip to the Bahamas. The winner of this tilt at Maples Pavilion will be alone atop the league standings.


Arizona forward Deandre Ayton controls the ball against California. (Photo: Kelley L Cox, USA TODAY Sports)

Saturday, 8:15 pm. ET, ESPN


Both these teams were in the top 10 just a couple of months ago. The Gators tumbled completely out of the rankings but have slowly been working their way back. Getting a win at Rupp Arena is never easy, of course, though the Wildcats are still trying to put all their pieces together as well. They aren’t likely to be gracious hosts after letting Wednesday night’s game at South Carolina get away.


Saturday, 10 p.m. ET, ESPNU


This hidden gem in the Mountain West should be worth staying up for. The teams that have separated themselves from the field in the league square off for the first time in Reno with the rematch in Boise slated for Valentine’s Day. Broncos’ senior Chandler Hutchison (19.6 ppg) and Wolf Pack junior Caleb Martin (19.3 ppg) figure to be in the MWC player of the year mix.


IMAGES FROM THIS WEEKEND IN COLLEGE BASKETBALL


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
