By

Dailymail.com Reporter






  Published:
  11:54 EDT, 5 June 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  08:06 EDT, 6 June 2018







         185

View  comments

A Northern California ranch the size of San Francisco can now be yours if you've got $31million in the bank. 


The Lone Pine Ranch, which spreads across 27,000 acres, has been put up for sale.


There is a plethora of floral, fauna, and animals that can be found on the incredible property, which also includes a 5,300 sq ft home. 


There are redwood forests, oak woodlands, and grassy meadows. There is a 16.5-mile stretch of the Eel River, which is full of salmon and steelhead fish. 


Lone Pine Ranch, a ranch in Northern California that is as large as San Francisco, can now be yours if you've got $31million

The Lone Pine Ranch spreads across 27,000 acres and includes a plethora of floral, fauna, animals, and beautiful views 

There is a 16.5-mile stretch of the Eel River, which is full of salmon and steelhead fish included in the breathtaking property 

One can find everything from mountain lions, wild pigs, bobcats, and porcupines on the property, as well as deer, bear, coyotes, and elk. 


Lone Pine Ranch also includes four additional homes and two bunkhouses, as well as barns, sheds, and corrals that can hold up to 800 cattle, according to the San Francisco Chronicle. 


The main home, which faces the river, holds 10 bedrooms and five bathrooms. 


Many of the rooms have large picture windows, perfect to look out and admire the rolling hills and breathtaking landscape. 


Video courtesy of Ranchagent.com 


Lone Pine Ranch also includes four additional homes and two bunkhouses, as well as barns, sheds, and corrals that can hold up to 800 cattle

There are redwood forests, oak woodlands, grassy meadows, and stunning lakes on the property, which is a six-hour drive from San Francisco 

You can find gorgeous views as well as animals that include mountain lions, wild pigs, bobcats, and porcupines on the property, as well as deer, bear, coyotes, and elk

There is also a pool in the backyard and a brick fireplace to warm up the living room, which comes with wood-paneled ceilings as well. 


Lone Pine Ranch has been put up for sale by the descendants of the late stock market titan Dean Witter, who purchased the ranch with his wife Helen in 1942. 


The couple created the ranch from three separate purchases and used it as both a 'working ranch and personal retreat', family members told the Wall Street Journal.  


Witter lived in San Francisco but would often visit the ranch, which is about six hours away, by a train that stopped right on his property. 


The main home in Lone Pine Ranch is this 5,300 sq building that includes 10 bedroom and five bathrooms inside 

If you'd rather not take a dip in the natural river, there is also a swimming pool on the property to enjoy among the trees 

The living room features wood-paneled ceilings and large picture windows to take in the property's incredible views 

This roaring fireplace is the center of the living room, done in a rustic style that is meant to reflect a log cabin of sorts 

Lone Pine Ranch has been put up for sale by the descendants of the late stock market titan Dean Witter, who purchased the ranch with his wife Helen in 1942

The ranch has been in the family ever since Witter (pictured) passed away in 1969, becoming a destination that many of Witter's descendants have cherished for decades

The ranch has been in the family ever since he passed away in 1969, becoming a destination that many of Witter's descendants have cherished for decades.


'It's been a place where a lot of Witters have grown up in ways that we would not have, had we not had the experience of these trips to the ranch,' Brooks Witter, the investor's great-grandson, said. 


Brooks began going to Lone Pine Ranch when he was six years old and would spend at least two weeks there every summer. 


'As a kid, we would play in the river and ride horses every day. We would drive around and look for wildlife in the back of a truck,' he recalled. 


The couple created the ranch from three separate purchases and used it as both a 'working ranch and personal retreat'

Witter lived in San Francisco but would often visit the ranch by a train that stopped right onto the property

 Brooks Witter, the investor's great-grandson, said visiting the ranch is like 'being whisked away back in time' 

Listing agent Bill McDavid said the one word he would use to describe the ranch is 'authentic' and 'has a feeling of grandma's house mixed with museum' 

'It's one of the most remote places in one of our most populous states. It's really a treasure in Northern California to have this many acres of really pristine land.' 


And Brooks said little has changed at the house since his childhood days. 


'You walk into the house and there's a sense of being whisked away back in time,' he said. 


Listing agent Bill McDavid said the one word he would use to describe the ranch is 'authentic'. 


'I sell a lot of ranches that are built to look and feel old...but they're not really old,' he said. 


'It's been a place where a lot of Witters have grown up in ways that we would not have, had we not had the experience of these trips to the ranch,' Brooks Witter said

Brooks began going to Lone Pine Ranch when he was six years old and would spend at least two weeks there every summer

'I don't mean to diss them,but when you go into this place...it has a feeling of grandma's house mixed with museum because Dean Witter, I gather, was a real Hemingway kind of guy.' 


As beloved as the ranch has been by the family for the better part of a century, Brooks said they believe now is the right time to let someone else cherish it. 


'There are now 13 owners,' he explained. 'The demographic of ownership is just going to get more complicated with each generation.' 


'Considering a third of the family uses it regularly, a third uses it infrequently, and then a third not at all, it feels like the right time to let someone else appreciate.' 


If the ranch is a little too steep for your pockets, the Witters' 3,019-acre White Ranch - located just across the creek from Lone Pine - is also on sale for a cool $4.95million.   


'As a kid, we would play in the river and ride horses every day. We would drive around and look for wildlife in the back of a truck,' Brooks recalled

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group