

By Katie Dowd, SFGATE

Caption


Close

In 2009, a History Channel special told the world about the existence of a secret military bunker under San Francisco. Hidden below the city’s surface are a series of rooms and tunnels that once made up a military complex. The location, which today is something of mystery except among urban explorers, was securely blocked off by city officials after the History Channel show aired.


In 2009, a History Channel special told the world about the existence of a secret military bunker under San Francisco. Hidden below the city’s surface are a


When a catastrophic earthquake struck San Francisco in the early hours of April 18, 1906, it ruptured gas mains all over the city. Soon, fires were consuming the quake-damaged buildings, block by block. Over the course of three days, 500 city blocks were demolished by fire, burning virtually unchecked.

One of the problems was San Francisco's meagre emergency water system. Although the city was surrounded by water, officials had no way of getting that water further inland — a problem city officials had long been aware of but had been slow to remedy.

After the disastrous 1906 fires, the city began building out a massive reserve water system. The San Francisco Fire Department Auxiliary Water Supply System, which was completed in the 1910s, added high and low-pressure fire hydrants on city streets and cisterns below the ground.

A look at the abandoned Eureka Valley Station.

You may not know it, but those cisterns are still under your feet. And they're still functional.

The cisterns, 172 in all with a capacity of 11 million gallons, are scattered around the city. You might recognize them from above by their distinctive markings: a ring of red bricks in the road.

In the event of another catastrophic event that takes out the city's normal, domestic water supply, SFFD can open the manhole covers on these cisterns and pump water out. They also can pump water from fire boats in the bay into the city water supply, if needed.

To see more fascinating things under your feet — from cisterns to coffins — check out the gallery above.