Ex-con Jerald Harris of North Aurora has published three books since his release from prison, including “Black Rain Outside My Window,” that he hopes to use to help keep other young black males from making the mistakes he made.

Ex-con Jerald Harris of North Aurora has published three books since his release from prison, including “Black Rain Outside My Window,” that he hopes to use to help keep other young black males from making the mistakes he made.

The old 13-inch TV that sits atop the kitchen counter sticks out like a sore thumb in the beautiful North Aurora home of Jerald Harris.


That's exactly the effect he wants.


In fact, Harris says, that cheap plastic-encased screen is one of his most prized possessions because he took it with him when he left prison after serving more than half of a 25-year sentence for armed robbery. And he wants that archaic television to be a constant reminder of how far he's come since regaining his freedom less than five short years ago.


Much like Quint Thompson, another local ex-con I wrote about last year who dramatically altered the trajectory of his life, Harris came out of prison a middle-aged man who was not only determined to make up for lost time but convinced "my story of redemption" can help other at-risk youth from making the same mistakes.


For Harris, that path centers around a book he recently published that is part autobiography and part poetry anthology, which he says took nine years to write.


When Quint Thompson stood in front of a room full of experts and successful business owners to accept an award as one of the Chicago suburbs' top entrepreneurs, the 46-year-old Aurora man was fully aware his story was different from the other winners.

And in his acceptance speech last fall at the...

He titled the book "Black Rain Outside my Window," as a metaphor representing the temptations and ugliness many young African-American males must weather in this country, including, hate, injustices, black-on-black crime, police brutality, racism, drugs, gangs and impoverishment.


"If you don't have the essential tools to survive," Harris warns, "then you are not going to make it."


I read "Black Rain" in one sitting, and I'm not surprised when he tells me kids who shunned other books have told him they did the same thing. Harris is a prolific writer who recalls his story in a raw, unflinching narrative that allows the reader — yes even an aging white female journalist — into the mind of a young black man as he slips from the innocence of childhood into a violent, drug- and alcohol-fueled street life that eventually cost him his freedom.

The memoir also offers a gritty and at times jaw-dropping glimpse into the heart of an angry black man whose finger-pointing flips between blaming his own shortcomings and a system that he said is rigged against young men of color.


Because he spent most of his 47 years in Aurora, "Black Rain" is especially relevant for this community as it takes readers behind the scenes of the murder and mayhem when Aurora, too, lost its innocence.


"The summer of '95 was a horrible summer," Harris writes of his hometown. "Gang-banging was at an all-time high. A race war was going on and (one gang was) killing blacks like it was a sport. It was a sad time for the city ... I was benumbed to everything around me and my heart was turning colder than ice … Sometimes it didn't matter if you were in a gang or not. If you were young and black they automatically assumed you were a thug or a criminal."


Which is exactly what this standout West Aurora basketball player turned into after he played a season for Waubonsee Community College. Chapter after chapter, Harris leads the reader through the many poor decisions he made that gradually morphed him into "a character like a bad guy in countless movies I had seen many times before."


The week of Nov. 9 -13, Reginald Dwayne Betts, 35, served as artist-in-residence at Lake Forest College. He stopped in English, pre-law, history and other classes to read his poetry, discuss literature, and talk about justice topics including trying juveniles as adults in court.

Betts's list of...

In and out of the Kane County Jail multiple times, where he writes that he became a chief enforcer of his cell block and got into fights that landed him in solitary confinement, Harris eventually landed with the Illinois Department of Corrections after getting nailed on three counts of armed robbery — the last one he vehemently denies. That, in turn, sent him to Joliet, Shawnee, Pinckneyville and Big Muddy River correctional centers, where he saw first-hand "the destruction and self-hatred of young black men who were misguided and full of rage and anger."


Harris — who changed the spelling of his name from Gerald to Jerald after incarceration — describes prison as "like being buried alive. You can see and hear the world but you can't touch it." And hard time quickly taught him that if you "wanted to survive in the belly of the beast, you had to disconnect your emotions."


Or get in touch with them.


"As I sat in segregation battered and bruised," he wrote after one fight, "I began to write on anything I could get my hands on."


Even as a "fire of anger and frustration was burning deep inside of me," Harris started looking for substance in his life, turning to God while also reading the words of Malcolm X and Dr. Martin Luther King.


"Books that were once boring to me," he noted, suddenly were "giving me life."


That was especially true of "A Breed Apart." Written by ex-con-turned-motivational speaker Victor Woods, who spoke to prisoners of Big Muddy about his own path to redemption and success, this book struck such a deep chord with Harris that, when he was finally released from prison, he traveled to Madison, Wisconsin, where Woods was speaking, to meet him personally.


When Kane County Judge Clint Hull moved over to juvenile criminal court four and a half years ago, his job on the bench got a little tougher ... at least in one regard.

The judge who sentenced young mom Sandra Vasquez to 15 years in prison in 2010 for her role in the drunk-driving accident that...

Woods, who now lives in Naperville and says a movie deal about his book — published in 2005 by Simon &amp; Schuster — is currently in the works, has met countless ex-cons in his years working with colleges, legislators, municipalities, law enforcement and prison officials on social justice issues. But he describes Harris as a "rare gem" whose "tenacity and drive" set him apart from others seeking a new start after prison.


"He saw himself in me as an example of what he could do," said Woods, who Harris would often follow in prison on that tiny TV when the speaker appeared on national programs.


"Motivation is not enough," Woods said of Harris, who has since become his good friend. "It also takes action."


And Harris is most certainly a man of action.


While jumping from interviewee to story narrator to poetic orator in our morning together, Harris admits he sleeps very little. In the four years and 10 months since his release from prison, he's not only published three books, including two "urban thrillers," he got married to Jocelyn Harris, a senior adviser for ComEd he calls "my rock." He also started a business, Cooley Mobile Detailing Services, with a growing client list, he says, that includes "police officers and state troopers." And he's got enough vehicles to fill the three-car garage of his $350,000 home that also features beautiful furnishings in addition to that ugly TV.


Harris knows he is blessed. But he's determined to share the wisdom he gained so other youth don't have to go through those same fires that almost consumed him. Last month he "mesmerized" his young audience at Cowherd Middle School in Aurora, said African American Men of Unity Executive Director Ricky Rodgers, whose group has mentored over 400 at-risk kids through its Rites of Passage program. And Harris is on tap to speak again Saturday to many more youth at the Aurora Township Youth Center.

"Kids like him who have real talents and skills but do not have the means to activate those skills often end up going in the opposite direction," said Rodgers "which is why what Jerald has to say is so vital."


Rodgers, who knew Harris when he was a hot-shot basketball player and also recalls when he got "derailed" and sent to prison, says the two met up about a year ago and he immediately realized the impact this man's narrative could have.


"They can relate to his story," says Rodgers of these at-risk youth. "Every one of us is a decision away from going to prison … that's how serious this is."


Harris admits to "many terrible mistakes," but the smartest decision he ever made, he told me, was "investing in myself" and overcoming so much self doubt. And he vows to "keep pushing."


"If I fall," Harris insists in the final page of Black Rain, "I will fall forward."


DCrosby@tribpub.com