On 20 June 2018, the Texas Tribune and the Center for Investigative Reporting’s Reveal jointly reported that immigrant child detainees were being injected with drugs at a previously investigated detention site. The Texas Tribune referenced a years-long investigation in their article:

Taxpayers have paid more than $1.5 billion in the past four years to private companies operating immigrant youth shelters accused of serious lapses in care, including neglect and sexual and physical abuse, an investigation by Reveal and The Texas Tribune has found.

In nearly all cases, the federal government has continued to place migrant children with the companies even after serious allegations were raised and after state inspectors cited shelters with deficiencies, government and other records show.

Reveal maintained that the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance policy” (announced by Attorney General Jeff Sessions in early April 2018) entailed administering powerful psychiatric drugs to children separated from their parents at the border:

President Donald Trump’s zero tolerance policy is creating a zombie army of children forcibly injected with medications that make them dizzy, listless, obese and even incapacitated, according to legal filings that show immigrant children in U.S. custody subdued with powerful psychiatric drugs.

Children held at Shiloh Treatment Center, a government contractor south of Houston that houses immigrant minors, described being held down and injected, according to the federal court filings. The lawsuit alleges that children were told they would not be released or see their parents unless they took medication and that they only were receiving vitamins.

The articles’ mid-June 2018 publication led to a growing number of disturbing claims about children specifically affected by family separation at the border, a practice formally announced in April 2018 and which began roughly in May 2018. Both articles referenced a lawsuit against Sessions et al, filed on 23 April 2018 in U.S. District Court in California.

A table of contents for the lawsuit contained testimony primarily from late 2017 and early 2018, gathered before the announcement of the family separation policy implemented in May 2018 by immigration agencies. Although it is possible child detainees in custody due to the policy are subject to the conditions described in the suit, little is known about the specific locations at which newer minor detainees were held and the conditions present in those facilities.

Snopes.com has long been engaged in the battle against misinformation, an effort we could not sustain without the support of our readers.


 If you'd like to learn more about how you can support us, click here. 

Filed Under:
									immigration
									obama administration
									reveal
													+2 more
											texas tribune
											trump administration
												


							Author:
						
																						Kim LaCapria
															
			
		

Featured Image:Chess Ocampo / Shutterstock.com

Published:20 June 2018

Bogado, Aura, Patrick Michels And Vanessa Swales.   “Separated Migrant Children Are Headed Toward Shelters With A History Of Abuse And Neglect.”
    The Texas Tribune.   20 June 2018.

Smith, Matt and Aura Bogado.   “Immigrant Children Forcibly Injected With Drugs, Lawsuit Claims.”
    Reveal.   20 June 2018.

U.S. District Court of Central California, Western Division.   “Flores v. Sessions.”
    23 April 2018.


							10 July 2018
						The pancake chain has acknowledged that a name change announced last month was just a publicity stunt to promote its hamburger menu.		


							10 July 2018
						A Tennessee resident told us that around 10 people, all naturalized citizens like her, reported experiencing the same issue.		


							9 July 2018
						The United States’ objection to what was expected to be an uncontroversial resolution shocked delegates in attendance at the World Health Organization’s 71st Assembly.		


							8 July 2018
						The diaper-clad 'Trump Baby' stands nearly 20 feet high, sports the president's signature blond hair, and holds a cellphone in his very small hands.		


							7 July 2018
						Dozens of food products have been recalled following warnings from European health agencies over listeriosis.		


							6 July 2018
						“It is huge relief that they did not get to the rhino,” the owner of South Africa’s Sibuya Game Reserve told reporters.		


							6 July 2018
						Third-party clothing items featuring the slogan "Impeach 45" were removed from Walmart's web site after social media users called for a boycott of the retail giant.		


							6 July 2018
						An outbreak of cyclosporiasis linked to pre-packaged Del Monte Fresh Produce vegetable trays has sickened 212 people in four states since May.		


							18 June 2018
						There is no federal law mandating children and parents be separated at the border; a policy resulting in that outcome was enacted in May 2018.		


							21 June 2018
						The First Lady made a surprise visit to detained immigrant children while wearing a jacket bearing the message "I DON'T REALLY CARE DO U?" on the back.		


							2 August 2016
						A viral image suggests that the late Nirvana singer Kurt Cobain hinted at a future Donald Trump presidency over 20 years before it happened.		


							21 June 2000
						The long-standing claim that Jane Fonda turned smuggled messages from U.S. POWs over to their North Vietnamese captors is false.		


							6 February 2018
						Facebook hasn't limited your feed to only a certain number of people, and sharing a post saying otherwise won't make any difference.		


							18 June 2018
						There is no federal law mandating children and parents be separated at the border; a policy resulting in that outcome was enacted in May 2018.		


							12 June 2018
						A heart-rending photograph of a crying child in a cage has been widely shared, but it was part of a protest to call attention to immigration practices.		


							21 June 2018
						The First Lady made a surprise visit to detained immigrant children while wearing a jacket bearing the message "I DON'T REALLY CARE DO U?" on the back.		


							5 April 2018
						Tide Pods and condom snorting are far from the first fake parental panics — are kids today really that stupid, or is it just the news outlets reporting on them?		


							20 June 2018
						A congressional report and criminal indictment resulted from a 2014 incident in which multiple immigrant children were handed off to a human trafficking ring.		

Urban Legends Reference Pages© 1995- by Snopes.com | This material may not be reproduced without permission | Snopes and the Snopes.com logo are registered service marks of Snopes.com | Privacy Policy | Terms of Use |