EDITION

Migrant children in US government custody are being involuntarily drugged to the point they cannot walk, stay awake, or maintain their physical or mental health,  court filings allege.

A  class-action lawsuit concerning the government’s treatment of unaccompanied migrant children in its care was filed in April, shortly after the Trump administration implemented its “zero tolerance” immigration policy for illegal arrivals. But many of the allegations of abuse in the filings go back years.

The  complaints don’t strictly relate to children who have been  separated from their parents at the US-Mexico border, but they shed light on the government’s ability to care for these children.

Government contractors, including Texas’ Shiloh Treatment Center and Virginia’s Shenandoah Valley Juvenile Center, have been accused of abusing children and overprescribing psychotropic drugs; the court documents say one child was taking 18 drugs and three meal-replacement shakes a day.

The filings allege that these drugs, which can have serious and permanent side effects, were prescribed often and without parental consent and that many of them weren’t approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use by children.

The experiences and allegations described by the children and some of their parents in the filings include:

A  separate court filing alleges that some children at the Shenandoah facility were  strapped down and made to feel suffocated: “Strapped me down all the way; from your feet all the way to your chest, you couldn’t really move … They have total control over you. They also put a bag over your head. It has little holes; you can see through it. But you feel suffocated with the bag on.”

The April lawsuit alleges that without proper oversight, the administration of these drugs to children in US facilities runs the risk of being used as “chemical straight-jackets.”

Several of the children reported eventually leaving these centres and ending their medical regimens without problems.

But these centres continue to receive funding from the US government to care for migrant children who are considered unaccompanied minors. An  investigation by the Center for Investigative Reporting’s Reveal website published Wednesday found that in the past four years, nearly half of the $US3.4 billion paid to 71 private companies that house migrant children went to 13 “operating homes facing serious allegations of child mistreatment.”

Site highlights each day to your inbox.

Follow Business Insider Australia on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Instagram.

Tesla 'whistleblower' files tip with the SEC

England is already in an amazing position for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar

The Australian dollar's been hosed

11 photos show how close Merkel was with Obama, and how different things are with Trump

Buying 'Access' To A Major Airport's Security System Apparently Costs Just $13

Updates On Black Adam, Quantum And Woody, And More

The Dummy That Ruined Your Childhood Is Back In The First Goosebumps 2: Haunted Halloween Trailer

Thai Boys Were Reportedly Sedated And In A Semi-Conscious State During Rescue

Spec Shootout: Microsoft Surface Go Vs iPad Vs Galaxy Tab S3

This Year's Banned Pokémon Anime Episode

Fine Art: Boss Fight

What Could Possibly Be Scarier Than A Smarter Hulk?

Hump Day Deals: Free Android Apps, 25% Off eBay, Cheap Dell Laptops

ACCC Has A Plan To Make Electricity Cheaper

Help Teens De-Stress With These 'Getting Things Done' Hacks 

If Words Hurt, It's Because You Let Them 