Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:53 pm

Missouri forward Jontay Porter runs through a timed agility test at a Tigers basketball practice last October. Photo by Chris Lee, clee@post-dispatch.com

Missouri forward Jontay Porter runs through a timed agility test at a Tigers basketball practice last October. Photo by Chris Lee, clee@post-dispatch.com

COLUMBIA, MO. • There was a time when Missouri forward Jontay Porter was widely expected to attend the NBA draft as one of the most intriguing and youngest players available.

That time was April.

Then came May and the NBA draft combine, and now that it’s June, Porter still plans to attend the draft two weeks from Thursday. On one condition.

“If Coach Martin lets me,” Porter said Wednesday.

Porter will indeed be at Barclays Center in Brooklyn to support older brother and projected top-10 pick Michael Porter Jr. Then he’ll return to Columbia and resume working under Cuonzo Martin at the level he believes he’s meant to play next season. Before Porter participated in last month’s NBA combine, the 18-year-old convinced himself the NBA can wait — even though teams all but assured him he’d be a first-round selection.

For the younger Porter, who took the express lane to college by skipping his senior year of high school, the NBA feedback didn’t impact his decision.

“I was going back to school because I realized I didn’t want to take that leap quite yet,” he said Wednesday at Mizzou Arena, three days into offseason workouts with the Tigers. “I can confidently say — I know the draft isn’t until the 21st — but I’m pretty confident I would have been a first-round pick. That really wouldn’t have been a question. Whether I was top 10 or top 30 I was pretty set on coming back.”

Porter, last year’s Southeastern Conference co-sixth man of the year, insisted his decision hinged on basketball factors — improving his skills and sharpening his body to compete with the grown men in the NBA. Porter posted the highest body fat percentage at the combine and was among the field’s least explosive jumpers. He’s got a year to make a stronger impression for the 2019 draft — all while restocking Mizzou’s roster with one of the SEC’s best young players.

“When I do make the NBA I want to be a factor right away,” he said. “Not that I’m going to be an All-Star or anything like that. And the G-League isn’t necessarily a bad thing or anything like that, but I realize I do have development to do before I’m ready to make the impact I envision on an NBA team. Coming back getting better, stronger, more mentally tough, getting ready to take that step and be a man in the NBA, I think coming back one more year is necessary.”

Porter’s father, Mizzou assistant Michael Porter Sr., wasn’t available to reporters, but in an KMOX radio interview that aired Sunday, he said one team was particularly smitten with his 6-11 son: the San Antonio Spurs, who own the No. 18 pick in the first round.

“San Antonio loved him,” Porter Sr. said. “He’s cut from that kind of cloth, a big man that can shoot and pass. They do a great job of developing players. … He got great feedback. When he was doing the interview with (San Antonio), he told me he said he was testing the waters and they just kind of scoffed at him. They assumed and just took for granted that he was going to stay in the draft. That was the impression he made on them and several other teams.”

“In that sense it was a tough decision for him,” he added. “But at the end of the day, Jontay felt like his life was moving so fast. He skipped his senior year of high school and now he’s talking about after his freshman year of high school skipping to the NBA. I think he just wanted to slow things down a little bit. I respect that decision.”

Since announcing in March that he’d test his draft stock without hiring an agent, Porter worked out in Chicago but returned to Columbia three or four times to visit with Martin.

“Even if he’s not my coach he’s still a mentor for me,” Porter said. “I respect his opinion a lot. He didn’t try to push me one way or another.”

Instead, Martin advised Porter on what to expect from his workouts and interviews, texted him reminders about getting proper rest and rehab.

“It was never a case of, ‘I’d love to have you back,’” Martin said. “Of course we wanted him back. I thought that would be great. But that was never the conversation.”

Now the conversation shifts to Porter’s role in Mizzou’s new rotation. By last season’s end, he was Mizzou’s most complete player, a developing scoring threat who led the Tigers in rebounds and blocks and ranked third in assists. The Tigers must replace last year’s top two scorers, guards Kassius Robertson and Jordan Barnett. Center Jeremiah Tilmon returns, as does point guard Jordan Geist and forward Kevin Puryear. Martin will mix in a cast of newcomers, including freshman guards Torrence Watson (Whitfield School) and Javon Pickett (Belleville East).

For Porter, who missed last summer’s team workouts and conditioning sessions while playing on the AAU circuit, the next couple of months will be time for with what Martin calls “tightening the screws.”

“He can shoot the ball,” Martin said. “Now you want his 3-point percentage to be better. His field-goal percentage to be better. His low-post game to be better. His turnovers to go down. His fouls to go down. There’s a tremendous amount of improvement even as talented as he is.”

If Porter enhanced anything while preparing for the combine it was his shooting range, he said. A 36.4-percent 3-point shooter as a freshman, he spent the last two months shooting from the NBA 3-point line of 23 feet, 9 inches, 3 feet behind the college arc.

“A normal college 3 feels like mid-range,” Porter said. “That doesn’t mean I’m going to be Steph Curry this year or anything like that, but definitely much more comfortable.”

After his spring sabbatical, Porter’s teammates gladly welcomed him back to the locker room last week, forward Kevin Puryear said. The reasons were obvious throughout last season.

“Honestly, he’s just a joy to play with the way he passes the ball or rebounds,” Puryear said. “He has a complete package. I think everyone in Columbia is excited for him to return for his sophomore season.”




Mizzou men's team gets two matchups against Tennessee; MU women's team resumes South Carolina rivalry on the road next season.

Dave Matter is the Mizzou beat writer for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.


                                    
                                        Whenever Dave Matter posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.