Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Clear skies. Low around 70F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear skies. Low around 70F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:53 pm

St. Louis Blues center Kyle Brodziak is congratulated by teammates after scoring in the first period during a game between the St. Louis Blues and the Carolina Hurricanes on Saturday, Dec. 30, 2017, at the Scottrade Center in St. Louis. Photo by Chris Lee, clee@post-dispatch.com

St. Louis Blues center Kyle Brodziak is congratulated by teammates after scoring in the first period during a game between the St. Louis Blues and the Carolina Hurricanes on Saturday, Dec. 30, 2017, at the Scottrade Center in St. Louis. Photo by Chris Lee, clee@post-dispatch.com

Scottie Upshall found himself an unlikely member of the Blues' top line and he became the hero of the night when he finished off a nice end-to-end play midway through the third period to give the Blues a 3-2 win over the Carolina Hurricanes on Saturday night at Scottrade Center.

On a night the Blues dressed just 11 forwards to give them cover in case the returning Jay Bouwmeester had an injury recurrence, the concept of regular lines went out the window. Upshall, a mainstay of the team's fourth line, found himself getting shifts with Brayden Schenn and Vladimir Tarasenko in the third period and they teamed up for the game-winner.

The Blues won a battle for the puck in their own end, and Tarasenko played the puck up to Schenn, who brought the puck into the zone and fed Upshall flying down the left wing, and he beat Carolina goalie Scott Darling for the lead.

It was the Blues had scored three goals against a goalie in regulation since their 6-1 win over Detroit on Dec. 9. They had scored three twice since then, once in overtime and once with the third coming into an empty net.

The Blues had lost two in a row and five of their past six as they slipped to third in the Central Division. Kyle Brodziak and Patrik Berglund had the other goals for thee Blue.

This was their last game for 2017 and their 41st of the season, putting them officially at the halfway mark with 50 points. Last year, they had 47 points after 41 games.

The finish got a little dicey when Carolina pulled Darling and then Brodziak was called for delay of game for putting the puck over the glass with 1:12 to play, giving Carolina a two-man advantage for the final 72 seconds.

BLUES BLOW TWO-GOAL LEAD, EVEN AFTER TWO PERIODS

The Blues got another quick goal to take a 2-0 lead on Carolina, then gave up two goals to leave the game tied at 2-2 after two periods on Saturday night at Scottrade Center.

This time, it was Patrik Berglund who scored, 42 seconds into the period, one second less than Kyle Brodziak needed to score in the first period. And then it fell apart. Brodziak had an assist on the goal, giving him two points in the game.

The Blues had a power play in which Carolina goalie Scott Darling had his stick knocked from his hand by a shot by Colton Parayko and slide into the corner, far out of his reach. The Blues played 63 seconds with Darling without a stick, and didn't manage a shot on goal during that time. They barely could get the puck into the Carolina zone in that time. 

And then when the penalty ended, Derek Ryan came out of the box, got a puck that rimmed around the boards when Vince Dunn took a shot that went wide, and made a very nice play to go around Carter Hutton and score at the 12-minute mark.

The Blues had another power pay that didn't produce anything, and 1 1/2 minutes after the penalty ended, Carolina's Noah Hanifin centered a pass that Lucas Wallmark redirected in for his first NHL goal and a 2-2 score.

Later in the period, the Blues had a three-on-one that Alex Pietrangelo shot wide.

BRODZIAK SCORES 43 SECONDS IN

The Blues got defenseman Jay Bouwmeester back, suited up seven defensemen and 11 forwards and got a goal in the first minute of the game from promoted center Kyle Brodziak as they took a 1-0 lead on Carolina on Saturday night at Scottrade Center.

Brodziak centered a third line between Patrik Berglund and Alexander Steen and the group got immediate results. Steen had the puck behind the net and threaded a puck into the slot to Brodziak, who fired it in for his seventh goal of the season, 43 seconds into the game.

The Blues were being cautious on defense with Bouwmeester returning to the lineup after missing nine games to a lower-body injury, so they suited up an extra defenseman in case Bouwmeester's injury acted up. Vince Dunn and Carl Gunnarsson took turns skating alongside Robert Bortuzzo.

With only 11 forwards, the Blues didn't have a fourth-line center and rotated several players through that slot. They also rotated players through the left wing position alongside Brayden Schenn and Vladimir Tarasenko.

The Blues lines:

Sobotka-Stastny-Thompson

Barbashev-Schenn-Tarasenko

Berglund-Brodziak-Steen

Upshall-Somebody else-Paajarvi

Carter Hutton made eight saves in the first period.

BLUES ACTIVATE BOUWMEESTER, SEND DOWN SCHMALTZ

The Blues activated Jay Bouwmeester off of injured reserve on Saturday, which likely means he'll be in the lineup this evening when the Blues face Carolina at Scottrade Center.

To make room for him on the roster, the Blues sent defenseman Jordan Schmaltz back to San Antonio of the AHL.

Bouwmeester missed nine games with a nagging lower-body injury that unexpectedly had knocked him out of the lineup twice. Once he took part in the morning skate but was scratched, then in the next game, on Dec. 14 against Anaheim, he took part in pregame warmups before being scratched. After that, the Blues put him on injured reserve.

Bouwmeester missed the first 21 games of the season with a fractured ankle suffered in a training camp scrimmage.

Bouwmeester has practiced with the team the past two days, and has taken part in aggressive skating drills, indicating he was ready to get back to action.

ANOTHER LOSS THAT STINGS

The Blues didn't hold a morning skate on Saturday after getting back to St. Louis after 1 a.m. from their game in Dallas on Friday. The Blues had a 2-1 lead with 5 minutes to play but gave up three late goals (including an empty-netter) to lose 4-2.

Blues coach Mike Yeo liked a lot of things about how his team played on Friday, and one of the things he wanted the team to do was stay positive.

After that loss, that could be a big challenge.

"It's a long season," Yeo said. "We always say if you get too excited about when things are going well, then  you're going to be in trouble. And if you get too down when things aren't going well ... Usually, there's a kind of a saying in our game that when things are going at their best, you're usually not quite that good, and when things are going their worst, you're definitely not that bad."

"The players played their hearts out tonight," he said after the game. "We played a real strong road game against a tough team and I felt that we deserved to win, so we just have to keep doing that."

HOW MANY MEN?

There was a lengthy delay and discussions among the officiating crew 7:28 into the second period on Friday after play had been blown dead when a puck hit the skate of a Dallas player leaving the ice. That's the kind of thing that can lead to a too-many-men penalty if the player's replacement had come on to the ice, which was the case.

The referees decided not to assess a penalty on the play.

"They felt that it was inadvertent," Yeo said, "so not a reason for them to call the penalty."

While the referees and linesmen were debating, a fight broke out on the ice between Vladimir Sobotka of the Blues and John Klingberg of Dallas, but since no one saw it start, no penalties were assessed.



Get our FREE e-newsletter, with the latest news, talk and features about the St. Louis Blues.

Schwartz and the defensemen score high marks for the first half of the 2017-18 Blues season. Veterans Steen, Stastny and Berglund are only ave…

Tom Timmermann is a Blues beat writer for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.


                                    
                                        Whenever Tom Timmermann posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.