

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

Jeremy J. Simmons, 35, was charged Tuesday with two counts of 
first-degree murder for the slayings of 31-year-old Shon Tiea Brister 
and 39-year-old Raymond Myles, Jr.

Jeremy J. Simmons, 35, was charged Tuesday with two counts of first-degree murder for the slayings of 31-year-old Shon Tiea Brister and 39-year-old Raymond Myles, Jr.

Seattle police were called about 12:18 a.m. Nov. 2 to Fifth Avenue 
and Battery Street, where they found three people suffering from gunshot
 wounds, according to the incident report. Brister and Myles died at the
 scene.


Seattle police were called about 12:18 a.m. Nov. 2 to Fifth Avenue and Battery Street, where they found three people suffering from gunshot wounds, according to the incident report. Brister and Myles died


A King County Superior Court judge ordered $2 million bail for Simmons.


Prosecutors charged him with two counts of first-degree murder, first-degree assault and illegal firearm possession.

A King County Superior Court judge ordered $2 million bail for Simmons.

Prosecutors charged him with two counts of first-degree murder, first-degree assault and illegal firearm possession.

The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County communities compare in terms of fatal shootings.


The toll taken by gun violence varies widely from community to community in the Seattle area, and the highest rates of gun fatalities aren’t necessarily where one might expect. Check out how King County


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click through for a look at how King County’s communities compare.


In King County, the overall rate of deaths involving firearms is 7 per 100,000 residents. Each year, about 141 King County residents die from intentional and accidental shootings, including suicides. Click


Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s
as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related
deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from gunshots,
including accidents and suicides. Click through for a look at how King County
communities compare.





Seattle’s gun-related death rate is lower than King County’s as a whole. From 2010 to 2014, the city saw a rate of 6.2 firearms-related deaths per 100,000 residents. About 42 people died each year from


14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

14. Central Seattle -- 8.3 gun deaths per 100,000 residents – 4 gun deaths per year on average

Prosecutors say the man they believe killed two people and injured one during a Belltown shooting last month was nabbed near the Mexican border in San Diego.

Jeremy J. Simmons, 35, was charged Tuesday with two counts of first-degree murder for the slayings of 31-year-old Shon Tiea Brister and 39-year-old Raymond Myles, Jr.

The surviving victim told police he believed Simmons and another man opened fire on him and his friends for "payback" of an accused theft allegedly committed by Brister's boyfriend.

Seattle police were called about 12:18 a.m. Nov. 2 to Fifth Avenue and Battery Street, where they found three people suffering from gunshot wounds, according to the incident report. Brister and Myles died at the scene.

Detectives found multiple spent shell casings of two different calibers at the scene, including .40 caliber and 9mm rounds, court records say.

RELATED: Man charged in mysterious Des Moines killing

The surviving victim, who was shot in the back, told detectives during his treatment at Harborview Medical Center that he was hanging out with Simmons and another man in Belltown the night of Nov. 1. He parted ways with them and met up with Myles, who was going to give him a ride home, according to the police report.

On their way to the car, Myles fielded a call from Brister, who claimed Simmons and another man "jumped" her and hit her in the head with a brick, accounts say. She asked Myles for a ride and the three met up soon thereafter.

As the trio approached Myles' blue Ford Mustang, Simmons and the other man allegedly showed up and opened fire on the group, according to Seattle police.

RELATED: Mentally ill defendant re-charged in 2013 Pioneer Square slaying

The surviving man later told police he wasn't sure why Simmons would shoot at him and Myles, but went on to say that Brister's boyfriend had reportedly stolen from Simmons in the past.

San Diego jail records say that Simmons was since arrested Dec. 11 by U.S. Marshals. He awaits extradition to King County.

A King County Superior Court judge ordered $2 million bail for Simmons.

Prosecutors charged him with two counts of first-degree murder, first-degree assault and illegal firearm possession.

Lynsi Burton can be reached at lynsiburton@seattlepi.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LynsiBurton_PI.