All four KPBS TV channels (KPBS, KPBS 2, Create and PBS KIDS) will be off air Tuesday and Wednesday, July 10 &amp; 11 from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. for scheduled upgrade work. This will NOT impact Cox, Spectrum or AT&amp;T users. You can watch the live stream of PBS Kids at KPBS.org/kids. We apologize for the inconvenience.


      Wednesday, July 4, 2018
      
    

Shyla Nott | inewsource

Credit: Associated Press 

Above: A family buys fireworks at a TNT Fireworks stand in the City of Monterey Park, Calif., on Tuesday, July 2, 2013.

For many Americans, the Fourth of July isn’t complete without fireworks. But if you’re thinking of firing off a few in San Diego County, don’t. 

Fireworks are illegal everywhere in the county. That means no sparklers, firecrackers, cherry bombs, bottle rockets or poppers. Even fireworks labeled “safe and sane” are banned.

Those caught with fireworks could face a fine and a year in jail. The fine is based on the size of the illegal fireworks cache and can range from $1,000 to $50,000. 

But if that doesn’t stop you, Cal Fire spokesman Kendal Bortisser said the dry landscape should. 

“This year, 2018, saw another decline in rainfall so our fuels throughout San Diego County, they’re drought-stricken, they’re dead, they’re dying, and they’re ready to burn,” Bortisser said. 

Cal Fire compiles statewide statistics on fires and their causes, and the numbers are startling when it comes to fireworks. 

From 2013 to 2017, fireworks started 3,125 fires in California — with 37 percent of them occurring on the Fourth of July. 

Fireworks-related blazes also have been increasing annually since 2014. 

The reason for that, Bortisser said, could be people are “taking advantage of fireworks that are outside of California and bringing them into the state.”

Source: Cal Fire

Most of the damage in 2014 came from the Monticello fire when fireworks on July 4 sparked a 6,488-acre blaze in Yolo County, injuring five people.

Despite these numbers, nearly 300 California communities permit state-approved fireworks for consumers. You can check out the list here.

But Bortisser said Cal Fire would prefer you leave the fireworks to the professionals. Head here for a list of Fourth of July events and fireworks shows in San Diego County.

Aired 7/6/18  on KPBS News

For many Americans, the Fourth of July isn’t complete without fireworks. But if you’re thinking of firing off a few in San Diego County, don’t. 

Want more KPBS news?Find us on Twitter and Facebook, or subscribe to our newsletters.
    

To view PDF documents, Download Acrobat Reader.

Listen Now


89.5/97.7 FM

© 2018 KPBS Public Broadcasting

© 2018 KPBS Public Broadcasting