Meanwhile, they remain separated from their families. 

Over the last several weeks, thousands of children have been separated from their parents and families and held at border detention centers as a result of the Trump administration's "zero tolerance" illegal immigration policy at the Mexican border. While Melania Trump's spokesperson has said Melania "hates to see children separated from their families," the FLOTUS also wore a Zara jacket that had, "I REALLY DON'T CARE, DO U?" written on the back for her first trip to one of the many detention centers last week.


Yesterday, Melania made a trip to the Southwest Key Campbell children's detention center in Phoenix, Arizona. Currently, there are 121 children at the facility and 81 of them were separated from their families while the rest were unaccompanied minors or brought into the country by other people, like family friends.


According to CNN, during Melania's visit, she went into three classrooms. In the first room, there were about 10 kids doing arts and crafts projects. When she entered, she said, "Hi! How are you?" before she asked, "Did you make friends?" 


And, according to The New York Times, she asked the children, "Do you like it here with some friends?" and "Do you like to dance with some music?"  


After that, she moved on to the next room where she asked yet another young girl about making friends. Melania then spent 10 minutes in the last room, where most of the children were under 18 months old, and she asked workers a few unspecified questions about the facility, per CNN.


During the visit, Melania's spokesperson Stephanie Grisham told reporters that Melania shares her views privately with her husband. Grisham also said, "I would say this is very visible. She cares about children deeply. She also believes in strong border laws and treating everybody equally."


Last week, Donald issued an executive order that called for an end to the separation practice that he enacted, and while a judge ruled that all families must be reunited within 30 days, that process is expected to be complicated, and experts have said there will be lasting health effects on the children who were separated. 