Welcome! 

Subscribe to Business Wire:
    Email Alerts
    Get Business Wire via: Homepage
    Mobile
    RSS
    Facebook
    Twitter
    LinkedIn
    

News Feed Item




      This week, more than 15,000 students from around the world traveled to 
      Houston, putting their innovation skills to the test at the annual FIRST 
      Championship Presented by Qualcomm® Incorporated, held at the George R. 
      Brown Convention Center, Minute Maid Park and Discovery Green.
    



This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: 
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180421005063/en/



Over 15,000 students, ages 6-18, participated in FIRST Championship Houston, April 18-21. FIRST Championship, the world’s largest celebration of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) for students, will continue next week with 15,000 more students in Detroit (April 25-28). (Photo: Business Wire)  


      The four-day event, attended by 30,000 people, came down to a 
      heart-pounding conclusion Saturday night in front of thousands of 
      cheering fans at Minute Maid Park when teams competed in match finals 
      for the FIRST® 
      Robotics Competition and FIRST® 
      Tech Challenge world championships. Four teams from San Jose, 
      California Greenville, Texas, Sammamish, Washington, and Hod-Ha'Sharon, 
      HaMerkaz, Israel, were the FIRST Robotics Competition Winning 
      Alliance for this year’s game, FIRST 
      POWER UPSM. Teams from Sutherlin, Oregon; Sun River, 
      Montana; and Bellevue, Washington, were the FIRST Tech Challenge RELIC 
      RECOVERYSM Winning Alliance.
    



      Over 15,000 students, ages 6-18, participated in FIRST 
      Championship Houston. FIRST Championship, the world’s largest 
      celebration of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) for 
      students, will continue next week with 15,000 more students in Detroit 
      (April 25-28).
    



      Selected Quotes:
    



      Among the participants, many earned honors for design excellence, 
      competitive play, research, business plans, website design, and 
      teamwork. A not-for-profit organization founded in 1989 by inventor Dean 
      Kamen, FIRST (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and 
      Technology) inspires innovation and leadership in young people through 
      engaging, team-based robotics challenges.
    



      In Houston, nearly 700 robotics teams from 43 countries competed and 
      exhibited in the four FIRST programs, including FIRST® 
      LEGO® League (grades 4 to 8, ages 9 to 14 in the United States, 
      Canada, and Mexico; ages 9 to 16 outside the United States, Canada, and 
      Mexico); FIRST Tech Challenge (grades 7 to 12, ages 12 to 18); 
      and FIRST Robotics Competition (grades 9 to 12, ages 14 to 18). 
      In addition to the high-energy robotics matches, 60 teams participated 
      in the FIRST® 
      LEGO® League Jr. (grades K-4, ages 6 to 9) World Festival Expo.
    



      FIRST Championship Houston honored significant supporters of the FIRST 
      mission:
    



      2018 FIRST Championship Winners
    



      The 2018 winners of the competitions and awards announced in Houston are 
      as follows:
    



      Dean’s List Award – This award celebrates outstanding 
      student leaders whose passion for and effectiveness at attaining FIRST 
      ideals is exemplary.
    



      From FIRST Robotics Competition:
    



      From FIRST Tech Challenge:
    



      1. FIRST® Robotics Competition Championship – FIRST 
      Robotics Competition combines sports excitement with the rigors of 
      science and technology. Under strict rules, limited resources, and time 
      limits, teams are challenged to fundraise, design a brand, exercise 
      teamwork, and build and program robots to perform tasks against 
      competitors. The 2018 challenge, FIRST 
      POWER UP, finds teams and their robots trapped in an 8-bit video 
      game. The alliance with the highest score at the end of the match, which 
      includes autonomous and teleoperated periods, defeats the boss and wins 
      the game.
    



      More than 91,000 students on 3,660 teams from 27 countries competed 
      during the 2018 season.
    



      The FIRST Robotics Competition Volunteer of the Year Award 
      winner was "Koko" Ed Patterson.
    



      Other FIRST Robotics Competition Awards included:
    



      Championship Finalists –
    



      Carver Subdivision
    



      Subdivision Winners –
    



      Carver Subdivision
    



      Galileo Subdivision
    



      Hopper Subdivision
    



      Newton Subdivision
    



      Roebling Subdivision
    



      Turing Subdivision
    



      Subdivision Finalists –
    



      Carver Subdivision
    



      Galileo Subdivision
    



      Hopper Subdivision
    



      Newton Subdivision
    



      Roebling Subdivision
    



      Turing Subdivision
    



      Engineering Inspiration Award –
    



      Autonomous Award sponsored by Ford –
    



      Creativity Award sponsored by Xerox –
    


      Entrepreneurship Award sponsored by Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp; Byers –
    



      Excellence in Engineering Award sponsored by Delphi –
    



      Gracious 
      Professionalism® Award sponsored by Johnson &amp; Johnson –
    



      Imagery Award in honor of Jack Kamen –
    



      Industrial Design Award sponsored by General Motors –
    



      Safety Award sponsored by UL –
    



      Innovation in Control Award sponsored by Rockwell Automation –
    



      Quality Award sponsored by Motorola –
    



      Team Spirit Award sponsored by FCA Foundation –
    



      Highest Rookie Seed –
    



      Rookie All-star Award –
    



      Rookie Inspiration Award –
    



      Judges’ Awards –
    



      2. FIRST® Tech Challenge World Championship – FIRST 
      Tech Challenge students learn to think like engineers. Teams build 
      robots from a reusable kit of parts, develop strategies, document their 
      progress, and compete head to head. In the 2017-18 game, FIRST 
      RELIC RECOVERY, teams work in an alliance to go on a robot 
      adventure. The goal is to score more points than the opposing alliance 
      during 150 seconds of game play that includes autonomous and 
      driver-controlled periods.
    



      Approximately 60,000 students on 6,013 FIRST Tech Challenge teams 
      competed during the 2017-2018 season. FIRST Tech Challenge Global 
      Sponsors include Official Program Sponsor Rockwell Collins, Official 3D 
      Augmented Reality/Virtual Reality Sponsor PTC, and Season Presenting 
      Sponsor Qualcomm.
    



      The FIRST Tech Challenge Volunteer of the Year 
      Award winner was Liz Looney.
    



      The Compass Award for excellence in coaching/mentoring was 
      awarded to Zhunquin Wang, coach of Team 12808, Revamped Robotics, from 
      Portland, Oregon.
    



      Other FIRST Tech Challenge awards included:
    



      3. FIRST® LEGO® League World Festival – FIRST 
      LEGO League introduces younger students to real-world engineering 
      challenges by inviting them to conduct research projects and build 
      LEGO-based autonomous robots to complete tasks on a thematic playing 
      surface. FIRST LEGO League teams, guided by their imaginations, 
      discover exciting career possibilities and learn to make positive 
      contributions to society. This year’s challenge, HYDRO 
      DYNAMICSSM, tasked more than 280,000 students on 35,226 
      teams representing nearly 90 countries with improving the human water 
      cycle.
    



      Top honors went to Champion’s Award winner, Team 37402, SESI Red 
      Rabbit, Americana, Brazil; Champion’s Award Finalist, Team 37401, 
      SESI Jedi’s, Jundiai, Brazil; and Champion’s Award Finalist, Team 
      23359, Water Works, La Jolla, Calif.
    



      Other FIRST® LEGO® 
      League awards included:
    



      Judges’ Awards
    



      4. FIRST® LEGO® League Jr. World Festival Expo – FIRST 
      LEGO League Jr. introduces children ages 6 to 9 to the exciting world of 
      science and technology. In this year’s Challenge, AQUA 
      ADVENTURESM, 16,767 teams used LEGO® elements to build 
      and LEGO® Education WeDo 2.0 to program a moving model and share their 
      discoveries about where water comes from and what happens on its way to 
      people.
    



      FIRST® LEGO® League 
      Jr. awards went to:
    



      Watch highlights from FIRST Championship Houston on the FIRST 
      Twitch Channel and view select photos on the FIRST 
      Facebook page.
    



      The 2018 FIRST Championship will continue next week in Detroit, 
      Michigan, happening from April 25 to 28 at the Cobo Center and Ford 
      Field. Visit The 
      FIRST Championship website, sponsored by Quicken Loans, to 
      learn more. All the highlights – matches, interviews, and analysis – will 
      be streamed live. Join the #FIRSTChamp conversation by following FIRST 
      social media channels.
    



      2018 FIRST Championship Sponsors
    



      Qualcomm is the 2018 FIRST Championship Presenting Sponsor.
    



      2018 FIRST Championship Lead Sponsors include: Google, Inc and 
      Magna International Inc.
    



      2018 FIRST Championship Event Sponsors include: ABB Foundation, 
      The Abbott Fund; BAE Systems; Bechtel Corporation; Booz Allen Hamilton; 
      Delta Air Lines, Inc.; Detroit Metro Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau; The 
      Dow Chemical Company; DTE Energy Co.; FCA Foundation; FedEx Corporation; 
      Ford Motor Company; General Motors Company; Houston CVB, Nokia Bell 
      Labs; NRG Energy; TE Connectivity; Twitch; U.S. Air Force; United 
      Technologies; ZF.
    



      2018 FIRST Championship Key Sponsors include: American Axle &amp; 
      Manufacturing; The Boeing Company; Bosch; The Coca-Cola Company; 
      Consumers Energy; DoD STEM; Kettering University; Lockheed Martin 
      Corporation; Mouser Electronics; PwC US, Southwest Airlines; Quicken 
      Loans; Texas Instruments; Two Sigma; Walt Disney Imagineering.
    



      Other 2018 FIRST Championship Supporters include: Aptiv; Arm; 
      Blue Origin; J.R. Automation; KUKA Robotics; Miksa Honey Farms.
    



      Save the date! The FIRST Championship 
      will be held in:
    



      2019: Houston: April 17-20 and Detroit: April 24-27
    



      2020: Houston: April 15-18 and Detroit: April 29-May 2
    



      About FIRST®
    



      Accomplished inventor Dean 
      Kamen founded FIRST® 
      (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology) in 1989 to 
      inspire an appreciation of science and technology in young people. Based 
      in Manchester, N.H., FIRST designs accessible, innovative 
      programs to build self-confidence, knowledge, and life skills while 
      motivating young people to pursue opportunities in science, technology, 
      and engineering. With support from over 200 of the Fortune 500 companies 
      and more than $70 million in college scholarships, the not-for-profit 
      organization hosts the FIRST® 
      Robotics Competition for students in Grades 9-12; FIRST® 
      Tech Challenge for Grades 7-12; FIRST® 
      LEGO® League for Grades 4-8; and FIRST® 
      LEGO® League Jr. for Grades K-4. Gracious 
      Professionalism® is a way of doing things that 
      encourages high-quality work, emphasizes the value of others, and 
      respects individuals and the community. To learn more about FIRST, 
      go to www.firstinspires.org.
    





View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180421005063/en/


                  Published April 22, 2018                                    
                  Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.
                  
                  Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.
                

Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Media and Entertainment

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Government

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Computers and Software

Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©2018 DXWorldEXPO, LLC.All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC.
Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO is prohibited.