Partly cloudy with a slight chance of thunderstorms. High 92F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 30%..

Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:35 pm

A Martin man was arrested Tuesday and charged with vehicular homicide as the result of this traffic accident that occurred Aug. 21, 2017, on Highway 79 southwest of Henry. Matthew Allen Griffin, now 34, was the driver of this 2001 Chevrolet Blazer, which hit a tractor trailer when it attempted to pass on the right shoulder of the highway and the truck made a right turn into the SUV. Griffin’s passenger, Stacey Couturier of McKenzie, was killed in the wreck. Griffin was indicted in a secret indictment earlier this month.

A Martin man was arrested Tuesday and charged with vehicular homicide as the result of this traffic accident that occurred Aug. 21, 2017, on Highway 79 southwest of Henry. Matthew Allen Griffin, now 34, was the driver of this 2001 Chevrolet Blazer, which hit a tractor trailer when it attempted to pass on the right shoulder of the highway and the truck made a right turn into the SUV. Griffin’s passenger, Stacey Couturier of McKenzie, was killed in the wreck. Griffin was indicted in a secret indictment earlier this month.

A Martin man was arrested and charged with vehicular homicide as the result of a traffic accident that killed a McKenzie woman in August 2017 near Henry.

Matthew Allen Griffin, 34, had been secretly indicted by a Henry County grand jury this month, and was arrested Tuesday by Henry County Sheriff’s Cpl. David Andrews at the county jail.

Griffin faces two counts of vehicular homicide and one count each of DUI, violation of the due care law and reckless driving. He was to appear in Henry County Circuit Court Wednesday. HIs bond was set at $100,000.

Griffin was the driver of a maroon 2001 Chevrolet Blazer that was involved in the wreck Aug. 21 on Highway 79 southwest of Henry.

Stacey L. Couturier of McKenzie was a passenger in Griffin’s vehicle. She was killed in the accident. She was 37 at the time of her death.

Trooper Caleb Cooper of the Tennessee Highway Patrol indicated in his report the accident happened near the intersection with old state Highway 76. Griffin’s SUV was traveling northeast toward Henry.

A 2012 Kenworth tractor trailer driven by Billy E. Osburn, then 42, of Paris was also traveling northeast. Osburn’s truck was attempting to make a right turn onto a field road when Griffin’s SUV tried to pass on the right shoulder of the highway. The two vehicles collided, and Couturier, who was sitting in the right front seat of the SUV, was thrown out of the vehicle.

Jerald Campbell, assistant district attorney for the 24th Judicial District, said Wednesday that, in this case, Griffin was charged with two separate counts of vehicular homicide even though Couturier was the only person killed.

“In the state of Tennessee, you can be found guilty of vehicular homicide in two different ways. One is for DUI and the other is for being reckless,” Campbell said.

Griffin was indicted on both actions that led to the wreck.

In other incidents:

• Three break-ins of vehicles were reported in the same general area Tuesday, all in store parking lots.

Two of the break-ins were in the parking lot of a building supply store on Memorial Drive. One was investigated by Paris Police Sgt. Tony Hutcherson, in which a Hidden Acres Road man reported his mini-van was broken into between 1:30 and 4 p.m. A total of $930 worth of items were stolen, including a watch, a duffel bag, shoes, swim goggles and a swimsuit.

PPD Lt. Josh Frey took a report at 6:16 p.m. from a man who said his vehicle was broken into between 2-6 p.m. An iPhone worth $200 was among the $370 worth of items taken.

The third break-in was in the parking lot of a sporting goods store in the Memorial Plaza Shopping Center on Mineral Wells Avenue. A store employee reported her car was broken into while she was at work between 1-9 p.m. She estimated $1,200 worth of items stolen, including clothing, a backpack, shoes, boots, a pair of glasses and a class ring.

• A Buchanan man reported several items stolen from his home while he was out of town, including a bank lock box key that led to his safety deposit box at a local bank being infiltrated.

Henry County Sheriff’s Deputy Stacey Bostwick took a report Monday afternoon from the man, who said he had been in Florida last week when he heard from a representative of his bank in Paris.

He was told that a man had come into the bank on Friday with a key to the safety deposit box being rented by the Buchanan man. He told bank workers that the Buchanan man had died, that he was the man’s grandson and that he was there to collect the belongings from the box.

When the Buchanan man returned from Florida, he found that two bank lock box keys had been stolen from his home, along with several identification papers, house and car keys and two Bulova watches valued at a total of $400.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription