
                                GARANCE BURKE AND MARTHA MENDOZA
                            


                            
                            Last updated 03:38, June 21 2018
                            


                Newly released audio gives an inside look at US facility where children are crying out for their parents after being separated.
            

Trump administration officials have been sending babies and other young children forcibly separated from their parents at the US-Mexico border to at least three "tender age" shelters in South Texas, The Associated Press has learned.


Lawyers and medical providers who have visited the Rio Grande Valley shelters described play rooms of crying preschool-age children in crisis. The government also plans to open a fourth shelter to house hundreds of young migrant children in Houston, where city leaders denounced the move on Tuesday (Wednesday NZ Time).


Since the White House announced its zero tolerance policy in early May, more than 2300 children have been taken from their parents at the US-Mexico border, resulting in a new influx of young children requiring government care.

US Border Patrol as agents review the mother's papers before detaining her and her daughter.

The government has faced withering critiques over images of some of the children in cages inside US Border Patrol processing stations.


READ MORE: * The facts about Trump's policy of separating families at the border * Five first ladies speak out on family separations at border * Trump's cruel policy leaves him more isolated than ever * Audio of crying children at US border adds to outrage * The faces of the children Trump is separating from their families


Decades after the nation's child welfare system ended the use of orphanages over concerns about the lasting trauma to children, the administration is starting up new institutions to hold Central American toddlers that the government separated from their parents.

In this photo provided by US Customs and Border Protection, people who've been detained sit in one of the cages at a facility in McAllen, Texas.

"The thought that they are going to be putting such little kids in an institutional setting? I mean it is hard for me to even wrap my mind around it," said Kay Bellor, vice president for programmes at Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service, which provides foster care and other child welfare services to migrant children. "Toddlers are being detained."


Bellor said shelters follow strict procedures surrounding who can gain access to the children in order to protect their safety, but that means information about their welfare can be limited.


By law, child migrants travelling alone must be sent to facilities run by the US Department of Health and Human Services within three days of being detained. The agency then is responsible for placing the children in shelters or foster homes until they are united with a relative or sponsor in the community as they await immigration court hearings.

Beata Mariana de Jesus Mejia-Mejia with her son Darwin in Guatemala, before they left for the US and crossed the border. Mejia-Mejia hasn't seen her 7-year-old son since he was taken from her a month ago, and thinks Darwin might be in a shelter in Arizona.

But US Attorney General Jeff Sessions' announcement last month that the government would criminally prosecute everyone who crosses the US-Mexico border illegally has led to the breakup of migrant families and sent a new group of hundreds of young children into the government's care.


The United Nations, some Democratic and Republican lawmakers and religious groups have sharply criticised the policy, calling it inhumane.


Not so, said Steven Wagner, an official with the Department of Health and Human Services.

Christopher Baker holds a sign at a rally in Olympia, Washington in the US. Donald Trump has defended his administration's border-protection policies in the face of rising outrage over the forced separation of migrant children from their parents.

"We have specialised facilities that are devoted to providing care to children with special needs and tender age children as we define as under 13 would fall into that category," he said. "They're not government facilities per se, and they have very well-trained clinicians, and those facilities meet state licensing standards for child welfare agencies, and they're staffed by people who know how to deal with the needs - particularly of the younger children."


Until now, however, it's been unknown where they are.


"In general we do not identify the locations of permanent unaccompanied alien children program facilities," said agency spokesman Kenneth Wolfe.

A 2-year-old Honduran asylum seeker cries as her mother is searched and detained near the US-Mexico border in McAllen, Texas. 

The three centres - in Combes, Raymondville and Brownsville - have been rapidly repurposed to serve needs of children, including some under 5. A fourth, planned for Houston, would house up to 240 children in a warehouse previously used for people displaced by Hurricane Harvey, Mayor Sylvester Turner said.


Turner said he met with officials from Austin-based Southwest Key Programs, the contractor that operates some of the child shelters, to ask them to reconsider their plans. A spokeswoman for Southwest Key didn't immediately reply to an email seeking comment.


"And so there comes a point in time we draw a line, and for me, the line is with these children," Turner said during a news conference on Tuesday (Wednesday NZT).

A US government photo shows the shelter used to house unaccompanied foreign children in Tornillo, Texas. 

On a practical level, the zero tolerance policy has overwhelmed the federal agency charged with caring for the new influx of children who tend to be much younger than teens who typically have been travelling to the US alone. Indeed some recent detainees are infants, taken from their mothers.


Doctors and lawyers who have visited the shelters said the facilities were fine, clean and safe, but the kids - who have no idea where their parents are - were hysterical, crying and acting out.


"The shelters aren't the problem, it's taking kids from their parents that's the problem," said South Texas pediatrician Marsha Griffin, who has visited many.

Part of a shelter used to house unaccompanied foreign children in Brownsville, Texas. 

Alicia Lieberman, who runs the Early Trauma Treatment Network at University of California, San Francisco, said decades of study show early separations can cause permanent emotional damage.


"Children are biologically programmed to grow best in the care of a parent figure. When that bond is broken through long and unexpected separations with no set timeline for reunion, children respond at the deepest physiological and emotional levels," she said. "Their fear triggers a flood of stress hormones that disrupt neural circuits in the brain, create high levels of anxiety, make them more susceptible to physical and emotional illness, and damage their capacity to manage their emotions, trust people, and focus their attention on age-appropriate activities."


Days after Sessions announced the zero tolerance policy, the government issued a call for proposals from shelter and foster care providers to provide services for the new influx of children taken from their families after journeying from Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala and Mexico.

Another shot of the Brownsville, Texas, shelter, showing beds foreign children have to sleep in after being separated from their families.

As children are separated from their families, law enforcement agents reclassify them from members of family units to "unaccompanied alien children." Federal officials said on Tuesday (Wednesday NZT) that since May, they have separated 2342 children from their families, rendering them unaccompanied minors in the government's care.


While Mexico is still the most common country of origin for families arrested at the border, in the last eight months Honduras has become the fastest-growing category as compared to fiscal year 2017.


During a press briefing on Tuesday (Wednesday NZT), reporters repeatedly asked for an age breakdown of the children who have been taken. Officials from both law enforcement and Health and Human Services said they didn't know how many children were under five, under two, or even so little they're non-verbal.


"The facilities that they have for the most part are not licensed for tender age children," said Michelle Brane, director of migrant rights at the Women's Refugee Commission, who met with a four-year-old girl in diapers in a warehouse in McAllen, Texas, where Border Patrol temporarily holds migrant families. "There is no model for how you house tons of little children in cots institutionally in our country. We don't do orphanages, our child welfare has recognised that is an inappropriate setting for little children."


So now, the government has to try to hire more caregivers.


The recent call for proposals by the federal government's Office of Refugee Resettlement said it was seeking applicants who can provide services for a diverse population "of all ages and genders, as well as pregnant and parenting teens."


Even the policy surrounding what age to take away a baby is inconsistent. Customs and Border Protection field chiefs over all nine southwest border districts can use their discretion over how young is too young, officials said. And while Health and Human Services defines "tender age" typically as 12 and under, Customs and Border Protection has at times defined it as five and under.


For 30 years, Los Fresnos, Texas-based International Education Services ran emergency shelters and foster care programmes for younger children and pregnant teens who arrived in the US as unaccompanied minors. At least one resident sued for the right to have an abortion in a high-profile case last March.


For reasons the agency did not explain, three months ago the government's refugee resettlement office said it was ending their funding to the program and transferred all children to other facilities. This came weeks before the administration began its "zero tolerance" policy, prompting a surge in "tender age" migrant children needing shelter.


In recent days, members of Congress have been visiting the shelters and processing centres, or watching news report about them, bearing witness to the growing chaos. In a letter sent to Attorney General Jeff Sessions on Tuesday (Wednesday NZT), a dozen Republican senators said separating families isn't consistent with American values and ordinary human decency.


On Tuesday (Wednesday NZT), a Guatemalan mother who hasn't seen her seven-year-old son since he was taken from her a month ago sued the Trump administration. Beata Mariana de Jesus Mejia-Mejia was released from custody while her asylum case is pending and thinks her son, Darwin, might be in a shelter in Arizona.


"I only got to talk to him once and he sounded so sad. My son never used to sound like that, he was such a dynamic boy," Mejia-Mejia said as she wept. "I call and call and no one will tell me where he is."



                
                     - AP
            

Donald Trump seems to be saying more and more things that aren't true

World Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        How musk moved in on the cave
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        The will to live: New cave rescue details
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Remarkable Thai cave survivor
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Trump lashes out at Nato allies
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys salute from hospital
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescues that gripped the world
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Why we care for the Thai boys
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Urged suicide 'free speech'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescue almost went horribly wrong
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Hero cave doctor's tragic loss
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Amid the Brexit turmoil
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys given sedative
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave casualty 'hero in my heart'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Coach, three boys 'stateless'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys were extraordinary
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            