Advertisement

Supported by

By Manny Fernandez

HOUSTON — The 15-year-old boy from Honduras who climbed a fence and fled a migrant shelter appeared to be making his way back home via Mexico, a person familiar with the boy’s case said on Monday.


While his exact whereabouts weren’t known Monday, the boy’s dramatic exit from Casa Padre in South Texas, the largest migrant youth shelter in the country, raised new questions about the degree to which shelter operators and federal officials were monitoring and protecting undocumented immigrant youth.


The nonprofit group that runs Casa Padre, Southwest Key Programs, is among many contractors that receive federal money to house and provide services for immigrant children, including those caught up in the Trump administration’s now-defunct family separation policy.


This boy, however, was apprehended alone at the border, unaccompanied by any parent or guardian. The shelter, in a former Walmart Supercenter in Brownsville, Tex., houses both sets of immigrant boys: those caught alone and those separated from their relatives by the government. The person who described the boy’s whereabouts spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly about the case.

Saturday’s escape was a blow to Southwest Key, one of the biggest shelter operators with 27 facilities in Texas, Arizona and California. The nonprofit group has been criticized for winning hundreds of millions of dollars in federal contracts to house and provide services for migrant youth, and its finances and shelter conditions have recently been scrutinized. The organization, which has been housing minors for years, including during previous administrations, has defended its work, finances and facilities.


While the children at Southwest Key shelters are in federal custody, its officials have said they cannot physically restrain those who attempt to leave.


But local officials and others questioned Monday whether the shelter could have done more to prevent Saturday’s runaway, regardless of the organization’s inability to use force to keep children from fleeing. The federal agency responsible for unaccompanied and family-separated migrant children, the Office of Refugee Resettlement, states in its policy manual that facilities should “ensure unaccompanied alien children remain within the facility perimeter.”


The boy had been at Casa Padre for 36 days, meaning he was there when reporters and members of Congress toured the space in recent weeks during a series of well-publicized visits. The average length of stay at a Southwest Key shelter is 52 days.


Casa Padre became the subject of nationwide attention and scrutiny on June 3 after a lawmaker, Senator Jeff Merkley, a Democrat of Oregon, tried to visit, was refused entry and had the police called on him. Mr. Merkley was granted a tour of the shelter on June 17, Father’s Day. The boy had been at Casa Padre both times the senator was there.

“This is further evidence that the way that the Trump administration is treating children within the immigration system is traumatizing and dangerous for these young individuals,” Mr. Merkley said in a statement.


The Honduran boy was not the first immigrant teen to flee from a shelter. Children have periodically escaped over the years, long before the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” and family separation policies flooded courtrooms, detention centers and shelters along the border with detained adults and youth.


So far in fiscal year 2018, which began last October and ends Sept. 30, Southwest Key had 42 children leave its facilities without permission. It has cared for 19,842 migrant youth, making the percentage of escapees as part of its overall population some .21 percent, said Jeff Eller, a spokesman for Southwest Key.


“We believe the children we care for have greater chance of succeeding if we can help them instead of being on their own and unsupported,” Mr. Eller said in a statement.


The teen escaped at about 3 p.m. on Saturday. He was outside the facility as part of his regularly scheduled outdoor recreation time. The children at Casa Padre are given two hours of outdoor activity time per day on the weekdays and three hours per day on the weekends, in addition to field trips to churches, parks and zoos. At some point during his recreation time, the boy ran and climbed a fence, the person familiar with his case said.


The boy had not alerted staff that he would be leaving. But shelter employees called to him as he escaped and encouraged him to stay. The shelter is nearly six miles from the border with Mexico.


Before the teen escaped, the shelter had been in touch with a man who claimed to be the boy’s father, who lived in Dallas. The man contacted the shelter on Sunday and told staff the boy had been in communication with him since he fled the shelter and had crossed the border into Mexico, the person familiar with the boy’s case said. The man said he was sending the teen money for his journey back to Honduras.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS