Phone


			 888-776-0942 from 8 AM - 10 PM ET
        
		

Chat


				 Chat Online with an Expert 
			


			Contact Us
		


			 888-776-0942
			
			from 8 AM - 10 PM ET
			

Phone


			 888-776-0942 from 8 AM - 10 PM ET
        
		

Chat


				 Chat Online with an Expert 
			


			Contact Us
		


			 888-776-0942
			
			from 8 AM - 10 PM ET
			

Carrier to add new flights to New York, Washington, D.C., and many other cities across North America

News provided by

May 31, 2018, 11:30 ET

Share this article

DALLAS, May 31, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Southwest Airlines Co. (NYSE: LUV) today extended its bookable flight schedule through Jan. 6, 2019. The new schedule brings several new nonstop options between cities that have not previously been offered on Southwest Airlines. Today's extension includes the airline's holiday schedule, allowing Customers to get an early start on holiday travel planning. 

"Today's schedule extension shows the depth of Southwest's growing network with new nonstop links among even more cities than ever before," said Adam Decaire, Southwest's Managing Director of Network Planning. "Our Teams are highly energized by continuing to develop our route map with more flights between more places while maintaining our core focus of connecting People to what's important in their lives." 


Going Big in the Big Apple


Beginning Nov. 4, 2018, Southwest will add new nonstop service between:


New York (LaGuardia) and New Orleans


New York (LaGuardia) and West Palm Beach, Fla.*


New York (LaGuardia) and Orlando*


*Service is offered on Saturdays beginning Nov. 10, 2018


Also on Nov. 4, 2018, Southwest will add one additional weekday nonstop flight between:


New York (LaGuardia) and Dallas (An increase to five weekday nonstop flights)


New York (LaGuardia) and Denver (An increase to three weekday nonstop flights)


New York (LaGuardia) and Kansas City, Mo. (An increase to two weekday nonstop flights)


By the end of Nov. 2018, Southwest will offer up to 35 flights a day from LaGuardia. 


More Southwest Heart in the Nation's Capital


Southwest grows its service in the Nation's Capital with new nonstop service. Beginning Nov. 4, 2018, the carrier will link Washington, D.C. (Reagan National) and Oklahoma City with daily nonstop service. On the same day, the carrier is also adding one additional flight on the following routes:


Between Washington, D.C. (Reagan National) and Nashville (An increase to four weekday roundtrip flights)


Between Washington, D.C. (Reagan National) and Dallas (An increase to five weekday roundtrip flights)


California Service Options Expand


Even More for San Jose


Southwest continues expanding in northern California with more flights to and from San Jose, Calif. By the end of Nov. 2018, the carrier will offer up to 99 departures a day to 24 destinations. Starting Nov. 4, 2018, Southwest will add new nonstop service Sundays through Fridays between San Jose, Calif. and Tucson, Ariz.  Additionally, the carrier will now offer eight weekday roundtrips between San Jose, Calif. and Portland, Ore., an increase of two flights each weekday, and 12 nonstop flights weekdays between San Jose, Calif. and Orange County/Santa Ana, also an increase of two flights each weekday.  


Burbank Grows 


The carrier is adding more options for travelers to reach key Southern California cities on Nov. 4, 2018, including new and returning nonstop flights between:


Burbank and Houston (Hobby) (Flights operate Sunday through Friday)


Burbank and Chicago (Midway) (Flights operate Sunday through Friday)**


**The carrier previously offered this route in 2005. 


More Flights from Long Beach


Responding to demands for more service from Long Beach, the carrier is adding more flights.


Between Sept. 5 and Oct. 31, 2018, Southwest will operate two additional nonstop flights on weekdays between Long Beach and Sacramento. The carrier will now offer four weekday roundtrips between the two cities. Additionally, the carrier will add three weekday flights between Long Beach and Las Vegas. This service complements its existing weekend service between both cities.


More Service to More Places


Beginning Nov. 4, the carrier will add daily nonstop service between Denver and Lubbock and service Sunday through Friday between Denver and El Paso, an increase from its Sunday only service that begins on Oct. 7, 2018. Also starting on Sunday, Nov. 4, the airline will add weekly service on Sundays between both Houston (Hobby) and Philadelphia and Sacramento. 


International Service Cuba Service ExpandsEffective Aug. 7, 2018, Southwest will expand its service between the United States and Cuba with a third daily nonstop flight between Ft. Lauderdale/Hollywood and Havana. 


More Passport Stamp Opportunities from ChicagoEffective Sun., Nov. 4, 2018, Southwest will begin international service on weekends between Chicago (Midway) and Cabo San Lucas/Los Cabos, subject to government approvals. The new route will complement existing international service between Chicago (Midway) and Cancun, Montego Bay, Jamaica, and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.


Daily Service ResumesThe carrier will resume seasonal daily international service on Nov. 4, 2018 between:


Ft. Lauderdale/Hollywood and BelizeFt. Lauderdale/Hollywood and Grand CaymanFt. Lauderdale/Hollywood and Turks and CaicosDenver and Puerto VallartaHouston (Hobby) and Liberia, Costa RicaSt. Louis and Cancun


To book a seat on any of these new flights or on any of the carrier's schedule now available for travel through Jan. 6, 2019, visit Southwest.com


ABOUT SOUTHWEST AIRLINES CO.


In its 47th year of service, Dallas-based Southwest Airlines Co. (NYSE: LUV) continues to differentiate itself from other air carriers with exemplary Customer Service delivered by more than 57,000 Employees to a Customer base topping 120 million passengers annually, in recent years. Southwest became the nation's largest domestic air carrier in 2003 and maintains that ranking based on the U.S. Department of Transportation's most recent reporting of domestic originating passengers boarded. During peak travel seasons, Southwest operates more than 4,000 weekday departures among a network of 100 destinations in the United States and 10 additional countries. Southwest has announced its intention to sell tickets in 2018 for service to Hawaii, subject to requisite governmental approvals.


Southwest coined Transfarency® to describe its purposed philosophy of treating Customers honestly and fairly, and low fares actually staying low. Southwest is the only major U.S. airline to offer bags fly free® to everyone (first and second checked pieces of luggage, size and weight limits apply, some carriers offer free checked bags on select routes or in qualified circumstances), and there are no change fees, though fare differences might apply.


As launch customer of the Boeing 737 MAX 8 in North America, the Company operates the largest fleet in the world of Boeing aircraft, all of which are equipped with satellite-based WiFi. Customers who connect to the WiFi network may use their personal devices to view on-demand movies and television shows, as well as nearly 20 channels of free, live TV. 


With a bold new look first unveiled in 2014, Southwest is progressing through a multi-year refresh of its fleet to showcase the carrier's Heart: a new logo, aircraft livery, interior design featuring new seats, Employee-designed uniforms, and an updated airport experience, all of which showcase a dedication of Southwest Employees to connect Customers with what's important in their lives.


From its first flights on June 18, 1971, Southwest Airlines launched an era of unprecedented affordability in air travel described by the U.S. Department of Transportation as "The Southwest Effect," a lowering of fares and increase in passenger traffic wherever the carrier serves. With 45 consecutive years of profitability, Southwest is one of the most honored airlines in the world, known for a triple bottom line approach that contributes to the carrier's performance and productivity, the importance of its People and the communities they serve, and an overall commitment to efficiency and the planet. 


Book Southwest Airlines' low fares online at Southwest Airlines or by phone at 800-I-FLY-SWA.


SOURCE Southwest Airlines Co.


 https://www.southwest.com

More news releases in similar topics

You just read:

News provided by

May 31, 2018, 11:30 ET

Share this article