Partly cloudy with a slight chance of thunderstorms. High 92F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 30%..

Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:35 pm

BIRMINGHAM, Ala. (AP) — President Donald Trump will nominate people from four states to serve on the nine-member board of directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority, the White House said Thursday.

Trump will name Kenneth E. Allen of Kentucky and James R. Thompson III of Alabama for terms that expire in 2021. Allen is retired from the Armstrong Energy coal company; Thompson is a corporate billing executive with the Birmingham-based National Bank of Commerce.

The president also will nominate A.D. Frazier of Georgia and Jeffrey Smith of Tennessee for board positions that expire in 2022, according to a White House statement. Frazier is president emeritus of Georgia Oak Partners, an Atlanta-based investment and acquisition company. Smith was deputy director of operations at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.

Citing Allen’s experience providing “affordable and reliable energy” in the region, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said he would recommend swift confirmation of the appointment.

Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., said Smith’s time at Oak Ridge made him “especially pleased” about the nomination.

“Jeff has a unique understanding of the importance of TVA, and I know he is eager to give back to the region he calls home. I am glad to recommend him to my colleagues for swift confirmation,” Corker said in a statement.

TVA is the nation’s largest public utility. It provides electricity to about 9 million people in Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Kentucky, Georgia, North Carolina and Virginia.

TVA chief executive Bill Johnson said having new viewpoints on the board would help the agency as it works to provide cleaner energy at the lowest feasible cost while promoting economic growth in the region.

 

Eight ex-Decatur County employees indicted

DECATURVILLE — Eight former Decatur County employees have been indicted on theft and forgery charges after a state audit.

News outlets reported Wednesday the ex-employees were charged after a state Treasury Comptroller audit that’s expected to be released soon. It found inconsistent records including unauthorized compensation to several individuals.

Some of those indicted are county Mayor Michael Smith; administrative assistants Martha Graves and the then-county mayor’s wife Doris Smith; Sheriff’s chief deputy William Scott Cagle; and jail administrator Pamela Brasher. Local news media report they posted bond after being arrested Tuesday.

WTVF-TV reports that Smith is accused of paying himself more than $15,000 between 2011 and 2014 to cover his health insurance despite never enrolling for the county’s plan.

The Jackson Sun reports they’ll be arraigned in County Circuit Court next week.

 

Report: Faulty repairs caused fatal crash

CLARKSVILLE (AP) — An improperly installed part caused a helicopter to crash in rural Tennessee, killing the two 101st Airborne Division pilots aboard, according to an Army report.

A U.S. Army Aircraft Incident Report obtained by USA Today Network-Tennessee says the Apache helicopter, which took off from Fort Campbell in December 2015 on a routine training mission, essentially came apart in midair before crashing to the ground and bursting into flames.

The pilots — Kevin Weiss, 32, of McHenry, Illinois, and Alex Caraballo-Leon, 35, of Patillas, Puerto Rico — had a little more than 20 seconds notice that the helicopter was in serious trouble as it flew 700 feet above the ground, but the report found that the crash was unavoidable once the small part either malfunctioned or didn’t work at all.

The report says investigators found fault with work performed by three soldiers who replaced bearings on the helicopter in November 2015. The report redacted the soldiers’ names and specific explanations of what was done wrong, but recommended more inspections when repairs are made.

It took more than a year for the Army to release its findings this month in a report of more than 300 pages.

Fort Campbell officials declined to comment on the report.

 

Judge again postpones 

trial in crash that killed six

CHATTANOOGA — The trial of a truck driver charged with killing six people in a 2015 interstate crash has been postponed for the second time this year.

The Chattanooga Times Free-Press reports Hamilton County Criminal Court Judge Don Poole postponed Benjamin Brewer’s trial date after attorneys debated over a potential witness Tuesday and expressed uncertainty over their preparation for the Sept. 25 start date.

The first postponement came in June, following the revelation of a retest of Brewer’s blood that found a lower amount of methamphetamine in his system.

The debate Tuesday among public defenders, state prosecutors and government attorneys hinged on deposing the federal employee who oversaw that retest.

Attorneys are due to return to court Oct. 17, but it’s unclear if they’ll pick a new date then.

 

Tennessee approves

merger of hospital systems

NASHVILLE — The Tennessee Department of Health has approved a proposed merger between two hospital systems.

News outlets report that the department announced Tuesday that Commissioner John Dreyzehner approved Kingsport-based Wellmont Health System and Johnson City-based Mountain States Health Alliance’s application for a Certificate of Public Advantage to oversee the merger.

The Federal Trade Commission opposes the merger, saying its benefits don’t outweigh harm to consumers. The TDH says it worked with the health care systems and state attorney general’s office to outline benchmarks linked to improving key health outcomes in northeast Tennessee.

The systems await approval from Virginia, to regulate the southwest Virginia portion of the merger.

The systems have 90 days to complete the merger, which would create Ballad Health, led by Mountain States CEO Alan Levine.

 

Lawmakers want agencies to allow photos of records

NASHVILLE — Tennessee lawmakers are asking three state agencies to ensure that their policies allow residents to take cell phone photos of public records.

The Tennessean reports that Joint Government Operations Committee members questioned the Office of the Comptroller of the Treasury, the Department of Transportation and the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency about their policies Wednesday.

Stephanie Maxwell told lawmakers she thought comptroller’s office policy did allow for photos of records. But Sen. Mike Bell said the way the policy is written doesn’t allow it. Bell requested a policy change.

Rep. Jeremy Faison said comptroller chief of staff Jason Mumpower has agreed the rule doesn’t intend to ban residents from using cell phone cameras.

Wildlife and transportation agency representatives said they plan to eliminate uncertainty about taking cell phone photos of documents.

 

Insurance commissioner OK’s premium requests

NASHVILLE — Three companies lined up to sell insurance on the Obamacare exchange in Tennessee in 2018 have had their premium requests approved by the state’s insurance commissioner.

The Tennessean reports BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, Cigna and Oscar Health each received approval from Julie Mix McPeak, commissioner of the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance.

Cigna premiums will increase an average 42.1 percent, while BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee asked for 21 percent, most of which is attributed to uncertainty due to the ongoing debate over Obamacare. Oscar Health is new so there is no prior year comparison.

More than 80 percent of Tennesseans who buy individual insurance receive tax credit that offsets the premium costs.

Open enrollment begins Nov. 1 and runs through Dec. 15 — six weeks shorter than last year.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription