EDITION

Migrant children who have been separated from their families are being forced to recite America’s Pledge of Allegiance every morning, according to a Washington Post report.

The Casa Padre facility in Brownsville, Texas, is the largest migrant children’s shelter in the country, housing nearly 1,5000 boys. Some arrived as unaccompanied minors while others were separated from family members under the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” policy.

Every morning in a building that was once a Walmart, the children are required to stand and recite the Pledge of Allegiance to a country where they are being kept in an institution. They are required to recite the sentences in English, despite the fact that many of the children are unlikely to be able to understand the words.

“We tell them, ‘It’s out of respect,'” one employee, who asked for anonymity out of fear of losing her job, told The Post.

The Casa Padre shelter, run by Southwest Key, gained nationwide attention over the last few weeks. Government-issued photographs showed cramped sleeping quarters, murals of President Donald Trump, and children wearing barcodes that are scanned during mealtimes.

The children are only allowed to have two hours outside each day. On Saturday, a  teenage boy ran away from the facility.

Site highlights each day to your inbox.

Follow Business Insider Australia on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Instagram.

Comcast bests Fox with a $34 billion offer in the ongoing bidding war for Sky

Tesla 'whistleblower' files tip with the SEC

England is already in an amazing position for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar

The Australian dollar's been hosed

Buying 'Access' To A Major Airport's Security System Apparently Costs Just $13

Updates On Black Adam, Quantum And Woody, And More

The Dummy That Ruined Your Childhood Is Back In The First Goosebumps 2: Haunted Halloween Trailer

Thai Boys Were Reportedly Sedated And In A Semi-Conscious State During Rescue

Talk Amongst Yourselves

Spec Shootout: Microsoft Surface Go Vs iPad Vs Galaxy Tab S3

This Year's Banned Pokémon Anime Episode

Fine Art: Boss Fight

How To Use YouTube's Incognito Mode

Hump Day Deals: Free Android Apps, 25% Off eBay, Cheap Dell Laptops

ACCC Has A Plan To Make Electricity Cheaper

Help Teens De-Stress With These 'Getting Things Done' Hacks 