
Wednesday 11 July 2018



By Associated Press Reporter



June 22 2018 8:55 PM



A girl pictured on the cover of Time magazine was not separated from her mother despite the poignant image of the child standing alone weeping, US Border Patrol officials said.


Time attached a correction to the story, saying: “The original version of this story misstated what happened to the girl in the photo after she (was) taken from the scene. 

“The girl was not carried away screaming by US Border Patrol agents; her mother picked her up and the two were taken away together.”

The Time caption says the photo was taken when the girl and her mother were apprehended by Border Patrol officers on June 12 and the mother was being searched “before being sent to a processing center for possible separation”.

US Immigration and Customs Enforcement said on Friday that the mother, Sandra Sanchez, is being housed at one of the government’s three existing family detention facilities at the South Texas Family Residential Centre in Dilley, Texas, 230 miles north of McAllen.

ICE would not provide information on the girl citing privacy reasons of juveniles.

Sanchez, 32, was arrested by Border Patrol agents while travelling with the little girl under the zero tolerance policy that criminally charges anyone caught crossing the border illegally.

She was transferred to ICE custody on June 17, and is being housed at the South Texas Family Residential Centre in Dilley, according to a statement from ICE. Her immigration case is ongoing.

The agency said that she had been previously deported to Honduras in 2013, and she had illegally re-entered. ICE did not comment on the girl, citing privacy reasons. 

It is not clear what will happen to her daughter, who is almost two years old, but immigration officials have said the goal would be to keep the family together even if they are deported.

In Honduras, the girl’s father, Denis Varela, said he had not heard from his wife or daughter in almost three weeks, and Ms Sanchez took their daughter to the United States without telling him.

He says the Honduran foreign ministry also told him that his daughter is detained with her mother and the two have not been separated.

Mr Varela, a dock worker who lives in Puerto Cortes, Honduras, said that the ministry gave him the girl’s detainee identification number a couple of days ago.

The executive order signed this week by President Donald Trump stopped the separation of children from parents at the border, instead saying they should be detained together as their cases progress. 

There have been signs at the border that the zero tolerance policy was slowing, but Justice Department and Homeland Security officials say the policy has not been reversed.

A 1997 landmark settlement known as the Flores agreement, which generally bars the government from keeping children in immigration detention for more than 20 days, remains in place. 

Mr Trump is seeking to have the settlement overturned but the Department of Justice said on Wednesday that the 20-day policy essentially stays in effect until Congress or the courts take action to change that.


Press Association


By Alistair Mason, Press Association It seems like magic – but it’s actually just maths.

By Ken Ritter and Michelle L Price, Associated Press A US judge has effectively put the execution of a two-time killer on hold after a pharmaceutical company objected to the use of one of its drugs to put someone to death.

By Edd Dracott and Max McLean, Press Association Anyone who’s rubbed a balloon on their head knows static electricity is fun, but when you get a dog with a furry coat involved it’s so hilarious it might make you go viral.





Today's news headlines, directly to your inbox every morning.



Sign Up



What a difference a few weeks makes. 


Transport Minister... 


It seems like magic – but it’s actually just maths. 


A US judge has effectively put the execution of a... 


Anyone who’s rubbed a balloon on their head knows... 


Time travel is, as yet, not possible – and... 


Even in their wildest dreams, most England fans... 


Before kick-off against Croatia in the World Cup semi-... 


Firefighters and paramedics helped save a man’s life... 


The FTSE 100 ended Wednesday deep in the red as trade tensions sparked by Donald... 


No self-respecting footballer is seen without tattoos these days, but thanks to the... 


When an injured owl was found outside a school in... 


The 12 boys rescued from deep within a... 


Thailand's Navy SEALs release video shows the... 


Prince Harry has said football is 'most definitely'... 


A group of protesters have created a 'Trump... 


Britain's data watchdog intends to fine Facebook £500,000 for breaches of... 


A third rescue operation to bring out the remaining four boys and their football... 


A look back at some of Boris Johnson's... 


Prime Minister Theresa May has thanked David Davis and Boris Johnson in a... 


Over a hundred people are feared dead after heavy rainfall... 

© Independent.ie 