Scattered showers and thunderstorms. High near 90F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 69F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:54 pm

CARRABELLE, Fla. (AP) — In a story June 13 about inmates sickened by synthetic marijuana smuggled into a jail, The Associated Press erroneously referred to the drug as simply "marijuana" in the short headline.


A corrected version of the story is below:


6 Florida inmates ill after smoking smuggled synthetic pot


CARRABELLE, Fla. (AP) — A Florida woman arrested for trying to smuggle contraband into a state prison apparently completed her mission by distributing a highly-potent synthetic marijuana to inmates after she was booked into a county jail.


Six Franklin County Jail inmates were rushed to a hospital Monday, suffering from symptoms associated with K2. Sheriff A.J. Smith tells the News Herald that five inmates were treated and returned to the jail by Tuesday. The sixth was airlifted to Tallahassee and is in intensive care.


They say 56-year-old Vanda McElveen was strip-searched at the jail on Saturday, but officials didn't find the drugs. The sheriff says a female inmate later helped remove it from a body cavity. Inmates who smoked the drug Monday started vomiting, hallucinating and having convulsions. One was given CPR by jail staff.


Copyright 2018 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




