Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Six inmates were transferred to local hospitals Monday after suspected drug overdoses while in the Sumner County Jail.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Some inmates at the Sumner County Jail in Gallatin were hospitalized for ingesting a drug brought into the jail.
(Photo: DESSISLAVA YANKOVA / staff)

UPDATED: Six inmates who were transferred to local hospitals Monday after suspected drug overdoses while in the Sumner County Jail were released at 5 a.m. Tuesday. 


All inmates and staff have been medically cleared, according to an email from Chief Deputy Aaron Pickard with the Sumner County Sheriff's Office.


Investigators are working with state agencies to identify the substance that was ingested by the inmates. After the identity is confirmed, investigators will seek charges for the person responsible for smuggling the contraband into the jail.


According to a news release from the Sumner County Sheriff's Office, a woman was arrested and brought to the jail April 15, and at 6 a.m. Monday, other inmates in the same pod began to show signs of respiratory distress.


Six inmates were taken to the hospital for "the treatment of suspected drug overdose or for precautionary measures to prevent overdose," according to the release and a statement from Chief Deputy Aaron Pickard.


Hospital staff advised the Sheriff's Office that none of the inmates were at risk of death.


The jail is currently being decontaminated.


Pickard said Monday afternoon that four inmates were back in the jail, and two remained in the hospital for observation.


All inmates who were transported to the hospital were allegedly voluntary participants in sharing the substance that was brought into the jail, according to the release.


Sumner News Editor Amy Nixon can be reached at anixon@gannett.com or 615-946-7549.
 


 


 
