Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Hamilton County Jail will reach a “breaking point” sometime this year, Hamilton County Sheriff Jim Neil told the press Wednesday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Hamilton County jail at 'breaking point.' Sheriff wants to use closed Queensgate facility
    Amanda Rossmann

Queensgate Correctional  Facility closed in 2008 could provide a good solution to jail overcrowding according to Sheriff Jim NeilWhen the county closed the Queensgate jail it housed more than 800 prisoners. Photo shot  Wednesday February 14, 2018. 
(Photo: Cara Owsley/The Enquirer)Buy Photo

The Hamilton County jail will reach a “breaking point” sometime this year, Sheriff Jim Neil told the press Wednesday. 


His solution; Reopen the Queensgate jail, closed  a decade ago.


Neil summoned reporters to the Hamilton County Justice Center Wednesday to detail the overcrowding problems and put pressureon the county board of commissioners to find more jail space.  


If he can’t find another jail to take the overflow of prisoners, that might mean releasing more prisoners who are awaiting trial. 


The Queensgate Correctional  Facility - abandoned in 2008 - is still vacant and on the market for $1.2 million. 


More: From the archives: County shuts door to Queensgate jail


It opened as a jail in 1992 after the Hamilton County commissioners contracted with Nashville-based private prison firm, Corrections Corporation of America, to buy and renovate the property in a jail. It was formerly Kruse Hardware. 


Corrections Corporation of America still owns it. 


Hamilton County Sheriff Jim Neil sits in one of the pods at the jail and discusses the serious overcrowding issue in the jail (Photo: Scott Wartman/The Enquirer)

It housed more than 800 inmates in 2008 when financial pressures from Great Recession forced the county close it.


IN OTHER NEWS: Jury finds Briana Benson guilty of the murder of Madie Hart


“We’re going to come face-to-face with more offenders than we’ve ever had,” said Neil, seated at a metal table in one of the common areas in one of the cell blocks,  prisoners in cells looking on. “We need more space.”


Voters have twice voted down sales tax levies to pay for a new jail, once in 2006 and again in 2007.


A man walks past the old Queensgate Correctional Facility on Linn Street Wednesday February 14, 2018. The jail closed in 2008 could provide a good solution to jail overcrowding according to Sheriff Jim Neil, When the county closed the Queensgate jail it housed more than 800 prisoners. (Photo: Cara Owsley/The Enquirer, Cara Owsley/The Enquirer)

 


Last year, when the jail population soared to 1,611, Neil held a similar press blitz, declaring a state of emergency.


The jail on Wednesday had 1,422 prisoners. Built in 1985, the detention center is designed for 840.


Heroin is a big factor in the bulging number of inmates, Neil said.


He's looking for every space he can to put prisoners. The Butler County jail is housing 25 of Hamilton County's prisoners at a cost of $75 per prisoner per day. Some prisoners are sleeping on portable cots in common areas. 


This year will be worse, he said. Starting in July, the Hamilton County jail will house 200 to to 300 state prisoners as the state looks to cut its prison costs.  This was mandated by the Ohio General Assembly in the budget passed last year. 


Neil expects his jail could have 1,900 prisoners at one time during this summer. 


These prisoner numbers, however, were routine 10 years ago when the Queensgate jail was open. With the Queensgate and Justice Center facilities were both open, Hamilton County would often have 2,000 prisoners.


Hamilton County still has two small treatment centers used to house a combined total of about 170 prisoners: Turning Point on Reading Road and Talbert House in Walnut Hills.


The county doesn't own these and doesn't have discretion on who goes there. Judges sentence offenders to treatment at these facilities, the sheriff said. 


The first-term sheriff kept coming back to the idea of re-using the Queensgate facility. 


Neil suggested Queensgate could best be used for prisoners with special needs. Of the 1,422 prisoners, 800 have chronic medical issues, including 275 on medication for mental health problems.


Hamilton County Sheriff Jim Neil says he needs more money to deal with crowding at the Justice Center (Photo: Enquirer file)

But using the Queensgate facility raises questions of cost and maintenance among county commissioners. 


The building was in terrible shape 10 years ago when it closed, said Board of Commissioners President Todd Portune.


"It's sitting there, but it's not a turnkey operation right now," Portune said. "We can't just say, yes, we're going to go to Queensgate and voila, there's 200 more beds to address the issue."


Exactly how much work needs to be done and what it would cost isn't known, he said. A review of county facilities due soon will detail the condition of the building, he said. 


The building has a new roof put on within the past five years and is in good shape, said John Dwyer, owner of Camp Washington-based Dwyer Commercial Real Estate, who is marketing the building. 


"I believe, from an economic standpoint, from a citizen's standpoint, it could make a good, minimum security jail," Dwyer said.  


The county will also consider once again using the sixth floor of the courthouse, Portune said. The county had jail facilities in courthouses since the early 1800s and housed prisoners on the sixth floor as recently as 1987. 


It's been storage ever since, Portune said. 


In the meantime, the county is looking at ways to better treat drug addiction among offenders. 


Queensgate Correctional  Facility closed in 2008 could provide a good solution to jail overcrowding according to Sheriff Jim Neil.
The county closed the Queensgate jail, which housed more than 800 prisoners. Photo shot  Wednesday February 14, 2018. (Photo: Cara Owsley/The Enquirer)

The Hamilton County Heroin Coalition is looking at ways to increase the pre-arrest diversion programs that puts some drug offenders in treatment instead of jail, commissioners said.


The county has asked the state for $3 million to retrofit the current Hamilton County jail with 80 drug treatment beds. The design has been done and it's ready to go as soon as the state gives the nod, said Commissioner Denise Driehaus. 


"We are working on strategies to keep folks out of the jail to begin with or to treat them differently in a different space," Driehaus said


Whether that will be enough to address the issue, no one could say Wednesday.


1869– The Hamilton County Community Correctional Institution, known as the Workhouse, was built in Camp Washington for $470,832.


1972–Hamilton County sued for overcrowding and poor conditions at the Workhouse


1985–The 12-story Hamilton County Justice Center with the current jail is built


1987–County stops housing prisoners on the sixth floor of the courthouse. 


1990–The Workhouse is razed. A plan to build a 1,500 bed jail on that site falls through due to cost overruns.


1992–Queensgate Correctional Facility opens in former Kruse Hardware building.


2006–Hamilton County voters reject a sales tax levy to pay for a new jail with 57 percent voting no. 


2007–Voters again reject a sales tax levy, this time with 56 percent voting no.


2008–Queensgate Correctional Facility closes amid budget cuts.


2017–Hamilton County Sheriff Jim Neil declares a state of emergency as the population at the Justice Center spikes to 1,611.


 


 


 


 
