Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Of the 176 inmates in the Cheatham County Jail on Feb. 5, Jail Administrator J.J. Hannah estimated that as many as 100 to 125 of them were re-offenders.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Rutherford County jail Inmate, Antwan Gilliam explains how the Rutherford County Sheriff's programs improved his life.
    HELEN COMER/DNJ

Cheatham County Jail
(Photo: Times file photo)

Of the 176 inmates in the Cheatham County Jail on Feb. 5, Jail Administrator J.J. Hannah estimated that as many as 100 to 125 of them were re-offenders.


He also estimated Cheatham County’s recidivism rate rang in at approximately 75 to 80 percent. That puts it above the state’s rate, which was recorded at 47.1 percent in 2016 and 50.5 percent in 2010, according to a Tennessee Department of Corrections news release issued last year.


Recidivism is generally defined as an inmate’s tendency to re-offend, thus reentering the jail or prison population. According to the Department of Corrections release, recidivism was considered a felony offender reentering prison at least three years after his or her previous release in the 2010 and 2016 data.


The Bureau of Justice Statistics data showed recidivism was highest among males, blacks and young adults. 


More:Number of freed Tennessee inmates returning to prison high but has improved


Hannah said, however, that as far as any trends go, there’s “no rhyme or reason” to re-offenders revolving through the doors of the Cheatham County Jail.


Cheatham County Sheriff Mike Breedlove, who acknowledged that the recidivism rate in the Cheatham County Jail is “very high,” said the already-overcrowded facility doesn’t have room to hold programs in-house which would combat recidivism, and jails that have implemented strong programs have seen drops in re-offenders entering the jail.


Cheatham County Sheriff Mike Breedlove (Photo: Submitted photo)

According to a 2013 report presented by the RAND corporation, a nonprofit, nonpartisan research organization that aims to pinpoint solutions to public policy, inmates who have resources such as educational and vocational training while incarcerated are "significantly less likely" to go back behind bars.


The report states that inmates who participate in programs are 43 percent less likely to return to prison after their release, according to the study which examined more than three decades of recidivism data.


Data also suggest that it's more cost efficient to offer programs for inmates than to rehouse them in the jail or prison again later.


The U.S. Departments of Justice and Education backed the study, the report states.


"We found strong evidence that correctional education plays a role in reducing recidivism,” Lois Davis, lead researcher and a RAND senior policy researcher, said in the report. ”


Although the Cheatham County Jail may not be able to offer programs in its facility, other departments in Tennessee have had better luck.


The Rutherford County Sheriff's Office recently renewed a focus on offering programs for inmates to combat recidivism, as reported in a Daily News Journal series published in December.


In the Rutherford County Adult Detention Center, volunteer-run classes for inmates at no cost to the county are held in former visitation rooms in the detention center and upcoming exterior buildings, one story states.


For example, inmates may participate in prep courses and take a High School Equivalency Test, or HiSET, a newer name for a GED program. RCSO staff confirmed in that story that 50 inmates completed the program and passed the exam in 2017.


"We don’t need bigger jails, we need fewer inmates," RCSO Sgt. Joe Scott said in the story. 


The Cheatham County Jail could benefit from a fewer number of inmates in an overcrowded facility with an unclear course of action to combat the problem.


The 116-bed Cheatham County Jail hit a “record number of inmates” at about 209 on Nov. 27 and remained above 200 for several days, Breedlove said previously.


According to a previous Times story, the jail typically holds about 170 inmates at a given time.


“We are in the process of sending requested jail records to CTAS Jim Hart who is set to do the final study on what the county needs are and projections for the future,” Breedlove previously said in a text message to the Times, specifying that the study should take four to six months. “The hope is to have a decision in place by the commission before the August election.”


When asked about the impact of recidivism on the jail’s overcrowding, Hannah said the more people are in the jail, the worse problems could be.


“(We) don’t get a whole lot of new faces in there,” said Hannah, who has worked in his job for about 18 years. “(It’s) been the same the whole time I’ve been there.”


He said one of the most significant problems boils down to offenders violating probation terms, failing a drug or alcohol test or missing a court date. But at the end of the day, he said, oftentimes there’s “no helping them unless they want to help themselves.


“Not everybody that is in jail is a bad person,” Hannah said. “(They just) made mistakes.”


Kelly Fisher, reporter for the Ashland City Times, can be reached at KPFisher@gannett.com, 615-801-3866 or on Twitter at @KellyPFisher.
