In October 2016, then 18-year-old Alex (whose name has been changed for this story for privacy purposes) crossed into the United States after a long journey from Honduras. He was running from violent gangs that frequently targeted him for being gay, according to the Southern Poverty Law Center. He hoped to gain asylum and a fresh start, but instead, Alex was detained by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement and transported to Stewart Detention Center in Lumpkin, Georgia, SPLC says.


More than 11 months later, he remains in the facility, where he claims he is being sexually harassed and assaulted by staff and detainees due to his sexual orientation.


“I do not feel safe anywhere in here,” he tells Teen Vogue on a phone call from inside Stewart. “I didn’t come here [to the U.S.] to work; I came here to try to survive. I never thought I would be detained for so long for trying to save my own life.”


Although Alex protested the detention center’s abusive environment, the only solution offered was a move to solitary confinement. His allegations against a guard’s obscene behavior were met with little concern for the young man’s safety, according to Brian Hoffman, an attorney with the SPLC representing Alex.


“CoreCivic, the private company that operates the detention center, conducted an investigation but did not interview witnesses and did not allow [Alex] to review the camera footage of the harassment himself,” Hoffman tells Teen Vogue. “They took no action against the guard.”


Cases like Alex’s are not uncommon. Because the immigration detention system is a complex web of judicial proceedings, people often find themselves in detention without knowing how long they will be there or what actions they need to take to be released. A government-mandated quota requires a minimum of 34,000 people to be detained at all times. Children who are accused of violating immigration laws don't even have a right to legal representation, and according to Christina Fialho, co-founder and executive director of national nonprofit Community Initiatives for Visiting Immigrants in Confinement (CIVIC), young people face an especially challenging system of custody.


The Homeland Security Act of 2002 requires unaccompanied minors to be placed under the care of the Office of Refugee Resettlement, which received 59,170 referrals, primarily from Central American countries, in fiscal year 2016. However, approximately 500 to 700 teenagers still end up in locked juvenile detention centers that contract with ICE, such as the Yolo County juvenile hall in California.


“These kids are not being held for the punishment for a crime or even in a pretrial criminal setting,” Fialho tells Teen Vogue. “This is purely civil immigration detention, but they’re being held behind bars.” In the past, CIVIC also worked with underage immigrants who were sent to adult facilities for lacking documentation that proved their age.


In three family detention centers in Texas and Pennsylvania, children as young as two weeks old  are incarcerated with their mothers. U.S. District Judge Dolly Gee has ruled more than once that family detention is overly restrictive and involves poor conditions, but data from August 2016 shows that more than 2,000 women and children still resided in such facilities. Although the Obama administration pushed to issue child-care licenses last year, Lisa Graybill of the SPLC tells Teen Vogue that her previous work as legal director of the ACLU of Texas revealed traumatizing conditions within these detention centers.


“Kids were being told, ‘If you cry too much or if you play too loudly or if you don’t do what we say, we will take you away from your mom,’” she says, citing ACLU court records. “It’s abominable. It’s what you get when you put people who are not child-care providers in charge of child-care.”


In fact, Graybill says that staff working beyond what they are certified to do is a recurring theme throughout all immigration detention centers. The result, according to Graybill, is inadequate health care, contaminated food, and physical and sexual assault that is rarely investigated. According to ICE records obtained by CIVIC, an underage girl in a Texas family detention center was found to have physical trauma after an alleged sexual assault, but her case was dismissed.


For immigrant teens who are over 18, like Alex, being housed in adult immigration detention facilities also means receiving no educational skills or resources while waiting for trial, says SPLC's Graybill. Alex's asylum case was denied 254 days into detainment, although the judge’s decision was not formally announced for another 82 days, according to SPLC's Hoffman. Between appeals, there’s a chance he could spend six to eight additional months in Stewart, says Hoffman, but that doesn’t stop him from thinking about what he’ll do with his freedom. Over a scratchy phone line, Alex says, “I want to study so I can maybe become a lawyer and advocate for people’s rights. I hope this will be a voice for change because a good society is founded upon respect for human rights."


This story is part of Kids Incarcerated, a Teen Vogue series on youth incarceration in the United States for National Youth Justice Awareness Month.


Related: Why Young Girls Die Behind Bars


I Was a Teen Behind Bars — Here's How I Survived the System


Youth Incarceration in the United States, by the Numbers


Why Some Colleges Can't Ask About Students' Criminal History Anymore


I'm on Probation and It's Like Another Form of Incarceration


Why Disabled Youth Are More at Risk of Being Incarcerated


How the School-to-Prison Pipeline Works


Bail Is a Broken System in Need of Reform


How Incarceration Impacts LGBTQ Youth's Mental Health


How Sex Offender Registries Impact Youth


Why Having Police in Schools May Be a Risk For Undocumented Students

© 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and  Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement  (updated 5/25/18). Teen Vogue  may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. Your California Privacy Rights.  The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 


CNWN Collection