We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration.

Around 600 asylum seekers have refused to leave the Manus Island detention center in Papua New Guinea, defying attempts by the Australian government to close the facility. Power and water supplies have been cut off.





Hundreds of asylum seekers barricaded inside the controversial Manus Island center were without electricity and drinking water on Wednesday, as the Australian government urged them to leave. 

The center was declared closed on Tuesday following the Papua New Guinea Supreme Court's ruling last year that the detention of asylum seekers there was unconstitutional.

Some 600 men residing at the facility have refused to leave, saying the alternative shelters provided are less safe and may leave them open to attacks from locals.

The Sydney-based Refugee Action Coalition said the removal of generators overnight meant the center was without power and toilets operating on electrical pumps weren't working.

"They took generators this morning. There is not power in whole centre. The toilets do not work. All refugees woke up again in fear," Behrouz Boochani, a Kurdish journalist held there, wrote on Twitter.

Last-ditch appeal

The Coalition, a group of lawyers representing the remaining asylum seekers, has applied for a last-minute injunction to prevent the facility from being shuttered and allow the men to be relocated to a third country. A ruling is expected on Wednesday.

Australian Immigration Minister Peter Dutton said there was no reason for asylum seekers to stay at the center because they have access to temporary residences nearby.

"All have been informed for a considerable period of time that there is safe and secure alternate accommodation where health and other services will be maintained," Dutton told Reuters news agency in an emailed statement.

Read more:US will honor 'dumb' Australia refugee deal

'Humanitarian emergency'

Papua New Guinean authorities have said that while they will not forcefully remove anyone, those remaining at the center after its transfer to the defense forces on Wednesday would be considered to be trespassing on a military base.

They have deployed extra police to the town of Lorengau where alternative housing for the asylum seekers is located, but angry locals have threatened to blockade them. The relocation is only a temporary measure while the United States vets asylum seekers it is considering accepting under a refugee swap deal. 

Read more: Australia to add 'values' test to citizenship exam

Nick McKim, a Greens lawmaker in Australia's senate who has visited Manus Island, urged authorities to keep the facility open.

"This is a humanitarian emergency. Drinking water has been cut off. There is no food apart from what the refugees have been able to put aside in the last few days," McKim told Australian broadcaster Sky News.

'The only humane thing'

The facility formed an integral part of Australia's expensive offshore detention program known as "Sovereign Borders."

Under the country's hardline border security policy, asylum seekers attempting to reach Australian shores by boat are sent to detention centers at Papua New Guinea's Manus Island and Nauru in the South Pacific.

The UN and human rights organizations have criticized the harsh treatment asylum seekers experience when they arrive at these offshore processing centers.

Read more: Australia moves towards lifetime entrance ban on offshore refugees

Last week, Amnesty International's Director of Global Issues, Audrey Gaughran, called on the government to "accept its responsibility to protect the human rights" of those seeking refuge under its jurisdiction.

"Shuttling refugees from one center to another is simply papering over the cracks in an abusive system," Gaughran said. "Authorities in Australia should do the only humane thing and immediately bring the refugees and asylum seekers on Manus Island to safety in Australia."

Most of the detainees on Manus Island come from Afghanistan, Iran, Myanmar, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Syria.

In late 2014, with the war in Syria approaching its fourth year and Islamic State making gains in the north of the country, the exodus of Syrians intensified. At the same time, others were fleeing violence and poverty in countries such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Eritrea, Somalia, Niger and Kosovo.

Vast numbers of Syrian refugees had been gathering in border-town camps in neighboring Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan since 2011. By 2015, with the camps full to bursting and residents often unable to find work or educate their children, more and more people decided to seek asylum further afield.

In 2015 an estimated 1.5 million people made their way on foot from Greece towards western Europe via the "Balkan route". The Schengen Agreement, which allows passport-free travel within much of the EU, was called into question as refugees headed towards the wealthier European nations. 

Tens of thousands of refugees were also attempting the perilous journey across the Mediterranean on overcrowded boats. In April 2015, 800 people of various nationalities drowned when a boat traveling from Libya capsized off the Italian coast. This was to be just one of many similar tragedies - by the end of the year, nearly 4,000 refugees were reported to have died attempting the crossing.

Countries along the EU's external border struggled to cope with the sheer number of arrivals. Fences were erected in Hungary, Slovenia, Macedonia and Austria. Asylum laws were tightened and several Schengen area countries introduced temporary border controls.

Critics of German Chancellor Angela Merkel's "open-door" refugee policy claimed it had made the situation worse by encouraging more people to embark on the dangerous journey to Europe. By September 2016, Germany had also introduced temporary checks on its border with Austria.

In early 2016, the EU and Turkey signed an agreement under which refugees arriving in Greece could be sent back to Turkey. The deal has been criticised by human rights groups and came under new strain following a vote by the European Parliament in November to freeze talks on Turkey's potential accession to the EU.

With anti-immigration sentiment in Europe growing, governments are still struggling to reach a consensus on how to handle the continuing refugee crisis. Attempts to introduce quotas for the distribution of refugees among EU member states have largely failed. Conflicts in the Middle East and elsewhere show no signs coming to an end, and the death toll from refugee sea crossings is on the rise. 

 Author: Rachel Stewart 

nm/ (AP, dpa, Reuters)

A first group of refugees from Australian-run Pacific camps are being flown to the United States from Papua New Guinea. For years, rights groups have condemned Canberra’s detention camp practices. (26.09.2017)
  



Vice President Mike Pence has said the US will honor a refugee swap deal with Australia. Pence is in Australia to patch up a rocky start to relations under the Trump administration. (22.04.2017)
  



Australian PM Malcolm Turnbull has announced a raft of stricter citizenship measures, raising the bar for English competency. Migrants will also have to wait longer to apply and accept "Australian values." (20.04.2017)
  



Amid reports of impending closure and an uncertain resettlement deal with the US, migrants seeking asylum in Australia are stuck in Manus Island's detention center and know alarmingly little about their future. (16.03.2017)
  



Australia has announced plans to ban all migrants arriving illegally by boat from ever entering the country. The move would represent the toughening of an already harsh refugee policy. (30.10.2016)
  



Protesters have abseiled down the front of Australia's Parliament House with a banner calling for the closure of refugee camps. They demanded better treatment for asylum seekers. (01.12.2016)
  



From escalating violence in the Middle East and Africa to incoherent asylum policy at home - DW looks at how the EU has found itself in the midst of a refugee crisis. (19.12.2016)
  



Hungary detains its asylum-seekers in transit zones on the EU's external border. Would that approach work on Germany's border with Austria, as the country's conservative leaders are planning? DW's Bernd Riegert reports. 


As Bulgaria concludes its six-month EU presidency, its foreign minister tells DW that no EU member state was prepared for the refugee crisis. 


A new resolution in the European Parliament is calling on EU countries to give refuge to migrants from Venezuela. The UN's migration agency estimates that 200,000 Venezuelans are already living in Spain. 


DW News presents the most important news — in brief, quickly and up-to-date.  



© 2018 Deutsche Welle |
Privacy Policy |
Legal notice |
Contact
| Mobile version
