

By Darryl Pinckney


September 19, 2017

The powerful and very personal documentary “Strong Island” is the story of a black family that could not sustain the blow of racial injustice and fell apart.

On April 7, 1992, in Central Islip, a Long Island suburb of New York
City, William Ford, Jr., a twenty-four-year-old man, was shot and killed
by Mark Reilly, a nineteen-year-old auto-body-shop employee. Reilly had
held onto Ford’s girlfriend’s car for longer than the couple had
expected the repairs to take. His tow truck had hit them two months
before, and a deal was struck whereby the auto shop would fix the damage
if they didn’t file a police report. After an argument over the delays,
Ford again went to the auto shop and was killed. The grand jury declined
to indict Reilly for manslaughter, accepting the district attorney’s
findings that, afraid for his life, he had shot Ford in self-defense.
More than twenty years later, the investigating officer on the case
assured Yance Ford, the director of “Strong Island,” that he had left no stone unturned at the time; it was just an “unfortunate thing.”


In Yance Ford’s powerful, disturbing, and very personal documentary,
details are important. What happened in 1992 was the murder of Yance’s
own brother, a black teacher, William Ford, Jr., who grew up in the
black enclave of Central Islip. He was shot in the chest with a rifle by
Mark Reilly, a young white man. The shop’s owner had a record of running
a shady business. William Ford had no record and was about to take the
entrance exam to be a corrections officer. Ford’s mother, Barbara
Dunmore Ford, an educator who founded Rosewood, a school for women on
Rikers Island, says in “Strong Island” that she will believe until her
dying day that the grand jury of twenty-three white people did not
return a true bill because her son was a black man. As the documentary
makes plain, the grand jury didn’t care to find out what really
happened. The police and the Suffolk County district attorney’s office
shielded the white youth immediately, never doubting his testimony that
he was frightened of Ford, a short but stocky young black man. As Yance
Ford observes to the camera, William Ford, Jr., became the prime suspect
in his own murder.


“Strong Island” is the story of a black family that could not sustain
the blow of racial injustice and fell apart. They were doing everything
right, and then were destroyed by all the things that they thought
they’d left behind in black history. Barbara Dunmore Ford remembers that
Yance Ford’s grandmother had been forced to leave school in the fourth
grade, in South Carolina, to go to work stripping tobacco. Dunmore Ford
was herself a girl when she taught her own mother to read and write. The
experience gave her a love of teaching. Her father died of an asthma
attack, unattended in the colored section of a hospital waiting room.
When Dunmore Ford recalls how much she and her husband, William Ford,
Sr., loved New York City, implicit in that is their escape from the
segregation of nineteen-sixties Charleston, South Carolina.


William Ford, Sr. had hoped to be a draftsman, but in order to take care
of his family he gave up school and became an M.T.A. motorman, working the
night shift. He wanted to get his family out of the city, and
real-estate developers in Central Islip were looking for black
government employees who could afford to be homeowners. Dunmore Ford
tells us that she didn’t like it. The elderly Jewish women in Brooklyn
had been neighborly; for her, Islip was moving back into a segregated
community. “It draws a line around your life,” she says. The children
had a good time, while the parents labored to keep them in Catholic
schools, because, in reality, the public schools weren’t good enough,
although the property taxes were high. “My father just believed in my
mother’s ability to do anything,” Yance Ford says, and the children were
brought up to believe that “our principal job in life was to love each
other.” William and Yance’s younger sister Lauren Ford remembers how
protective her brother was, and that she was the first person to tell
her that she was pretty.

Since Trayvon Martin’s killing, we have become familiar with the
testimony of black parents concerning the talk they must have with their
teen-age sons, the one that tries to prepare them as young black males
for encounters with the police. It’s a talk rooted in black history, and
it cuts across class lines. The generational exchange that was once
portrayed in black drama as beaten-down old heads pleading with defiant,
reckless youth has been revised as a responsibility of black tutelage, a
passing on of necessary survival techniques. Don’t talk back; above all,
don’t run. It is heartbreaking to hear Ford’s mother reproach herself
for not having had that talk with her older son, for telling her
children to judge people by their character, not by the color of their
skin. She wonders how she could have been so wrong. “I did William a
great disservice in raising him the way we did,” she says. Perhaps she
means that she hadn’t warned him about what white people could get away
with when it came to their dealings with black people. Her son had
become frustrated as a customer, forgetting all about inherited white
resentment of black anger.


“Strong Island” tells either of a racist coverup or of the racism that
determined which questions the white investigators asked in William
Ford, Jr.,’s killing. His friend Kevin Myers, who was outside the body
shop when the shooting occurred, was prepared to testify in court that
the auto mechanic had had no reason to be fearful during either of his
two confrontations with Ford, even though Dunmore Ford herself had been
“disrespected” by the mechanic when she and Ford’s girlfriend came by to
check on the car. Ford and Reilly were never alone in the shop; Ford was
not armed, but during the first confrontation at the business he had
picked up and brandished a car door, to some laughter in the shop.
Detectives seemed only interested in asking the friend how much he
himself weighed, and how much Ford weighed—as if to gauge how much of a
physical threat they were. Early on in the film, Yance Ford says, “I am
unwilling to accept that someone else gets to say who Williams was. And
if you’re uncomfortable with me asking these questions, you should
probably get up and go.” Racism is character assassination.


The family understood that what a D.A. tells a grand jury is crucial.
Outside of the courtroom, they were the targets of intimidation by an
unfamiliar car that often parked across the street from their house, and
by phone calls in the middle of the night, every night; nevertheless,
inside the courtroom they expected justice. What do you do when the
system fails you? The tragedy left the Fords in some deep way unable to
comfort one another. We get the feeling that parts of them retreated
inside themselves, away from family connection. William Ford, Sr.,
suffered a stroke the year after his son’s killing. He died before Yance
Ford began work on “Strong Island,” and his is the other absence mourned
in this film. Dunmore Ford died during the making of the documentary, an
event that becomes a part of story. Yance Ford’s documentary is about
trying to establish what happened the night that William Ford, Jr., was
killed, and what happened during the investigation, but also what
happened to the Ford family afterward. The easiest way to deal with
black people is to ignore them; the easiest way to cope with pain is not
to speak of it, even to the self.


The day he was killed, William Ford, Jr., had been a witness at a
high-profile trial. A white assistant district attorney in Brooklyn had
been shot during a holdup at an A.T.M., and it was William Ford,
Jr., who had chased and tackled the gunman. It would be an insult to
call this an irony. It’s impossible to ignore who the surviving Fords in
“Strong Island” are: Barbara Dunmore Ford, Lauren Ford, and Yance Ford
are gripping in everything they say. A summary of the case gives no
sense of the experience of watching “Strong Island,” in which the visual
narrative, put together with subtlety and refinement, unfolds from the
story itself. That story is handed from person to person, tied together
by the voice of Yance Ford, who, at different moments in the film, reads
from the last pages of William Ford, Jr.,’s journal, and from his
autopsy report. Here are home movies, sixteenth-birthday parties or
college graduations, and photographs from the nineteen-seventies and
eighties, Polaroids that have turned into a family archive. Those are
Yance Ford’s hands shuffling the photographs, laying them out, and Yance
Ford’s voice interrogating the past, face tightly framed. It would be
cowardly of the viewer to look away. The film is a form of justice.
“Strong Island” is so quiet, so dignified—if that is not too Booker T.
Washington a thing to say. There is no hint of Rodney King or the
gangsta rap of that time, 1992, the year of William Ford, Jr.,’s death.
Respectful attention must be paid, because grief is in the room.

Darryl Pinckney is the author of, most recently, the novel “Black Deutschland.”


Sign up for the New Yorker Recommends newsletter and get expert recommendations every week from the worlds of film, literature, and music.


By John Cassidy

By Jeffrey Toobin

By Andy Borowitz

By Brian Phillips

By Sarah Schmelling

How Black Lives Matter Is Resisting Trump


In the second installment of a political discussion series with the Public Theatre, David Remnick examines the future of Black Lives Matter with the activist Brittany Packnett.

By Vinson Cunningham


By Rachel Aviv


By John Cassidy


By Jeffrey Toobin
