By Jared Gilmour



                                    jgilmour@mcclatchy.com
                                


                        
                            December 18, 2017 09:06 PM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

The sheriff in Teller County, Colo. had a vehicle to sell earlier this year, so he posted an ad for the car on Craigslist.

Then Sheriff Jason Mikesell got a text from a prospective buyer making him an offer he probably wasn’t expecting: Four pounds of “homegrown black market” marijuana in exchange for the car, Fox 21 reports.

Needless to say, 39-year-old Shawn Langley of Vail, Colo. didn’t realize he was bidding on the sheriff’s vehicle when he made the illegal offer, according to police. Langley even sent pictures of his “homegrown” product and boasted about its quality to the sheriff, KRDO reports.

Then, on Nov. 28 around 7:30 p.m., Langley and an accomplice, Jane Cravens, went to Woodland Park, Colo., where they had planned to swap the marijuana for the vehicle, according to police. But instead, the two alleged drug dealers were arrested by the Teller County Sheriff's Office and Metro Vice Narcotics Unit, KKTV reports.

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

Both Langley and Cravens were taken to the the Teller County Jail, where they were booked on narcotics charges, according to jail records.

Authorities seized the four pounds of marijuana, as well as the suspects’ car, according to KOAA.

Though recreational marijuana is legal in Colorado, adult residents of the state are only allowed to grow six marijuana plants per person, according to the state government. It’s also illegal for anyone under 21 to use the drug.

Earlier this year, Gov. John Hickenlooper (D-Colo.) signed a law to channel about $6 million in marijuana tax revenue a year into investigating black-market marijuana operations, the Associated Press reports. 

“We don’t want people to say they’re trying to grow for medical purposes, or licensed recreational uses, and instead they’re shipping it out of state,” Hickenlooper said in June, according to AP.



A close-up look at Forbidden Farms' marijuana growing operation in Shelton and the processing facility on the Tacoma Tideflats in Washington. Owned by the Balduff brothers Garrett and Taylor, the premium producer even supplies cannabis connoisseur 







                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    