
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Daniel Nations’ legal problems are mounting.

He was arrested this week in Teller County on suspicion of illegally possessing a weapon and now faces charges in El Paso County related to the reported hatchet threats against mountain bikers in the Mount Herman area.

He has been accused of felony menacing with a real or simulated weapon and reckless endangerment, according to court records. Arrest records detailing his connection to the threats were sealed.

The El Paso County Sheriff’s Office had previously named Nations a suspect in the threats based on the vehicle he was driving, which matched witness descriptions.

“We do anticipate more charges related to the menacing cases,” Sheriff’s Office spokeswoman Jacqueline Kirby said.

Colorado is not the only state where Nations, a convicted sex offender, faces charges.

Indiana authorities Wednesday also cited Nations for failing to register his new address after disappearing in May. His last known address was a motel in Greenwood, Ind., south of Indianapolis, but when police checked on him in July they learned he’d moved out May 12 and had not registered anywhere else in Indiana or any other state.

His booking information at Teller County jail Thursday listed his address as “Transient, CO.”

While Nations has not been accused in any other crimes, authorities are looking at him as a possible suspect in three murders in two states, including the shooting death of a local mountain biker.


Tim Watkins was found dead in the Mount Herman area Sept. 17, the same area where Nations reportedly was threatening other bikers with a hatchet.

Indiana authorities also have said they are looking into Nations’ possible connection to the murder of two teens in Delphi. Nations resembles a composite sketch of the murder suspect.

Nations remains in the Teller County jail on a $2,000 bond. El Paso County is seeking a $10,000 bond in the menacing case, court records show.

To read more of this story go to gazette.com