SALINAS (CBS SF) — A man was arrested on suspicion of robbing a Wells Fargo Bank when he was spotted nearby eating a sandwich and counting a large sum of cash by an off-duty Salinas police officer later in the day, authorities said.

(Salinas Police Dept.)

Salinas police said the suspect, 47-year-old Marcus Trujillo, had allegedly robbed the bank at 1903 Natividad Road in Salinas around 3:50 p.m. Tuesday, handing a note to the teller asking for cash while claiming he had a gun.

Bank employees gave police a description of Trujillo, but he was not found in the immediate area after the robbery.

At 6 p.m. Tuesday, an off-duty Salinas officer getting dinner at Ike’s Love and Sandwiches on North Main Street – about five-minutes from the Wells Fargo – noticed Trujillo, who matched the suspect description and was counting a large sum of money. The officer called 911, and other officers arrived on the scene to detain Trujillo.

Police said the investigation also revealed Trujillo first went to a nearby pizza restaurant and asked employees to use the restroom, offering to pay them $100 after being given permission. The offer was refused and Trujillo gave an employee $50 for being honest, police said.

Trujillo also purchased two pizzas and a beer with a $100 bill before deciding he wanted a sandwich from Ike’s instead, police said.

Witnesses confirmed Trujillo matched the suspect’s description before he was booked into the Monterey County Jail.

This guy is so dumb on so many levels!  He got a few hundred bucks so he started to flaunt it.  No wonder he’s poor.  Stupid people can’t handle money responsibly.  Just look at Dem-run California.

Please log in using one of these methods to post your comment:


			
			You are commenting using your Google+ account.			
				( Log Out / 
				Change )
			
			
		


			
			You are commenting using your Twitter account.			
				( Log Out / 
				Change )
			
			
		


			
			You are commenting using your Facebook account.			
				( Log Out / 
				Change )
			
			
		

Connecting to %s

 Notify me of new comments via email.


 Notify me of new posts via email.


				
				

			



