
    
        
            By Corey W. McDonald

cmcdonald@jjournal.com

 The Jersey Journal

BAYONNE -- A city man was sentenced to 46 months in prison yesterday for robbing a BCB Bank in Jersey City in 2016.

Patrick O'Boyle, 60, had his sentence imposed in Newark federal court after entering a guilty plea in November to one count of bank robbery. He was also sentenced to three years of supervised release.

On May 25, 2016, O'Boyle approached the teller of the BCB Bank on Washington Street and demanded all "your 100s, 50s, and 20s, and make it quick because my car is double parked outside."

O'Boyle, 59 at the time, held his left arm to his side as if he had something under his sweatshirt, which the teller thought might have been a gun, authorities said.

He walked out with more than $1,200.

He was quickly apprehended on the day of the robbery by police after a description of him was broadcast over the police radio. Bank staff identified O'Boyle as the man who carried out the robbery.

O'Boyle has a history of robbing Hudson County banks.

According to previous reports, O'Boyle went inside a JP Morgan Chase Bank on Washington Street on Nov. 23, 2010, walked up to a teller and said, "Are you ready for Thanksgiving? This is a stick-up. Make it quick," and made a gesture that suggested he had a weapon.

He walked out carrying $6,000, but was arrested after boarding a Hudson Bergen Light Rail train following the robbery.

Two days later, he was charged with a Nov. 10, 2010 robbery at a Capitol One Bank on Washington Street. The bank was crowded when O'Boyle arrived, so he left to have lunch with a friend. He returned later, found the bank empty, and approached a teller and said "This is a robbery, put all the money in the bag."

O'Boyle pleaded guilty to two counts of bank robbery in September 2010 and was was later sentenced to 31 months in jail with three years of supervised release. He was released in June 2015.

He also has three prior arrests, four violations of probation and a federal conviction.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        