 Posted By: Johnny Jet





This is a sponsored post.


Arguably the most beautiful beaches in the United States can be found on Florida’s west coast. The locals describe the white sand as sugar-like, and although that sounds sweet, in my opinion the description really should be flour-like since it’s that much softer.


My favorite beach town on Florida’s west coast is Clearwater Beach. Clearwater has hotels for every budget including some new luxurious ones that are all relatively inexpensive, family-friendly and easy to get to.


Clearwater Beach will always hold a special place in my heart since it’s where I popped the BIG question to my then-girlfriend six years ago. We went back for the first time in November to speak at a conference (the TMS Family Travel Conference) with our one-year-old and it happened to be the place where he mastered walking. So it’s now special for our whole family.


While there I couldn’t find a lot of good information on where to go, stay and eat, so I did some firsthand research and interviewed a few locals (including an on-duty police officer). Below is the sum of that research: an insider’s guide to Clearwater Beach, Florida. If you want to add anything, please leave a comment at the bottom. (Note: All directions are from the Wyndham Grand, so just change the starting point to the hotel or address you are coming from.)


To and from Tampa International Airport The closest airport to Clearwater Beach is Tampa International Airport (TPA) at 21 miles (30 minutes without traffic). An uberX is the cheapest way to get to and from, as a one-way ride is only $27. If you plan on doing a lot of exploring then you’ll want to rent a car. FYI: The next-closest major airport is Orlando International Airport (MCO) at 109 miles. If you’re thinking about visiting the theme parks while in town, you might want to save for the end and fly out of MCO to cut down your driving time.


Tip: Sometimes a multi-city plane ticket or two one-ways can be cheaper than a traditional roundtrip ticket.


Florida Free Rides That’s right: You can get all around Clearwater Beach, Island Estates and Sand Key without ever having to drive again, and it’s all free! FloridaFreeRides.com—a local transportation service that runs from 9am to 3am, seven days a week—offers the service. Just call 727-424-5458 for a free ride.


Clearwater Ferry Taxi Service Clearwater Ferry Taxi Service is the best way to enjoy Clearwater Beach while avoiding traffic and parking issues. Tickets are available for purchase onboard. Adults: $4 each way. Children (4 to 12): $2 each way.


 





Luxury hotels











Mid-tier hotels 


Budget hotels


Once you find a place to stay, the next step is where to eat…


 





 





 





If you’re feeling lazy like I am sometimes and you don’t want to bother getting in the car (or walk), you can have your food delivered in Clearwater (as in many places). Fortunately, there are multiple food delivery services available. While I was there I used Uber Eats (get $5 off your first two orders with my code: eats-uberjohnnyjet). Our food came within 25 minutes and was fantastic. It’s a great way to experience local food without the effort. It’s also much cheaper than room service (and better food).


 





Renting an apartment or just need to stock up on some goods? Clearwater has several grocery stores to choose from. If you’re on the beach then Surf Style Island Market will probably be the closest as they have a couple of locations on the beach. There’s also a Mega Walgreens with a mini grocery store not cheap though our two bananas were $0.99. For a real grocery store go to Publix across the bridge. Directions.





If you need to wash your clothes and your hotel doesn’t offer washing machines for guests to use (the Hyatt, Residence Inn and Wyndham Time Shares all do), you can go to Clean Jeans Laundry (575 Mandalay Avenue; 727-290-7940). That’s what I did. Clean Jeans will pick up your clothes from your hotel before 9am and drop them back off after 5pm for $5 extra. You can also drop your stuff off anytime for $1.25 a pound. There’s usually a three-hour turnaround.


 








 





Phillies (and Yankees) Spring Training If you’re a Philadelphia Phillies fan, you’ll want to go to Clearwater in February and March since it’s the team’s Spring Training home. If you aren’t a fan, you’ll probably want to avoid the beach then since traffic can get crazy (so I heard). The beach might also be crowded with Yankees fans since their Spring Training facility is just up the road (30 minutes) in nearby Tampa.


Obviously, I can’t list every attraction, restaurant or hotel in Clearwater Beach, so if you want to add anything please leave a comment below so others can see your recommendations.


 


The comments on this page are not provided, reviewed, or otherwise approved by the bank advertiser. It is not the bank advertiser's responsibility to ensure all posts and/or questions are answered.Editorial Note: The editorial content on this page is not provided by any bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and has not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities.


Editorial Note: The editorial content on this page is not provided by any bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and has not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities.




There is some great information here about our wonderful Clearwater Beach! I would like to add that as far as places to stay, if you are coming for a week or more, a beachfront vacation condo may be a much better (and more comfortable) choice for most people. Hotels can be great for short stays, but the lack of privacy and chaos can be tiring after a few days. A condo provides all the comforts of home and still has all the beach access and convenience of local restaurants and shops.

Your email address will not be published.


Comment


Name 


Email 


Website


  







Advertiser Disclosure

 50,000 bonus points - Apply Now - Terms     Earn 60k Points - Premium Travel Perks -  Apply Now- Terms  






 Editorial Note: The editorial content on this page is not provided by any bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and has not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities. Opinions expressed here are author's alone, not those of the bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities.