Gallery: Election 2015 votes counted in Salem County, Nov. 3, 2015


    
        
            By South Jersey Times Editorial Board

Tuesday is the deadline to register to vote in New Jersey's Nov. 7 election, so this is a reminder to get it done if you want to cast a ballot.

It's also another annual reminder about New Jersey's "easily hacked" voting machines.

Our state is picking a governor and the entire Legislature, and filling local offices on Nov. 7. However, the suitability and stability of voting systems tends to get talked about seriously only in presidential years. The "hanging chad" 2000 presidential election, won narrowly by George W. Bush amid a Florida recount, really got discussions going about replacing outdated machinery and software.



In the 17 years since, New Jersey has become an island of misfit voting systems. It's now only one of five states not to have adopted paper backups, according to a report from The Center for Investigative Reporting.

The eye-opening report at the Center's revealnews.org, also raises new concerns about the "hackability" of the election system used in 18 of 21 counties. Only Louisiana still uses the same system statewide, and we all know what a bastion of political integrity the Pelican State is.

An extremely close election for governor, though not likely, would leave New Jersey fumbling over a recount. Whoever was named the winner would face widespread skepticism. In comparison, reveal.org noted that the only other state  choosing a governor this year, Virginia, "decertified a handful of that state's fundamentally insecure voting machines" before its governor's race. "Some of those models will be the primary avenue through which Garden State residents select their next governor."

It's more likely that any creaks and cracks will show up Election Night in municipal government or school board elections, where only a handful of votes can separate a winner from a loser.

This hits home particularly in Salem County, where countywide freeholder elections in 2015 triggered a seven-vote initial win and a recount battle that was still unsettled three months later. And Salem's system is even more vulnerable to mischief than most other counties'. Bags of computer ballots must be transferred physically for counting to a central data processing center. They'd probably be safer if they went by Pony Express.

Statewide, excuse after excuse has been made as to why a 2005 law mandating the use of paper-trail machines hasn't been enforced for 12 years. At first, there was concern about the technology, but we're now at a point where 45 other states have figured it out. Unlike New Jersey, they eventually got new equipment and stopped grousing about paying for it.

Enter a lingering controversy from 2016. The Russians have no reason to meddle in, say, this year's Washington Township school board race, but such interference could be collateral damage in 2018 and in 2020, when congressional and then presidential contests on the same ballot will be of more interest to foreign disruptors.

Not to get partisan, but off-the-wall presidential comments about 3 million people having voted illegally in 2016 are a distraction. Concern about states that leave inactive voters on the rolls too long is more credible, but this actually results in an infinitesimal number of duplicated ballots. 

In New Jersey, the far bigger threat to our election results is from balloting systems that can't be trusted. Ours is a state that prides itself on being home to inventors and innovators. So, why are we still using voting equipment that requires keeping MacGyver on speed dial, and that only Rube Goldberg -- or Vladimir Putin -- could love? 

Send a letter to the editor of South Jersey Times at sjletters@njadvancemedia.com

Bookmark NJ.com/Opinion. Follow on Twitter @NJ_Opinion and find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        