Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.


✓ Unlimited access to billingsgazette.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

LIMITED TIME OFFER Save 30% with an annual subscription ✓ Unlimited access to E-Edition✓ Unlimited access to the billingsgazette.com website and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (800) 762-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Mainly sunny. High 84F. Winds NE at 10 to 15 mph..

Generally clear skies. Low 62F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 9:53 am

Tumbleweed offices in Billings are at 505 N. 24th St.

PITMAN

Federal Court, Yellowtone County Reporter

PITMAN

Tumbleweed offices in Billings are at 505 N. 24th St.

Homeless youth in the Tumbleweed program will continue to have a place to live through a contract renewed on Tuesday by Yellowstone County.

On a 2-1 vote, the commission renewed for one year its lease of a house it owns at 1019 Neptune Blvd., in the Billings Heights. The county has been leasing the house to Tumbleweed for $1 a year since about 2014.

Commissioners John Ostlund and Robyn Driscoll approved renewing the lease while Commissioner Denis Pitman wanted to sell the property.

Pitman said he thought the county had gotten away from its initial mission of using the house for youth services and that there was no reason to keep the property. He recommended the county sell the property and use the proceeds to improve the Youth Services Center, which provides secure detention for juvenile offenders, shelter care for youth in crisis, counseling for youth and families, mental health and chemical dependency evaluations and outpatient addiction treatment.

Pitman’s motion to have the property declared excess county property died from lack of a second.

Driscoll said she “disagreed completely” with Pitman, saying Tumbleweed is providing youth services by offering shelter and helping them graduate from high school.

Ostlund agreed, saying nothing the county does gets as much “bang for the buck” as helping homeless youth through the Tumbleweed program and lease of the county’s house. He said he had “no interest” in selling the property.

Tumbleweed, a non-profit organization, uses the house to temporarily house homeless youth through a transitional living program.



PITMAN

Homelessness is up slightly in Montana, according to a national report released Wednesday by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Developm…

Federal Court, Yellowtone County Reporter

Federal court and county reporter for The Billings Gazette.


                                    
                                        Whenever Clair Johnson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 