
                                CLAUDIA TORRENS
                            


                            
                            Last updated 08:43, December 2 2017
                            

Manuel Burga is one of three former South American football officials on trial in a US case highlighting widespread corruption in the sport's governing body. 

A juror dismissed for sleeping during hearings. A defendant allegedly making a throat-slitting gesture to intimidate a witness. A US judge admonishing a defendant for taking a paper clip and a pen from her clerk's desk.


The trial of South American football officials charged in the Fifa bribery scandal is not only about corruption. It also has drawn some attention because of a series of bizarre episodes that have happened over three weeks of witnesses giving testimony and journalists going in and out of a New York courtroom to report on an investigation that has shaken the football world.


On Thursday (Friday NZT), for example, US District Judge Pamela K. Chen admonished defendant Manuel Burga, former president of the Peruvian football federation, for allegedly taking a paper clip and a pen from her clerk's desk.

"No-one, no party, nobody should be touching anything in this bench area,'' Chen told him.


READ MORE: * Fifa World Cup draw announced * Australian football in turmoil over FFA board make-up


The federal judge actually tightened Burga's bail conditions a couple of weeks ago when Burga allegedly sought to intimidate a witness by staring at him in the courtroom and making a slashing gesture across his throat. The defence said Burga was merely scratching a rash on his neck. The witness, Alejandro Burzaco, a former marketing executive from Argentina who testified about paying millions of dollars in bribes, was shaken by the gesture and the trial was delayed at least an hour.


Burzaco and others have testified how they brokered the bribes paid to football officials in exchange for their influence in awarding lucrative broadcasting and hosting rights for the World Cup and other major football tournaments. More than 40 defendants have been charged in the corruption case, with many, including Burzaco, pleading guilty in hopes of getting reduced sentences.


Besides Burga, the trial has other two defendants: Jose Maria Marin, former president of the Brazilian football federation, and Juan Angel Napout, former president of the Paraguayan football federation and former president of CONMEBOL, South America's football governing body.


In another bizarre event, Chen this week dismissed a juror who slept during testimony. A couple of hours before lawyers and Chen had discussed how to dismiss the juror without embarrassing him, it was decided to do take the action in the courtroom without any other jurors present.


"We need the full attention of any juror. So I apologise but we're going to have to let you go,'' Chen told him. He was then escorted after his belongings were brought to him by US Marshals.


Besides journalists, Chen's courtroom has been filled with relatives of the defendants and lawyers from companies who have an interest in the case and who take notes continuously. Defendants sometimes eat sandwiches and salads in the court's cafeteria alongside lawyers, journalists and court staff.


Testimony has generated headlines around the world. A former Argentine government official, Jorge Delhon, killed himself hours after the court was told he took millions of dollars in bribes in exchange for handing out television rights. On Thursday his name came up again when a witness gave more details about how he paid money.


Eladio Rodriguez, an Argentinian who worked for Burzaco, said that in 2013 he registered a US$2.6 million (NZ$3.7 million) payment to an entity he named "the government''.


"Everything that says government was Delhon,'' he said.


Delhon dealt with the now-defunct government program Futbol para Todos (Football for All), which broadcast local football matches on public TV.



                
                     - AP
            

Portugal, Spain grouped together for 2018 Fifa World Cup, Russia get friendly group

Sport Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Footy fans gather in the streets
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Kane misses golden chance
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Warriors tactic change on cards
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Boucher to hang 'em up
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        UK media stand by England
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Coming home or going home?
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        England's World Cup dream over
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Netherlands too good for the Black Sticks
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Tokyo term for talented teen
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Kiwi held up in crash
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Qld deny NSW Origin sweep
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Player ratings: State of Origin III
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Boyd no Super conference fan
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Anderson ousts Federer
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Aussie prop backs round robin
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            