Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. ESE winds at 10 to 20 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph..

Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. ESE winds at 10 to 20 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:56 pm

The Utah County jail is photographed in Spanish Fork, Friday, July 15, 2016. 

The Utah County jail is photographed in Spanish Fork, Friday, July 15, 2016. 

A hepatitis A outbreak that has reached the Utah County Jail in Spanish Fork is keeping the Utah County Health Department busy.


“It’s here, right in this jail,” said Steve Mickelson, the nursing director at the Health Department.


Utah County typically has one or two reported cases of hepatitis A a year. In 2017, there have been 25 reported cases of hepatitis A in Utah County as of Dec. 26, according to information from the Utah Department of Health.


There’s been at least 133 confirmed cases of the virus in the state in 2017, with 82 of the cases being in Salt Lake County.


There has been 63 hospitalizations from the virus in the state and no deaths.


About half of the confirmed cases have been in people who have experienced both homelessness and illicit drug use. Another 26 have had illicit drug use and 10 have been homeless.


Several cases have also been linked to a national outbreak of the virus.


The multistate outbreak has roots in California and Michigan.


Mickelson said the Utah County Health Department has a grant to offer vaccines to inmates at the Utah County Jail in an effort to contain the outbreak.


The virus is typically spread through oral contact with items such as food or drinks that have been contaminated by infected feces.


A jail’s environment creates close quarters between inmates, who might not all have the best hygiene practices.


Symptoms show up two to six weeks after exposure and include yellowing of the skin, abdominal pain, nausea and diarrhea.


Mickelson said someone can start passing hepatitis A two weeks before they show symptoms and can continue to spread it for another month after symptoms appear.


It can take a week and a half for Health Department employees to contact everyone who could have been exposed from a single case, and since many of the infected are homeless, health employees have had to give cards to the infected that they can in turn give to people they may have exposed in case the contacts don’t have an address, phone or if the person infected doesn’t know the names of those they’ve potentially exposed.


Mickelson said the outbreak hit Utah County in October. Since then, the Health Department has encouraged inmates to be vaccinated, vaccinated inmates, gone to the Food and Care Coalition and has visited homes where the department knows many people may have been exposed.


He said the department has been led to homes where there could have been 19 cases of hepatitis A.


“If that were to go unrecognized and unaddressed, that can feed an entire community,” he said.


The outbreak hit its peak in Utah County about a month ago.


The vaccine is given in two parts six months apart. While the jail creates an environment inmates will be in for some time, it’s difficult to keep up with vaccinating the ever-changing jail population. Mickelson said the outbreak is leading for extra hours for Health Department employees.


The hepatitis A vaccine wasn’t required for kindergarteners to have until 2002. Mickelson said those who attended school before that and who have experienced homelessness, used illicit drugs or have been incarcerated could be at risk.


“This might be something they want to seriously consider, especially if they are in these types of populations,” Mickelson said.


It’s amazing how quickly a national story hits home. A few weeks ago, we published stories about a hepatitis A outbreak in Southern California…

Braley Dodson covers health and education for the Daily Herald.


                                    
                                        Whenever Braley Dodson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
