Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. W winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:56 pm

The Utah County jail is photographed in Spanish Fork, Friday, July 15, 2016. 

The Utah County jail is photographed in Spanish Fork, Friday, July 15, 2016. 

The state has begun the process of gathering information on county jail deaths and compiling data about substance abuse and drug withdrawal behind bars.


Spurred in part by reports of inmates dying while withdrawing from heroin or other opiates, the Utah Legislature in March created an annual reporting system and ordered a study of jailhouse substance abuse issues.


At least four deaths in 2016 sparked outrage over jail medical policies, resulting in federal court lawsuits against the counties involved:


Those cases were among a reported 25 deaths in Utah jails that year, the most since at least 2000.


The Legislature passed Senate Bill 205, mandating that county jails submit annual reports of jail deaths to the Utah Commission on Criminal and Juvenile Justice.


The bill also ordered the creation of a work group to study and report on the number of substance abuse-related deaths in 2013 through 2016.


The group will review treatment and other resources available to inmates in withdrawal and highlight other issues regarding substance use disorder-related treatment in county jails.


Officials probably will not look at circumstances of individual deaths, said Mary Lou Emerson, director of the Utah Substance Abuse Advisory Council.


“We’ll specifically stick to what the statute tells us to do,” said Emerson, who is putting together the work group.


“We’ll look at the treatment resources available,” she said. “I don’t know that we will tie it back to specific deaths. The Legislature may decide it wants more details in the future.”


Counties are required to submit the annual death reports by Aug. 1. Emerson said the work group can’t begin its study until that data has been collected by the Justice Commission.


The substance abuse work group must submit its report by Nov. 30, 2018, the date the group is scheduled by law to expire.


The group will include representatives of prosecutors, defense attorneys, treatment providers, the Utah Department of Health, the Utah Sheriffs’ Association and the Utah Association of Counties.


Emerson said the group will report its findings and make recommendations for possible treatment changes or additions in jails.


The Justice Commission is working with county attorneys on standardizing the annual jail death reports, said David Walsh, commission deputy director.


You can reach reporter Mark Shenefelt at mshenefelt@standard.net. Follow him on Twitter at @mshenefelt and like him on Facebook at Facebook.com/SEMarkShenefelt.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
