Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. W winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:56 pm

Tevis Farley tosses scrap sheetrock into a bin during his shift at Liberty Safe on on Wednesday, May 30, 2018, in Payson.

Tevis Farley removes cut sheetrock from the water jet machine at the Liberty Safe manufacturing facility on Monday, May 21, 2018, in Spanish Fork. Farley is a current inmate at the Utah County Jail and participates in the Jail Industries program, which places inmates in

Tevis Farley poses for a portrait in the Jail Industries building on Friday, May 18, 2018, in Spanish Fork.

Tevis Farley hugs his younger sister, Abigail Farley, as he exits the Jail Industries dormitory building at the Utah County Jail on Monday, May 21, 2018, in Spanish Fork.

Tevis Farley folds clothes in his room at his family's house on Friday, June 8, 2018, in Lehi. Farley works for Liberty Safe, in Payson, where he works on the water jet line to cut sheetrock for the safes.

Tevis Farley tosses scrap sheetrock into a bin during his shift at Liberty Safe on on Wednesday, May 30, 2018, in Payson.

Tevis Farley removes cut sheetrock from the water jet machine at the Liberty Safe manufacturing facility on Monday, May 21, 2018, in Spanish Fork. Farley is a current inmate at the Utah County Jail and participates in the Jail Industries program, which places inmates in

Tevis Farley poses for a portrait in the Jail Industries building on Friday, May 18, 2018, in Spanish Fork.

Tevis Farley hugs his younger sister, Abigail Farley, as he exits the Jail Industries dormitory building at the Utah County Jail on Monday, May 21, 2018, in Spanish Fork.

Tevis Farley folds clothes in his room at his family's house on Friday, June 8, 2018, in Lehi. Farley works for Liberty Safe, in Payson, where he works on the water jet line to cut sheetrock for the safes.

Three weeks ago, Tevis Farley signed an employment contract at Liberty Safe’s manufacturing facility. Earlier that day, Farley was released from Utah County Jail and his previous connection to Liberty Safe, through the Jail Industries program, ended.


Farley and other participants in the Jail Industries apply to the program to work full-time positions at companies in Utah County. The Jail Industries program has contracts with local industrial companies that allow for inmate workers to gain a skill by working on location. In May, Farley was one of 17 participants from the program that worked full time at the Liberty Safe manufacturing facility, while serving their sentencing.


The number of inmate participants fluctuates as inmates are released and as company contracts respond to the demand of their products. However, the work is often very similar for inmates that qualify, apply and are accepted into the program. With Utah County’s unemployment at 2.8 percent, according to the April records from the Utah Department of Workforce Services, industrial companies, like Liberty Safe, see the benefit of having consistent workers who are arriving on time and eager to work.


“They’re grateful for having a job and coming in here,” Brent Simpson, the director of manufacturing for Liberty Safe, said. He notes that the company appreciates the workers, because they know who is coming in and when and because the program provides transportation for the workers to the businesses. Also, Simpson said the strictness of the program and presence of the deputies on-site maintains good behavior from the inmates within the program.


Cory Christopherson, a process lead for the water jet line at Liberty Safe, works with many of the Jail Industries employees and views the benefits of the opportunity daily.


“They care about their opportunities here. They are happy to be here and they always work hard when they are here,” Christopherson said. He also feels that the opportunity at Liberty Safe is a chance for many who otherwise wouldn’t have one.


For the inmates, applying to the Jail Industries program is an opportunity to work, gain a skill and earn money. For Farley, the direct interactions with others outside of the jail system has been an important factor.


“All of our bosses are civilians, there is quite a few people that I get along with, at the company, which I think helps in the fact that we’re associating ourselves and building relationships with people that aren’t in our same situation,” Farley said. “In my experience, the people that you surround yourself with, you’re most likely to become.”


The little freedoms that come with enrollment in the program of being able to go outside and stay busy throughout the week goes far when in jail. For Farley, the time passed more quickly, he was less stressed, and the savings he built throughout the program would make paying for accrued fines a bit more manageable.


When Farley was leaving jail, it felt different this time, he said, “compared to in the past, I feel more committed. One of the hardest things when getting out of jail is when you have the dead time when you try to find a job.”


That dead time is hard, because the bills of Adult Probation and Parole and court fines begin to stack up. When Farley left prison in May, he had roughly $5,500 to pay in fees, and without a job that wouldn’t be possible. Farley still has a bit of extra time on his three-day weekends, because he works four 10-hour shifts, but he is working on finding positive ways to fill that time.


Upon release, Farley immediately stepped into his current role at Liberty Safe. This transition is both a benefit to the recently released inmate, who may be dealing with fees, and also for the companies, who hire these workers, because they already know their work ethic and have experience with the individual, Sgt. James Baldwin said. Baldwin oversees the day-to-day operations of the Jail Industries program.


The Jail Industries program was first implemented in Utah County in 1999 and generally houses 60 to 80 inmates in the program. In 2017, the Jail Industries program had 408 inmates participate throughout the year. The inmate workers generated a gross revenue of $803,641.94, which was divided between the inmates, state and federal taxes, the staffing agency, the Utah Victims Fund, and to Utah County to offset program costs.


“The success of the program comes from the top down,” Baldwin said. “Sheriff Jim Tracy has been a huge supporter of the program and has always been a strong advocate of offender re-entry programs.”


This leadership is about to shift, with Tracy retiring and a new sheriff for Utah County set to be elected this year. Baldwin is optimistic for the future leadership of the Sheriff’s Office, saying, “I have talked to the two candidates and I do feel that both of them want to see these types of programs.”


Baldwin sees the practicality of the program as a major strength for the individuals and for the community.


“It is something they can actually go and do and mimics your real life and it prepares them for real life when they get out,” Baldwin said. Baldwin highlights the habit-forming process of developing a routine, learning a job and building on positive successes. He believes that these things help an inmate after being released when they hit a barrier in their life on the outside of jail.


Even with strengths of the program, Baldwin explained that it isn’t a silver bullet that immediately corrects behavior for every inmate that is released. Farley actually participated in Jail Industries program for six days during a previous sentencing at the jail. However, the Jail Industries program prefers inmates that can work longer and create habits, but this depends on sentencing from a judge.


Recently, the Sheriff’s Office examined the program to look for how it can help the inmates at the end of their sentencing. Because, even though 75 percent of inmates that participate in the program were offered jobs, only approximately 18 percent of the individuals would obtain the employment and sustain it upon release. A common factor of those individuals who were offered work, but didn’t obtain it, was a lack of proper identification. Now, when an inmate enters the program, they go through the process of making sure they have the ID they need to re-enter the workforce.


For Farley, many of the difficulties were daily things like making sure he had rides to and from work, maintaining a healthy schedule, and focusing on positive relationships. He continues to focus on how to improve.


“If you’re not moving forward in recovery and life, you are moving backwards,” he said.


Even though Farley is now outside of Jail Industries, it has allowed Farley and other inmates to advance their lives, while serving their sentence.


The Jail Industries program at the Utah County Jail has contracts with local industrial companies that allow for inmate workers to gain a skil…


                                    
                                        Whenever Evan Cobb posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.