Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

With the clock ticking until Mayor Megan Barry’s proposed May 1 public referendum on a legacy-defining $5.4 billion transit plan, she now has two fewer controversies to deal with.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Nashville Mayor Megan Barry says the project would generate billions in economic activity for Nashville.
    Joey Garrison / The Tennessean

Mayor Megan Barry answers questions from The Tennessean's David Plazas during a one-on-one interview Monday, Nov. 27, 2017, in Nashville.
(Photo: George Walker IV / Tennessean.com)

With the clock ticking until Mayor Megan Barry’s proposed May 1 referendum on a legacy-defining, $5.4 billion transit plan, she now has two fewer controversies that could have muddied the path to win approval of the monumental project.


Over a two-day stretch last week, Barry retreated from a pair of contentious fights — one involving Nashville General Hospital; the other Cloud Hill, the much-disputed redevelopment project previously planned for Greer Stadium — that had showed no signs of simmering down. 


The mayor office’s says the transit timeline didn’t factor into either decision. But regardless of motive, she’s quieted a lot of noise at city hall, pushing aside some major distractions as she moves into the main stretch of her transit campaign.


►More: Mayor Barry delays closure of inpatient care at Nashville General Hospital


► More: Cloud Hill abandons controversial project for Nashville's Greer Stadium


► More: At Mayor Megan Barry’s midterm, big projects converge for political gauntlet


First came her move to “reset” the conversation around Nashville General Hospital, announcing a delay last Thursday on any decision for the safety-net hospital until 2019. She had previously advocated for ending inpatient care at the hospital with a decision by June.


Less than 24 hours later, Barry ended her support to redevelop the city-owned Greer Stadium with a private mixed-use development called Cloud Hill.


It came as Cloud Hill developers withdrew their project — hammered by historic preservationists since last summer — after archaeologists commissioned by the city found strong evidence of graves of slaves who built the adjacent Civil War-era Fort Negley. 



    Nashville's growing prosperity cannot continue without a reliable, frequent, bigger transit system, but that could also accelerate displacement and it will not stop traffic congestion.
    David Plazas / The Tennessean

Together, it marked a sudden flip on two of the most debated proposals of Barry’s first term — just as arguably the hottest issue of them all, transit, is poised to dominate more of the public debate. 


Nashville General Hospital employees listen during the December meeting of The Hospital Authority of Metropolitan Nashville and Davidson County on Dec. 21, 2017. (Photo: Joe Buglewicz / For The Tennessean)

Barry’s hospital proposal had been met with swift and strong resistance by African-American leaders and multiple council members. The Cloud Hill pushback, which — like the hospital — raised issues involving race, had turn into a monthslong battle that the administration had not foreseen when it announced in May that it intended to award Cloud Hill a contract.


Each had put the mayor on the defense at a time when she needs to project a clear message for her proposal to raise four taxes, including sales tax, to pay for an ambitious light rail system. The plan's $5.4 billion price tag rises to nearly $9 billion when all associated costs, including operations, are included.


Some say the lingering fights had even jeopardized support for transit.


“You’re putting at risk even your transit folks,” Enoch Fuzz, the African-American pastor at Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church in North Nashville, told The Tennessean just days before Barry announced her decision to kick the hospital discussions to the end of this year. “People are saying, we’re not going to support anything that this mayor wants because we don’t agree or trust the mayor’s deals and public affairs made in the dark.”


Barry spokesman Sean Braisted said each decision was “made on its own merits.”


Barry, in a letter last week to the Metro Council and Metro Hospital Authority Board, announced her delay on the decision ending inpatient care at the city-owned hospital by apologizing for not effectively engaging stakeholders on the front end.


She said she intended to launch a “starting point” for a broader discussion on Nashville General with her November announcement to overhaul the hospital.


But she added: “Obviously that has not occurred, as intended.” 


► More: Consultant's free, secret advice to Mayor Barry on Nashville General Hospital questioned


With Cloud Hill, Barry pointed to a new study conducted by Tennessee Valley Archaeological Research that found it "highly likely that human remains are still present" on portions of the city-owned site.


Historic records suggest they are likely the graves of slaves. Barry said that whatever happens at Greer should honor that history and called for a vision that unites the community.


The old Greer Stadium is in the shadow of Fort Negley. (Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean)

Council members say they don’t believe the moves were intentionally designed to remove potential hurdles for her transit push. 


But they also said the air is now cleared for a better debate.


 “Saving the hospital became my priority and the Minority Caucus’ priority,” said Councilman Scott Davis, who chairs that caucus. “I couldn’t really focus on other issues because the hospital is very important.


“How it’s helped is by getting everybody more focused,” he said of not dealing with the hospital and Cloud Hill at the same time as transit.


But he said the hospital will still be on his radar.


At-large Councilman John Cooper, the council’s top critic of Cloud Hill who has also raised concerns about the mayor’s transit proposal, said he believes it was the archaeological study's timetable that drove the Greer Stadium decision.


He called the decision on Cloud Hill “more coincidence than planning" as it relates to transit.


► More: Mayor's office met with Cloud Hill a year before city kicked off Greer Stadium redevelopment


“Fewer subjects will mean better discussion,” Cooper said. “The bandwidth in any community is limited and the transit issue itself is complex and has multi-generational aspects to it. It’s going to be a cost that for years the community is going to have to be paying for. It deserves a deep discussion about the merits of transit itself.


“We should be grateful to the mayor for moving on in these other subjects so that we can focus on transit.”


Vice Mayor David Briley listens to council members speak during a meeting at the Metro Courthouse in Nashville, Nov. 7, 2017. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)

Vice Mayor David Briley, who met with Barry and hospital leaders before she changed her hospital stance, said he believes the mayor changed course because of the volatile issue itself, not transit. But he said that the hospital controversy figured to spill into everything the council does. 


"One of the reasons I got involved in the issue and asked the mayor to do a 'reset' was my fear that this issue would have an impact on every decision the council makes every couple of weeks," Briley said. "There was a fair amount of resentment and anxiety about this issue. And I had a sense it was going to affect other issues that the council decides."


The council next week is set take up Barry's transit referendum proposal on a second of three votes. Its action would simply add the proposal to the ballot, not sign off on the proposal itself.


The ordinance is expected to pass by a wide margin after a special council committee of the whole voted 29-1 to recommend approval last week.


But Barry's struggle won't be getting the measure to the ballot. It will be rallying the type of broad coalition, inside the council and outside, needed for approval in May. 


If Barry can piece together support from the same type of traditional Democratic constituencies that led to her election in 2015, then the electoral math is on her side in Democratic-leaning Nashville.


► More: Nashville transit coalition claims more than 30,000 petition signatures


But that's not a sure thing: There are some signs of splintering within that base on transit, including among some African-American voters and liberals, who have objected to a proposal that would raise Nashville's sales tax rate to the highest in the country.


Meanwhile, the fight is about to get tougher.


For months, while the Transit for Nashville Coalition, which backs Barry's transit referendum, mounted a coordinated campaign and message, the opposition had been vocal but not organized.


That's now changed as a new political action committee called NoTax4Tracks, led by automobile mogul and Republican activist Lee Beaman, was announced this week. The group has received early support by an old Barry rival — David Fox, Barry's runoff opponent from the 2015 election who broke his post-election silence by coming out against Barry's transit plan.


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 
