Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The latest on closures and cancellations in Santa Rosa and Escambia counties as Hurricane Nate moves north across the Gulf.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Gov. Rick Scott gives an update on Tropical Storm Nate at the Escamiba County Emergency Operations Center on Friday, Oct. 6, 2017.
    (Jim Little/jwlittle@pnj.com)

Gov. Rick Scott, local and state officials hold a press briefing on Friday, Oct. 6, 2017, in Pensacola on Tropical Storm Nate.
(Photo: Tony Giberson/tgiberson@pnj.com)Buy Photo

This story will continue to be updated. See something missing? Email online@pnj.com.


Pensacola International Airport will close and cease all operations at 6 p.m. Saturday and will remain closed Sunday. Weather permitting, normal operations are expected to resume Monday, according to a Facebook post.


Passengers with impacted travel plans should contact their airlines for flight information and details on rebooking and cancellations.


People trying to access the parking garage Saturday must present a valid airline ticket with same-day scheduled departure. Access to the parking garage will close Saturday and will not reopen until Monday.


Pensacola State College will close at 5 p.m. Saturday and remain closed through Sunday. All activities and classes on campus or online are canceled. The college will conduct the previously scheduled SAT testing on Saturday. PSC will resume normal operations, activities and class schedules on Monday.


Escambia County School District students are not in session Monday as part of a pre-planned teacher training day. Superintendent Malcolm Thomas said staff will be notified Sunday if Monday's training day will go on as planned.


List of cancellations continues below gallery


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Superintendent Tim Wyrosdick said the Santa Rosa County School District is canceling all activities Saturday evening due to the storm. A decision regarding school on Monday will be made by 6 p.m. Saturday. 


The University of West Florida will close all of its locations starting at noon Saturday through Monday. That includes all classes, events, campus and online courses. The university expected to reopen on Tuesday unless conditions change.


Pensacola Naval Air Station will stop normal operations and close the installation to all visitors starting at 5 p.m. Friday. Only mission essential personnel are required to report for duty. The National Naval Aviation Museum will be closed Saturday and Sunday.


The Pensacola Symphony Orchestra has canceled its opening night and dress rehearsal as Hurricane Nate continues to move rapidly over the central Gulf of Mexico.


Opening night was originally scheduled for 7:30 p.m. Saturday at the Saenger Theatre. The symphony is working to reschedule the performance and will notify patrons when additional information is available.


Patrons should visit pensacolasymphony.com or call the symphony office at 850-435-2533 with questions.


WSRE's "StudioAmped" performance by Johnny Hayes &amp; The Loveseats that was scheduled for Monday has been canceled. The Friday night performance will take place as scheduled, starting at 7 p.m. in the WSRE Jean &amp; Paul Amos Performance Studio at Pensacola State College. The remainder of the "StudioAmped" lineup will be performed as scheduled, resuming Tuesday with Jimmy Lumpkin &amp; The Revival.


The Santa Rosa Island Triathlon was canceled due to the storm. More information can be found here.


UWF's home football game against Mississippi College has been rescheduled for 6 p.m. Friday at Blue Wahoos Stadium. The game was initially scheduled for Saturday evening.


The Japan-U.S Military Program scheduled for Saturday at the National Naval Aviation Museum has been canceled.


Sacred Heart Health System has postponed its Medical Mission at Home event, which was scheduled for Saturday at Pensacola High School. The event, a day of free screenings, social services and health care services, will be rescheduled.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The BaseFEST concert on board Pensacola Naval Air Station that was scheduled for Saturday is canceled. It will not be rescheduled.


The eighth annual Navarre Beach Take A Kid Fishing event set for Saturday at the Navarre Pier has been re-scheduled. It will now take place from 8 to 11 a.m. Oct. 21, pending approval from the Santa Rosa County commissioners. 


Pensacola State College has canceled Pensacola ComposerFest XIII, which was scheduled for 2:30 p.m. Sunday at the school's Ashmore Fine Arts Auditorium.


Pensacola Day, a Campus Church event scheduled for Saturday, has been canceled because the weather is expected to affect many of the event's outdoor activities.


Northwest Florida Great Dane Rescue's Second Annual Dane-Toberfest, a fundraising event featuring adoptable dogs, food and vendors, has been rescheduled for Oct. 15 at Seville Square from noon to 5 p.m.


The following state parks in Escambia and Santa Rosa counties will close at 5 p.m. Friday:


Beginning at 4 p.m. Saturday, outside activities, including youth sports, will be canceled at Shoreline Park in Gulf Breeze. Also at 4 p.m. Saturday, Shoreline Park South, including the boat ramp, pier, parking area and beach, will be closed. The Gulf Breeze Community Center and Shoreline Park are expected to reopen at noon Sunday.


The National Park Service closed all of Gulf Islands National Seashore to the public. The closure included all of the park's Mississippi islands, Fort Pickens, Fort Barrancas, Naval Live Oaks, Santa Rosa Island and the Okaloosa and Perdido Key areas. All campers at the Fort Pickens and Davis Bayou campgrounds had to evacuate by noon Friday.


All local YMCA branches will open on time Saturday and offer scheduled programs and classes before closing at 4 p.m. Saturday. The branches will remain closed on Sunday.


Pensacola Greyhound Park closed at 6 a.m. Saturday and will remain closed until weather conditions improve. 


The Florida Department of Corrections has canceled weekend visitation at all institutions in the Panhandle on Saturday and Sunday in response to the storm


Local impacted facilities include Blackwater River Correctional Facility, Century Correctional Institution, Okaloosa Correctional Institution, Santa Rosa Correctional Institution and Santa Rosa Correctional Institution Annex.


For the full list of impacted facilities in Region I, visit dc.state.fl.us. 



    Nate is most likely to clip far eastern Louisiana before finally coming ashore somewhere near the Mississippi-Alabama border late Saturday into early Sunday.
    Ryan Truchelut/WeatherTiger

 
