Thanks to major properties like Game of Thrones and Marvel’s Cinematic Universe, we’ve entered a golden age of sci-fi and fantasy properties being developed for film and television. It seems that nearly every network and studio has snatched up the rights to old and new classics, with a bevy of projects in production or premiering in the coming months. To keep you on top of the latest news, we’ve updated our master list of every SFF adaptation currently in the works, from American Gods to Y: The Last Man.

Check out this list and get your DVRs and Netflix queues ready, because you’re going to be wonderfully busy for the foreseeable future.



 

All-New Wolverine #7 art by Marcio Takara

Adapted from: New Warriors by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1989, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Television (Marvel Television/TBD)
What it’s about: “New Warriors centers around six young people struggling to make a difference and learn how to harness their powers … Not quite super, not yet heroes, Marvel’s New Warriors is about that time in your life when you first enter adulthood and feel like you can do everything and nothing at once—except in this world, bad guys can be as terrifying as bad dates.”
Status: Kevin Biegel (Cougar Town, Enlisted) will serve as showrunner and lead writer. Milana Vayntrub will play Unbeatable Squirrel Girl! The series is expected to premiere sometime in 2018, though it’s looking for a network after Freeform passed on it.

 



Adapted from: Nightflyers by George R.R. Martin
Originally published: 1980, St. Martin’s Press
Optioned for: Television (Syfy/Netflix)
What it’s about: Martin’s sci-fi novella follows a crew of explorers on a sentient spaceship, who find their rendezvous with an alien ship possibly derailed by the Nightflyer’s own mission.
Status: Syfy is adapting the novella for television, with the screenwriter of the 1987 film adaptation on board as a producer. Jeff Buhler (Jacob’s Ladder) penned the pilot; in early 2018, he stepped in as showrunner after Daniel Cerone left (sources say due to creative differences). Martin will not be involved with the TV series, due to his overall deal at HBO. Syfy announced an official series order in early 2018 and released a first-look teaser. While no release date has yet been announced, it is expected to premiere sometime in 2018; the Netflix trailer in early 2018 says “coming soon.”

 



Adapted from: The Passage by Justin Cronin
Originally published: 2010, Ballantine Books
Optioned for: Television (Fox)
What it’s about: Federal agent Brad Wolgast (Mark-Paul Gosselaar) must protect young Amy (Saniyya Sidney) from being experimented on by the government to test a new virus—a virus that “could either cure all disease or cause the downfall of the human race.” As Cronin’s trilogy is about vampires, you can guess what winds up happening.
Status: Fox ordered a pilot for The Passage in early 2017. Ridley Scott’s production company, Scott Free, has been working with Fox, Friday Night Lights’ Liz Helden, and Matt Reeves (director of Cloverfield and Let Me In) to adapt the book, with Cronin as a co-producer. The pilot was retooled in early 2018, replacing key supporting characters with new ones, and tweaking the premise, which ultimately led to a series order in mid-2018. It is expected to premiere sometime in 2018. Watch the first trailer.

 

From the cover of From Dead to Worse

Adapted from: short fiction by Charlaine Harris
Originally published: various
Optioned for: Television (NBC)
What it’s about: The series, about former spies in suburbia, is described as “a high-octane project that mixes humor, romance and espionage centering on a pair of former operatives who get reactivated and drawn into a larger conspiracy while attempting to maintain their undercover lives.”
Status: Emerald City executive producer Shaun Cassidy and comics creator Kelly Sue DeConnick (also involved with Emerald City) are setting up NBC’s second Harris project, after Midnight, Texas. It’s unclear if the series will premiere in 2018; there’s been no update since early 2017.

 



Adapted from: The Rook  by Daniel O’Malley
Originally published: 2012, Little, Brown and Company
Optioned for: Television (Starz/Lionsgate)
What it’s about: When Mfanwy Thomas awakes in a park wearing latex gloves but with amnesia, she must follow the letter from her former self (which opens with “the body you are wearing used to be mine”) to discover how she wound up there.
Status: Twilight creator Stephenie Meyer and The Night Manager’s Stephen Garrett will executive produce the supernatural spy thriller. The series is expected to premiere sometime in 2018.

 

Dark Horse Comics

Adapted from: The Umbrella Academy by Gerard Way (writer) and Gabriel Bá (artist)
Originally published: 2008, Dark Horse Comics
Optioned for: Television (Netflix)
What it’s about: “The Umbrella Academy is a dysfunctional family of superheroes—The Monocle, Spaceboy (Tom Hopper), The Kraken (David Castañeda), The Rumor, The Séance (Robert Sheehan), Number Five, The Horror (Ethan Hwang), and The White Violin (Ellen Page)—who work together to solve their father’s mysterious death while coming apart at the seams due to their divergent personalities and abilities.”
Status: Jeremy Slater (Fantastic Four, Death Note) adapted the comic book series, with Steve Blackman (Fargo) serving as executive producer. The series is expected to premiere sometime in 2018.

 



Adapted from: The War of the Worlds by H.G. Wells
Originally published: 1898, William Heinemann
Optioned for: Television (BBC One)
What it’s about: In Wells’ novel, an unnamed protagonist in Surrey and his brother in London watch as Martians invade southern London. In this three-part drama series, couple George (Rafe Spall) and Amy (Eleanor Tomlinson), whose love somehow defies society’s standards of the time, must fight for their lives against a Martian invasion. Other characters include George’s brother Frederick (Rupert Graves) and astronomer and scientist Ogilvy (Robert Carlyle).
Status: Peter Hartness, who adapted Susanna Clarke’s Jonathan Strange &amp; Mr Norrell for the BBC in 2015, has adapted the novel into a miniseries set, interestingly, in Victorian times. While an official premiere date has yet to be announced, Den of Geek reported that it would be airing later in 2018.

 

 

Photo: Fiery Film

Adapted from: “Hello, Moto” by Nnedi Okorafor
Originally published: 2011, Tor.com
Optioned for: Film (Fiery Film)
What it’s about: Scientist and witch Rain (Keira Hewatch) hopes that her inventions, wigs that allow their wearers to wield influence and power, will help battle corruption. Instead, she watches her friends Philo (Tunde Aladese) and Coco (Ogee Nelson) themselves become corrupted, turning them against Rain as she attempts to make up for what she’s done.
Status: Nigerian film/TV company/studio Fiery Film optioned the rights in early 2017. The short film is currently in post-production, with the plan to begin festival and screening tours in early 2018.

 

 



Adapted from: the universe of Stephen King
Originally published: various
Optioned for: Television (Hulu/Bad Robot)
What it’s about: Named for the fictional Maine town appearing (or mentioned) in many of King’s novels and short stories, Castle Rock is a horror anthology series that will both draw from King’s existing body of work while including new stories.
Status: J.J. Abrams will produce; Manhattan creator Sam Shaw will write with Dustin Thomason, who also served as a writer and executive producer on Manhattan. The cast includes Melanie Lynskey, Sissy Spacek, Andre Holland, and Jane Levy. Premieres sometime in summer 2018; watch the latest teaser.

 



Adapted from: Cloak and Dagger by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1983, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Television (Freeform/Marvel Television)
What it’s about: Marvel is expanding its television universe with a show aimed at teenagers on Freeform (formerly known as ABC Family). Tandy “Dagger” Bowen (Olivia Holt) and Tyrone “Cloak” Johnson (Aubrey Joseph) are an unusual duo, in that their superpowers are incredibly complementary: She can create daggers of light, while he can engulf others in total darkness. No word yet on which of Cloak and Dagger’s many Marvel Comics plotlines the show will actually be based.
Status: Writer/director Gina Prince-Bythewood (Beyond the Lights, An Untamed State) will direct the pilot. Watch the first trailer!

 



Adapted from: various Marvel Comics by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1999, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Walt Disney Company/Marvel Studios)
What it’s about: “In the aftermath of Captain America: Civil War, Scott Lang (Paul Rudd) grapples with the consequences of his choices as both a super hero and a father. As he struggles to rebalance his life with his responsibilities as Ant-Man, he’s confronted by Hope van Dyne (Evangeline Lilly) and Dr. Hank Pym (Michael Douglas) with an urgent new mission. Scott must once again put on the suit and learn to fight alongside the Wasp as the team works together to uncover secrets from the past.” Watch the first trailer!

 



Adapted from: The Darkest Minds by Alexandra Bracken
Originally published: 2012, Disney Hyperion
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: After a pandemic kills most of America’s children and teenagers, the survivors develop superpowers and are placed inside internment camps. Sixteen-year-old telekinetic Ruby Dee (The Hunger Games‘ Amandla Stenberg) escapes the camp, joining up with a group of teens on the run from the government. This Is Us’ Mandy Moore will play a doctor who’s part of a crusade to stop the persecution of the children.
Status: Jennifer Yuh Nelson (Kung Fu Panda 3) will direct the adaptation, with Shawn Levy (Night at the Museum) producing.

 



Adapted from: Meg by Steve Alten
Originally published: 1997, Bantam Books
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/Gravity Pictures)
What it’s about: When a deep-sea submersible is stuck in a trench at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean after an attack by a prehistoric shark called the Megalodon, expert deep sea rescue diver Jonas Taylor (Jason Statham) must rescue the crew. Why is he the best man for the job? Because he’s the only one who has encountered this creature before. Watch the first trailer.

 



Adapted from: A Discovery of Witches by Deborah Harkness
Originally published: 2011, Penguin Books
Optioned for: Television (Sky One)
What it’s about: Diana Bishop (Teresa Palmer), an alchemical history professor at the University of Oxford, gets caught up with an ancient manuscript that calls to the magic in her blood, and a charming vampire, Matthew Clairmont (Matthew Goode), who may also have designs on her blood. Doctor Who’s Alex Kingston will play Diana’s aunt Sarah Bishop, with Sherlock’s Lindsay Duncan as Matthew’s vampiric mother Ysabeau de Clermont.
Status: While there was a film adaptation in development back in 2011, now it looks as if the All Souls trilogy will appear on TV. Jane Tranter and Bad Wolf will produce the series; Harkness is one of the executive producers and is writing some of the episodes. Watch the first trailer!

 



Adapted from: The House with a Clock in Its Walls by John Bellairs
Originally published: 1973, Dial
Optioned for: Film (Mythology Entertainment)
What it’s about: Bellairs’ eerie middle-grade books follow Lewis Barnavelt and his mysterious warlock uncle Jonathan Barnavelt as they get tangled up with black magic, ancient artifacts, and the apocalypse.
Status: Eli Roth directs the movie adaptation. Watch the first trailer!

 



Adapted from: Venom: Lethal Protector by David Michelinie (writer) and Mark Bagley (artist)
Originally published: 1993, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Columbia Pictures)
What it’s about: Director Ruben Fleischer (Zombieland) told fans at Brazil Comic-Con that the story is primarily based on the Lethal Protector and The Planet of the Symbiotes books. The former has Eddie Brock (to be played in the movie by Tom Hardy) moving to San Francisco and becoming an antihero, while the latter is about Brock/Venom fighting off symbiotes. This movie is not a spinoff of Spider-Man: Homecoming. Watch the first teaser.

 



Adapted from: Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by Newt Scamander (a.k.a. J.K. Rowling)
Originally published: 2001, Arthur A. Levine/Scholastic (US) and Bloomsbury (UK)
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros.)
What it’s about: The sequel to Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them sees Albus Dumbledore (Jude Law) enlisting former student Newt Scamander (Eddie Redmayne) in Paris to thwart dark wizard Gellert Grindelwald’s (Johnny Depp) plans. Watch the first trailer!

 



Adapted from: Mortal Engines by Philip Reeve
Originally published: 2001, Scholastic
Optioned for: Film (Universal Pictures/MRC)
What it’s about: Mortal Engines is the first book in a quartet set in a distant future called the Traction Era. A catastrophic Sixty-Minute War laid waste to Earth, and obliterated national boundaries. People rebuilt society by focusing on “Traction Cities”—that is, mobile city-states that are mounted on tracks and can attack each other for resources as part of a system known as “Municipal Darwinism.”
Status: Peter Jackson adapted the screenplay (with Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens) and produced the film, with his protégé Christian Rivers directing. The cast includes Robert Sheehan, Patrick Malahide, Stephen Lang, Jihae, and Leila George.

 



Adapted from: various DC Comics by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1941, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Films)
What it’s about: No official synopsis yet.

 



Adapted from: Bird Box by Josh Malerman
Originally published: 2014, Harper Voyager (UK)/Ecco (US)
Optioned for: Film (Netflix)
What it’s about: In this post-apocalyptic thriller, Malorie (Sandra Bullock) and her children are among the scattered survivors of an alien force that pushes humans to strange violence. Seeking sanctuary, Malorie takes her children on a harrowing journey twenty miles downriver in a rowboat—blindfolded—with nothing to rely on but her wits and the children’s trained ears.
Status: Eric Heisserer (Arrival) penned the adaptation.

 



Adapted from: Ultimate Fallout by Brian Michael Bendis and Sara Pichelli
Originally published: 2011, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures)
What it’s about: “Enter a universe where more than one wears the mask.” But most importantly—Miles Morales! Watch the first trailer.

 



Adapted from: Deadly Class by Rick Remender (writer) and Wes Craig (artist)
Originally published: 2014, Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (Syfy/Sony Pictures TV)
What it’s about: High school intrigue—first love, gossip, cliques, growing up—at a boarding school for assassins in 1987 San Francisco.
Status: The Russo brothers (directors of the last two Captain America movies) are adapting the shockingly vicious series for the small screen. Syfy gave the series a pilot order in late 2017 and a series pickup in mid-2018; it will premiere sometime in 2019. Watch the first teaser.

 



Adapted from: Doom Patrol by Arnold Drake (writer), Bob Haney (writer), and Bruno Premiani (artist)
Originally published: 1963, DC Comics
Optioned for: Television (Warner Bros. Television/Berlanti Productions)
What it’s about: It is unclear which iteration of the long-running series the TV show will be based on, but here’s the official synopsis: “Doom Patrol is a re-imagining of one of DC’s most beloved group of outcast Super Heroes: Robotman, Negative Man, Elasti-Girl and Crazy Jane, led by modern-day mad scientist Dr. Niles Caulder (The Chief). The Doom Patrol’s members each suffered horrible accidents that gave them superhuman abilities—but also left them scarred and disfigured. Traumatized and downtrodden, the team found purpose through The Chief, who brought them together to investigate the weirdest phenomena in existence—and to protect Earth from what they find. Part support group, part Super Hero team, the Doom Patrol is a band of super-powered freaks who fight for a world that wants nothing to do with them. Picking up after the events of Titans, Doom Patrol will find these reluctant heroes in a place they never expected to be, called to action by none other than Cyborg, who comes to them with a mission hard to refuse, but with a warning that is hard to ignore: their lives will never, ever be the same.”
Status: Greg Berlanti will executive-produce the live-action series alongside Jeremy Carver (Supernatural), who is adapting the comic for television. Some of the characters from Doom Patrol will first appear in the TV series Titans. Doom Patrol will air on DC Universe, the forthcoming subscription digital model from Warner Bros. Television, sometime in 2019.

 

Photo: Neil Gaiman/Twitter

Adapted from: Good Omens by Terry Pratchett &amp; Neil Gaiman
Originally published: 1990, Gollancz/Workman
Optioned for: Television (BBC/Amazon Studios)
What it’s about: Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett co-wrote this comedy about the angel Aziraphale and the demon Crowley trying to avoid the End Times, brought about by Satan’s son.
Status: At a 2016 memorial for Pratchett, Gaiman revealed that the late author wrote him a letter before his death imploring Gaiman to adapt their book on his own. (Gaiman: “At that point, I think I said, ‘You bastard, yes.’”) The six-part miniseries, which will star David Tennant as Crowley and Michael Sheen as Aziraphale, is set to premiere in 2019 on Amazon Prime Video before being aired via BBC Two.

 

Photo: Warner Bros. Television/DC Entertainment

Adapted from: various Superman comics
Originally published: 1938, DC Comics
Optioned for: Television (Warner Bros Television/DC Entertainment)
What it’s about: The producers behind Gotham will delve into life in Metropolis before Superman showed up, following young reporter Lois Lane and evil-mastermind-in-the-making Lex Luthor in their day-to-day life.
Status: The 13-episode series will premiere on DC’s streaming service sometime in 2019.

 



Adapted from: NOS4A2 by Joe Hill
Originally published: 2013, William Morrow
Optioned for: Television (AMC)
What it’s about: In his 1938 Rolls Royce-Wraith with the license plate NOS4A2, Charles Talent Manx picks up children and transports them to the sinister Christmasland. On her Raleigh Tuff Burner bike, Victoria McQueen is the Manx’s only victim to have escaped… until he picks up his next victim, her son.
Status: AMC used its new script-to-series model to develop the series under showrunner Jami O’Brien (Hell on Wheels, Fear the Walking Dead), in which the network opens writers’ rooms to develop the pilot and several scripts, considering the potential for a first season, before it picked up 10 episodes to air sometime in 2019. Hill will executive-produce.

 



Adapted from: various DC Comics by various writers and artists
Originally published: 1959, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Films)
What it’s about: No word yet on plot, but Margot Robbie, Jared Leto, and Will Smith are all confirmed to be returning.
Status: Producer Michael De Luca (The Social Network) is helping to oversee the sequel, to be written and directed by Gavin O’Connor (Warrior, The Green Hornet). The film is expected to go into pre-production in fall 2018.

 

Photo: Lionsgate

Adapted from: Hellboy by Mike Mignola
Originally published: 1993, Dark Horse Comics
Optioned for: Film (Millennium)
What it’s about: A demon who shaved off his horns, Hellboy works for the BPRD (Bureau for Paranormal Research and Defense), fighting dark forces like the Nazi occultists who first summoned him from Hell as an infant.
Status: Instead of Guillermo del Toro’s long-gestating (and now dead) Hellboy 3, this will be an R-rated reboot directed by Neil Marshall (The Descent) and starring David Harbour (Stranger Things). According to Harbour, it won’t be an origin story.

 

Photo: 20th Century Fox via Entertainment Weekly

Adapted from: Uncanny X-Men (“The Dark Phoenix Saga”) by Chris Claremont (writer) and John Byrne (writer/artist)
Originally published: 1980, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: No official synopsis yet, but it will presumably pick up after the events of X-Men: Apocalypse. Jessica Chastain will play the villainous Lilandra. Check out first-look photos from EW.

 

Photo: Murray Close via Lionsgate

Adapted from: The Knife of Never Letting Go by Patrick Ness
Originally published: 2008, Walker Books
Optioned for: Film (Lionsgate)
What it’s about: In a dystopian future where all living creatures can hear each other’s thoughts, the sole boy in a town of men flees with his dog after discovering an awful secret, and comes upon a strangely silent girl.
 Status: Doug Liman (Edge of Tomorrow) will direct; both Charlie Kaufman (Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind) and Jamie Linden (Money Monster) have taken stabs at adapting the book. The cast includes Tom Holland (Todd Hewitt), Daisy Ridley (Viola Eade), Nick Jonas (Davy Prentiss Jr.), and Mads Mikkelsen (Mayor Prentiss).

 

Photo: Brie Larson/Twitter

Adapted from: Captain Marvel by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1968, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Marvel Studios)
What it’s about: Captain Marvel tracks Air Force pilot Carol Danvers’ (Brie Larson) transformation into the titular superhero after an accident fuses her human DNA with that of an alien and grants her superpowers. The movie will be set in the ’90s and feature Skrulls as the villains.
Status: Directing duo Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck (Half Nelson) will helm the film, based on a screenplay from Geneva Robertson-Dworet (Tomb Raider, Gotham City Sirens).

 



Adapted from: various Marvel Comics
Originally published: 1990, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Fox)
What it’s about: It’s currently unclear whether or not this standalone film will be an origin story.
Status: At SDCC 2017, after the project had languished for a couple of years, star Channing Tatum said that they were “giving it a bit of a rethink.” Now, its projected release is mid-2019.

 



Adapted from: TBD
Originally published: TBD
Optioned for: Film (Walt Disney Company/Marvel Studios/Sony Pictures)
What it’s about: TBD
Status: Set to begin production in June 2018, for a July 5, 2019 release date.

 



Adapted from: New Mutants by Chris Claremont (writer) and Bob McLeod (artist)
Originally published: 1982, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: We don’t know much, but judging from the title, it’s likely about a team of young mutants fighting to protect themselves in a world that hates them.
Status: Josh Boone (The Fault in Our Stars) will direct from a script by him and writing partner Knate Lee. Maisie Williams (Game of Thrones, Doctor Who) will play Wolfsbane, while Anya Taylor-Joy (The Witch, Split) will play Magik; Alice Braga has replaced Rosario Dawson in the role of Dr. Cecilia Reyes. Also, it’s going to be a “full-fledged horror movie”! Watch the first trailer.

 



Adapted from: various DC Comics by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1941, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Films)
What it’s about: Rumor has it the sequel will be set during the Cold War.
Status: Director Patty Jenkins will return!

 



Adapted from: Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West by Gregory Maguire
Originally published: 1996, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Film (Universal Pictures)
What it’s about: Maguire’s political and ethical commentary is a revisionist take on the Wicked Witch’s life—reimagining her as Elphaba, the misunderstood, green-skinned girl who befriends another witch-to-be, Galinda, at Shiz University and stumbles upon corruption in the Emerald City.
Status: Technically, the movie is adapting the beloved Broadway musical Wicked, with music and lyrics by Stephen Schwartz and book by Winnie Holtzmann. But since their show was inspired by Maguire’s book, I’m counting it. The two are working on a screenplay, with Schwartz teasing at least two new songs. The movie will be released December 20, 2019.

 

Photo via Xinhua

Adapted from: The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu (translated by Ken Liu)
Originally published: 2006, Chongqing Press
Optioned for: Film (Youzu Pictures)
What it’s about: During China’s Cultural Revolution, a secret military program sends signals into space to initiate first contact with aliens. Years later, a physicist uses the virtual reality video game Three-Body to discover a secret organization and uncover what the aliens might actually want from Earth.
Status: The Three-Body Trilogy is being adapted into six movies, directed by Panpan Zhang. Liu told The Atlantic in late 2017 that although the film shoot had wrapped in 2015, the project was still in post-production. Release date is unclear, as the project’s release seems to have been delayed several times. In the meantime, check out the stunning stage adaptation of the novel.

 

Originally published: 1999-2009, Vertigo Comics
Optioned for: Film (New Line Cinema)
What it’s about: In Brian Azzarello and Eduardo Risso’s noiry, pulpy comic book series, the mysterious Agent Graves approaches people with a gun, the identity of the person who ruined their lives, and a hundred rounds of untraceable ammunition.
Status: Tom Hardy is on board to produce and potentially star in the movie adaptation.

 

Originally published: 1981, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: The project’s current code name is a nod to one of the first issues in which Kitty Pryde appeared, leading many to believe that even if the spinoff doesn’t specifically adapt that comic, it will nonetheless focus on the young, wall-walking mutant.
Status: Deadpool director Tim Miller and X-Men comic book writer Brian Michael Bendis are teaming up for the spinoff.

 

Originally published: 1997, Del Rey
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: In 2014, Syfy announced that it would develop a miniseries based on Clarke’s fourth and final Odyssey book, which wraps up the loose ends from 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Status: No update since the 2014 announcement, and Syfy seems concerned with plenty of other projects (many of which are adaptations).

 

Originally published: 2004, IDW Publishing
Optioned for: Film (Amblin Entertainment)
What it’s about: Weatherman-turned-late-night TV horror show host Aleister Arcane (a.k.a. Green) gets a kick out of airing gory little skits, until the local sponsors in his hometown of Jackson, OK, shut him down. But when a tragic incident gets him taken off the air and forced into early retirement, the local kids realize that Aleister Arcane has laid a curse upon their town.
Status: Eli Roth is teaming up with Jim Carrey (who will star and produce) to adapt Niles’ series. Jon Croker (The Woman in Black 2: Angel of Death) will write the screenplay with David Hoberman and Todd Lieberman.

 

Originally published: 2017, Penguin Publishing Group
Optioned for: Film (Paramount/Pascal Pictures)
What it’s about: Mastai pitched the alternate-universe novel as Kurt Vonnegut trying to tell The Time Traveler’s Wife with the narrative voice of Jonathan Tropper: A man from a utopian AU falls into the very real 2015 and must decide whether he wants to return to his time or try to establish a life in this new reality.
Status: Amy Pascal nabbed the film rights at the 2015 Frankfurt Book Fair. Mastai will write the script for the adaptation and executive produce.

 

Originally published: 2008, Scholastic
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: Kibuishi’s ongoing graphic novel series (which won the American Library Association’s Best Book for Young Adults in 2008) follows siblings Emily and Navin through a portal into a fantasy world filled with giant robots and man-eating demons. Led by the talking rabbit Miskit, Em (wearing the eponymous amulet) and Navin search for their missing mother.
Status: 20th Century Fox is looking to develop the series into a potential film franchise. Aron Coleite (co-executive producer of the Star Trek TV series) will write the screenplay.

 

Originally published: 2011, Tor Teen
Optioned for: Film (Fickle Fish Productions)
What it’s about: Ghost hunter Cas (Cameron Monaghan) is surprised when Anna Dressed in Blood (Maddie Hasson), a ghost known for killing anyone who sets foot in the abandoned Victorian she calls him, decides to spare his life. As he investigates her curse, these opposites grow closer.
Status: Twilight author Stephenie Meyer will produce, with music video director Trish Sie helming a script from Allison Wood.

 

Originally published: 2014, Orbit Books
Optioned for: Film
What it’s about: Breq used to be the spaceship Justice of Toren, controlling countless ancillary soldiers, before an accident fragmented her. Now, in a single form, she is returning to the Imperial Radch to confront its ruler, Anaander Mianaai.
Status: In 2014, Ann Leckie shared the exciting news that Ancillary Justice had been optioned for television! Fabrik and Fox Television Studios (who have between them worked on The Killing, Burn Notice, and The Americans, among other series) are interested, especially in terms of dealing with the series’ depictions of gender and race. There’s been no update since, but as Leckie put it, “the potential is there, and that’s tremendously cool!”

 

Armada by Ernest Cline

Originally published: 2015, Crown/Archetype
Optioned for: Film (Universal Pictures)
What it’s about: Dreaming of a major event to change his humdrum life, Zack Lightman escapes into Armada, a flight simulator video game. Then one day, the flying saucers appear… as if straight out of Armada itself.
Status: Universal had optioned the rights in 2012, with Cline writing a screenplay. Following the release of the Ready Player One movie in 2018, Universal has moved forward on the adaptation, hiring Dan Mazeau (Wrath of the Titans, Van Helsing) to write a new draft. Cline will remain a collaborator.

 

Originally published: 2017, Crown
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: Jasmine Bashara is an occasional smuggler on Artemis, the first and only city on the Moon. But when Jazz gets the chance to commit the perfect crime, she instead stumbles into the middle of a conspiracy for control of Artemis.
Status: 20th Century Fox acquired the movie rights to the novel months before publication. The Martian producers Simon Kinberg and Aditya Sood are onboard for the adaptation, with Phil Lord and Chris Miller directing.

 

Originally published: 2001, Viking Press
Optioned for: Film (Walt Disney Company)
What it’s about: Colfer’s beloved series follows teenage genius Artemis Fowl, who in the first book kidnaps LEPrecon (Lower Elements Police Recon) captain Holly Short in order to ransom her to the Fairy People.
Status: Since 2001, the film rights to the Artemis Fowl series have moved from Miramax to Disney. Though Kenneth Branagh signed on as director in 2015, there has been no news on the project until an open casting call in 2017 raised fans’ hopes again.

 

Originally published: 2018, Disney Press
Optioned for: Film (Paramount Pictures)
What it’s about: Twelve-year-old Aru Shah regularly makes up lies to brighten her mundane life, but she never imagines that when she lights the supposedly cursed Lamp of Bharata, that she’ll freeze everyone she loves in time and unleash the Sleeper demon. To save the day, she’ll have to find the reincarnations of the five Pandava brothers from the epic poem the Mahabharata and journey through the Kingdom of Death.
Status: Paramount won the bidding rights to create a movie franchise that Deadline describes as “a cross between Wizard of Oz and Coco, with a touch of Night at the Museum.”

 

Originally published: 2011, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Television (Starz)
What it’s about: Post-apocalyptic Chicago has been split into five factions, ways to group citizens possessing different affinities: Abnegation, Amity, Candor, Dauntless, and Erudite. When Abnegation member Tris discovers that she is Divergent—able to choose more than one faction—she goes for the brave, reckless adventurers Dauntless. Along the way, she uncovers conspiracy upon conspiracy that threaten the entire social system of the city.
Status: The Divergent franchise stumbled in the box office, with the third installment (part one of the third book) Allegiant not doing as well as its predecessors Divergent and Insurgent. Lionsgate announced in 2016 that it would release the fourth planned film, Ascendant, as a TV movie, and then develop a spinoff starring an entirely new cast. As of 2017, Starz will develop a new take on Allegiant for TV; it’s unclear if star Shailene Woodley and any of the original cast might return to wrap up the story.

 

Originally published: 1995, Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (Fremantle Media)
What it’s about: The series includes at least 16 standalone story arcs featuring over 2,000 original characters—the residents of Astro City, a mid-sized American city that boasts the largest number of superheroes and villains of any one place on the planet. Both regular people and “all-too-human superhumans” grapple with crime, justice, and life-altering events.
Status: Fremantle Media, the producers behind American Gods, will bring this adaptation to television. While DC Comics currently publishes the series, Busiek retains the rights (as Deadline points out), so don’t expect this series to be part of the DCEU.

 

Originally published: 2011, First Second Books
Optioned for: Film and Television (TBD)
What it’s about: Short version: “Harry Potter in space.” Long version: Hakata Soy, along with his friends and crushes Miyumi San and Maribelle Melonbelly, split time at Astronaut Academy between pop quizzes and Fireball Championships and saving the galaxy from threats that adults just can’t handle.
Status: Writer/producer Vivek J. Tiwary (The Fifth Beatle) has optioned the film and TV rights; he is currently in talks with studios, networks, and other creatives.

 

Originally published: 2016, Tor.com Publishing
Optioned for: Television (AMC)
What it’s about: Tommy Tester hustles to put food on the table, keep the roof over his father’s head, from Harlem to Flushing Meadows to Red Hook. He knows what magic a suit can cast, the invisibility a guitar case can provide, and the curse written on his skin that attracts the eye of wealthy white folks and their cops. But when he delivers an occult tome to a reclusive sorceress in the heart of Queens, Tom opens a door to a deeper realm of magic, and gets caught up in a Lovecraftian conspiracy to conjure the destruction of the world.
Status: AMC announced the project as part of their “scripts-to-series development model that puts the emphasis on the most important part of our strategy – outstanding writing, a commitment to worlds you’ve never seen on TV before, and rich character development.” No casting announcements yet, but Victor LaValle will act as co-executive producer.

 

Originally published: 1961, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Entertainment)
What it’s about: No word yet on if the project will draw inspiration from Batgirl’s current, rebooted arc, or the more classic stories like Alan Moore’s The Killing Joke or Gail Simone’s run.
Status: Joss Whedon exited the project in early 2018, a year after signing on, after admitting that he had no way in to Batgirl’s story. Christina Hodson (Birds of Prey, Transformers spinoff Bumblebee) has been hired to replace him.

 

Originally published: 1939, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Films)
What it’s about: Since the project has recently changed hands creatively, no word on the take on this standalone Batman film starring Ben Affleck.
Status: Matt Reeves (Cloverfield, War for the Planet of the Apes) has taken over directing and writing from Affleck.

 

Originally published: 2016, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
Optioned for: Television (Studio 8)
What it’s about: In Howey’s collection of linked novellas, the notion of the lighthouse keeping boats safe has transformed into lighthouses in space, sending beacons across the Milky Way to ensure safe passage for spaceships. But when the supposedly reliable beacons break down, a shellshocked former soldier must put aside his past to help the ships traveling out in the dark.
Status: Studio 8 has tapped Josh Friedman (creator, The Sarah Connor Chronicles and screenwriter, Avatar 3) to develop the TV series.

 

Originally published: 2011, Penguin Publishing Group
Optioned for: Television (Legendary Television)
What it’s about: In 2011, WIRED editor Wohlsen delved into a then-mostly-unknown subculture of biohackers working to change how we build and alter genetic code. In the intervening half-decade, biopunk has become much more mainstream, so it’s good timing to reexamine Wohlsen’s book on the small screen.
Status: Zachary Quinto will co-executive produce and star as “the iconoclastic leader of this movement who can’t wait for the future to get here fast enough.”

 

Originally published: 1995, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (DC Films/Warner Bros.)
What it’s about: The name for several comic book series (one written by Gail Simone) since its creation in 1995, Birds of Prey was originally built on the premise of Barbara Gordon and Black Canary teaming up. Later iterations have included Harley Quinn, which seems to be the direction this adaptation is heading in. It is currently unclear which arc or specific series is being adapted.
Status: Birds of Prey beat out Margot Robbie’s other DCEU girl gang project Gotham City Sirens, which now appears to be not be happening. Cathy Yan (Dead Pigs) is Warner Bros’ top choice to direct, from a screenplay by Christina Hodson, who is also scripting the Batgirl movie.

 

Originally published: 1945, Fawcett Comics
Optioned for: Film (DC Films)
What it’s about: The standalone film follows Black Adam (Dwayne Johnson), arch-nemesis of the superhero Shazam.
Status: In development.

 

 

Originally published: 1984, Tor Books
Optioned for: Television (Boston Diva Productions/Phantom Four)
What it’s about: The Black Company begin their series as a tough, cynical unit who sell their skills to the highest bidder. However, when they learn that an ancient prophecy may be coming true, they have to reevaluate their choices, and most importantly, decide whether to forsake old loyalties. The Lady, who rules the Northern Empire, hires the Black Company for her own ends.
Status: Eliza Dushku and David Goyer’s production companies (respectively) are collaborating on the adaptation, with Dushku playing the pivotal role of The Lady.

 

Originally published: 1966, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Marvel Studios)
What it’s about: “We have ideas and a pretty solid direction on where we want to head with the second one,” Kevin Feige told Entertainment Weekly when confirming the sequel in early 2018.
Status: While Feige confirmed that the sequel was “absolutely” happening, he did not provide specifics on release date (hence why it’s In the Works instead of Coming Soon) nor any other details.

 

Originally published: 1941, Quality Comics
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Films)
What it’s about: The Blackhawks are a World War II-era squadron of ace pilots led by a mysterious man known as Blackhawk to fight superpowered threats.
Status: Steven Spielberg will produce the adaptation, from a screenplay by frequent collaborator David Koepp (Jurassic Park, Indiana Jones and the Crystal Skull), “with an eye toward” directing.

 

Originally published: 2014, Vertigo Comics
Optioned for: Television (Hulu)
What it’s about: This miniseries follows four detectives trying to solve four murder cases, all in London but in distinct time periods: the 1890s, the 1940s, 2014, and post-apocalyptic 2050.
Status: Amulet screenwriter Aron Coleite is developing Bodies with Robert Downey Jr. and Susan Downey’s Team Downey company.

 

Originally published: 1991, Cartoon Books
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros)
What it’s about: The series follows the three Bone cousins, Fone, Smiley, and Phoney Bone, after they’re run out of Boneville and have to make a new life for themselves in a forbidding forest. They’re soon caught up in an adventure with a young woman named Thorn, which is gradually revealed to be an epic high fantasy saga.
Status: Warner Bros is planning a trilogy of feature-length animated films: Mark Osborne (Kung Fu Panda, The Little Prince) will direct a script co-written with Adam Kline (Artemis Fowl).

 

Originally published: 2015, Roc
Optioned for: Film and Television (Roaring Virgin Productions)
What it’s about: Being a “halfie”—not quite dead, not quite alive—makes Carlos Delacruz a perfect soulcatcher for the Council of the Dead in New York City: He tracks down ghosts with unfinished business and keeps them from disturbing the balance between the living and the dead.
Status: Actress and producer Anika Noni Rose optioned Daniel José Older’s urban fantasy series in January 2015.

 

Originally published: 2017, Harper
Optioned for: Film (Stone Village Productions)
What it’s about: In this futuristic retelling of the Joan of Arc story, humanity has fled the radioactive surface of the Earth for CIEL, a mysterious hovering platform. Having evolved into hairless, sexless creatures who inscribe stories upon their skin, the surviving humans are galvanized by Joan, “a child-warrior who possesses a mysterious force that lives within her and communes with the earth.”
Status: Stone Village won the movie rights before the book even hit shelves, with Scott Steindorff (The Lincoln Lawyer) and Dylan Russell (Penelope) producing.

 

Originally published: 2017, Farrar, Straus and Giroux
Optioned for: Film (Paramount)
What it’s about: Borne follows a young woman fighting to survive in desolate near-future city. The woman finds a green lumpish creature called Borne during a scavenging mission, and begins to realize that her new companion may be more than she first thought.
Status: Scott Rudin and Eli Bush, who are currently producing the film adaptation of VanderMeer’s Annihilation with Paramount, will also produce Borne.

 

Originally published: 2006, Wildstorm/Dynamite Entertainment
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios/Sony Pictures Television)
What it’s about: In a world where superheroes take advantage of their superpowered fame, Hughie (Jack Quaid) gets drawn into a covert war between the government and superheroes after the death of his girlfriend by the superhero A-Train (Jessie Usher).
Status: Supernatural and Timeless creator Eric Kripke is adapting the comic for television, and will executive produce alongside Preacher’s Evan Goldberg and Seth Rogen.

 

Originally published: 1932, Chatto &amp; Windus
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: Aldous Huxley’s scarily prescient vision of the future sees humans born in hatcheries and seduced by consumerism, free sex, and—when those don’t make them entirely happy—the hallucinogenic drug soma, which they can take to get away from it all. But soon a “savage” from the “reservation” threatens the World State.
Status: Steven Spielberg’s Amblin Television will adapt Huxley’s iconic novel, with Grant Morrison and Bryan Taylor (Crank) serving as writers and executive producers. No word yet if it will be a miniseries or ongoing series. The last update was in late 2016.

 

Originally published: 2016, Tor Books
Optioned for: Television (ITV Studios America)
What it’s about: Belcher’s urban fantasy follows an offshoot of the Knights of Templar: bikers, taxi hacks, state troopers, bus drivers—the Brotherhood of the Wheel—who protect travelers from roaming serial killers.
Status: ITV Studios America (Aquarius, Texas Rising) acquired the rights in mid-2017.

 

Optioned for: Television (Fox)
What it’s about: The legend of King Arthur, reimagined as a modern-day police procedural. Hoo boy. I’m just gonna post the synopsis: “When an ancient magic reawakens in modern-day Manhattan, a graffiti artist named Art must team with his best friend Lance and his ex, Gwen—an idealistic cop—in order to realize his destiny and fight back against the evil forces that threaten the city.”
Status: The Jackal Group’s Gail Berman (Buffy the Vampire Slayer, The Rocky Horror Picture Show reboot) and Joe Earley will oversee the project, written by Dan Frey and Ru Sommer (The Black List, Fox’s Saint Patrick) writing.

 

Originally published: 2017, Flatiron Books
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: When her cruel father arranges a marriage for her, Scarlett fears she will never journey to Caraval, the magical annual festival that demands participation of its attendees. But when her sister Tella whisks her away to Caraval, and then gets kidnapped, Scarlett learns the disturbing truth: This year’s Caraval revolves around Tella, with whoever finds her the winner.
Status: Fox preemptively picked up the film rights in 2015; as of early 2018, there were no new developments, though the option still holds.

 

Originally published: 2015, Dial Books
Optioned for: Film (Walt Disney Company)
What it’s about: Ellen DeGeneres, along with her A Very Good Production partner Jeffrey Kleeman, will produce the story of a 12-year-old witch who travels to Castle Hangnail to become its new master. If she fails at being as wicked as expected, the castle will be decommissioned by the Board of Magic, with its various residents (including a hypochondriac fish and a minotaur afraid of the letter Q) dispersed into the non-magic world.
Status: Recently announced.

Originally published: 2017, Spiegel &amp; Grau
Optioned for: Television (Annapurna Television)
What it’s about: LaValle’s New York City fairy tale centers on new parents Apollo and Emma, who suspect that something may be unusual about their son Brian… (Read our review.)
Status: Annapurna Television, which is also producing the Coen brothers’ Western anthology series for Netflix, will adapt the novel. Annapurna’s Sue Naegle and Ali Krug will oversee development, with LaValle serving as a co-executive producer.

 

Originally published: 2015, Pan Macmillan
Optioned for: Film (Summit Entertainment/Lionsgate Pictures)
What it’s about: The last remnants of Earth escape their dying planet for a fully terraformed one… only to find the new world abandoned by humans and occupied by a very different sentient species.
Status: Film rights optioned in mid-2017.

 

Originally published: 2014, Archie Horror
Optioned for: Television (Netflix)
What it’s about: This new interpretation of Sabrina the Teenage Witch draws from the recent series reimagining her occult upbringing as a half-mortal, half-witch.
Status: Aguirre-Sacasa, who currently serves as showrunner on The CW’s Riverdale, penned the pilot; Berlanti Productions and Warner Bros. TV are also involved. The series was originally being developed for The CW, but in late 2017, Netflix gave the series a two-season order. No release date yet, but early 2018 casting includes Doctor Who’s Michelle Gomez. Check out the first photos.

 

Originally published: 1970, Doubleday
Optioned for: Television (Skybound Entertainment)
What it’s about: Recovering from a loss of memory, Corwin discovers that he is a prince from Amber, one of the two “true” worlds—the other being the Courts of Chaos—waging war for control over the “shadow” worlds, including Earth.
Status: Robert Kirkman and David Alpert will adapt the ten-book series; no writers have been announced yet.

 

Originally published: 1932, Weird Tales
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios)
What it’s about: In this reimagining, “driven out of his tribal homelands, Conan wanders the mysterious and treacherous world of civilization where he searches for purpose in a place that rejects him as a mindless savage.”
Status: Ryan Condal (Colony co-creator), Miguel Sapochnik (Game of Thrones director), and Warren Littlefield (The Handmaid’s Tale producer) are adapting the series.

 

Originally published: 1987, Macmillan
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios)
What it’s about: The first book in Banks’ Culture series is the story of Horza, who is tasked by the conquering and warlike Idirans with recovering a Culture “Mind”—an A.I. that could help them wipe out the Culture.
Status: Amazon Studios has acquired the rights to Consider Phlebas, with the Estate of Iain M. Banks serving as executive producer. Dennis Kelly (Utopia, Matilda) will adapt the series, with Plan B Entertainment (World War Z) producing.

 

Originally published: 2015, Bloomsbury USA
Optioned for: Film (Constantin Film/Tempo Productions)
What it’s about: After killing what she believes is a wolf, huntress Feyre realizes that she has accidentally slain a faerie. Dragged to the faeries’ realm by lethal immortal Tamlin, Feyre must choose between stopping an impending, shadowy threat or dooming Tamlin and the world of Fae forever.
Status: The production company behind the Resident Evil movie franchise and the Shadowhunters: The Mortal Instruments TV series (based on Cassandra Clare’s books) is adapting Maas’ first novel in this series of the same name for the big screen. Maas shared a photo of the first page of the screenplay (adapted by Rachel Hirons) in mid-2018, warning fans that it was still slow going as they were searching for the perfect director and cast.

 

Originally published: 2017, Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (eOne)
What it’s about: “A slick and ruthless Chicago hitman. A smart but downtrodden Seattle housewife. When an inexplicable event strikes these two random strangers, their bodies, souls, and lives are switched to potentially deadly effect. It’s Freaky Friday meets Goodfellas!”
Status: The adaptation is one of Vanessa Piazza’s (Lost Girl, Dark Matter) major projects in her new multi-year producing partnership with eOne. Simone wrote the pilot and will serve as an executive producer, with Staggs serving as a consulting producer.

 

Originally published: 2003, Plume Books
Optioned for: Film &amp; Television (Amazon Studios/Sony Pictures Entertainment)
What it’s about: Stephen King has described the series as his magnum opus: Combining themes from sci-fi, fantasy, horror, and Western, it follows a gunslinger (Idris Elba), the Man in Black he’s following (Matthew McConaughey), and his quest to find a tower that is both physical and metaphorical.
Status: The Dark Tower movie (read our review) came to theaters August 4, 2017. The TV show is expected to premiere in 2018: Based on Wizard and Glass, it’s a 10-to-13-episode prequel series following a young Roland. In mid-2018, Amazon Studios’ new head Jennifer Salke confirmed that the TV series is not dead but also said that she has yet to read the scripts.

 

Originally published: 2015, Tor Books
Optioned for: Film (G-BASE)
What it’s about: Traveler-magician Kell’s official job is to deliver correspondence between the parallel Londons, but his unofficial job is smuggling visitors to see the flourishing magic of Red London, or the eerie control of White London (though no one is allowed in Black London). When a thief from boring Grey London robs, saves, and then joins Kell, he discovers the perilous magic at the root of everything.
Status: While the original plans for the adaptation was a limited series along the lines of Game of Thrones, the project changed direction in 2017: Schwab will be a producer on the movie version of the first book, with the other two volumes serving as material for a potential franchise.

 

Originally published: 1987, Grand Central Publishing
Optioned for: Television (TBD)
What it’s about: Lilith’s Brood is a trilogy, in which the alien Oankali save humans from themselves, but for a price (Dawn); some humans agree to mate and evolve with the Oankali, while others revolt (Adulthood Rites); and there emerges a new generation of human-Oankali hybrids (Imago).
Status: While producer Allen Bain acquired the TV rights in 2015, that adaptation seems to have fallen through. As of mid-2017, director Ava DuVernay (A Wrinkle in Time) is helming the new adaptation alongside producer Charles D. King’s (Fences) Macro Ventures and TV writer Victoria Mahoney (Misfits). Right now it seems as if only Dawn is in development.

 

Originally published: 1937, Collins Crime Club
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: On a tranquil cruise down the Nile River, Hercule Poirot (Kenneth Branagh) must determine who shot a beautiful young passenger.
Status: 20th Century Fox announced the sequel to Murder on the Orient Express in late 2017. Screenwriter Michael Green will adapt this novel, as he did the prior, with director Kenneth Branagh expected to return.

 

Originally published: 2013, First Second Books
Optioned for: Film (Disney)
What it’s about: Like the female Indiana Jones and trained in 47 styles of swordfighting, Delilah Dirk breaks out of a Turkish prison and picks up a mild-mannered lieutenant, Selim, as her sidekick for fighting pirates and the like.
Status: Disney is developing a live-action adaptation that could lead to a diverse franchise built on female empowerment.

 

Doc Savage, from the character created by Henry W. Ralston, John L. Nanovic, and Lester Dent

Originally published: 1933, Doc Savage Magazine
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures/Original Film)
What it’s about: The pulpy adventure hero has been credited as the forerunner to modern superheroes.
Status: Director Shane Black and Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson have wanted to work together on this adaptation since 2016, but there’s been no real update.

 

Originally published: 1962, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: No word yet on whether this will be a standalone film or if Doctor Doom will get to play off the Fantastic Four.
Status: Legion creator and executive producer Noah Hawley announced at SDCC 2017 that he was developing the film, reportedly to direct. It would seem that he wants to mix genres, perhaps drawing inspiration from Captain America: The Winter Soldier to make the Doom movie more of a political thriller.

 

Originally published: 1968, Ballantine Books
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros.)
What it’s about: The possible franchise series would begin with the first book, Dragonflight, which sees orphaned noble Lessa hiding out as a lowly servant after the assassination of her family. But as her telepathic powers grow, a dragonrider recognizes her potential to become the strongest Weyrwoman (that is, the female leader in a Weyr, or group of dragons) in recent history.
Status: As of late 2014, the studio had landed a screenwriter, but no update since then.

 

Originally published: 1965, Chilton Books
Optioned for: Film and Television (Legendary Entertainment)
What it’s about: Dune tells the story of Paul Atreides, whose family accepts stewardship of the desert planet Arrakis, the only source of the coveted “spice” in the universe. After a betrayal, Paul leads a rebellion to restore his family’s control over Arrakis.
Status: Legendary Entertainment has reached an agreement with the Frank Herbert estate in which it has acquired the film and television rights to Dune. The agreement calls for the development and production of possible film and TV projects for a global audience. Brian Herbert has confirmed that Arrival and Blade Runner 2049 director Denis Villeneuve will helm the project. In an early 2018 interview, he said that he was planning at least two films, and that the first would probably take two years to make—which means we shouldn’t expect it before 2020.

 

Originally published: 2017, Knopf
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures)
What it’s about: Astronaut Scott Kelly’s memoir will detail his year spent in space, as well as the post-return to Earth experiments conducted on him and his twin brother and fellow astronaut Mark Kelly to help guide NASA’s plans for eventual travel to Mars.
Status: Sony Pictures picked up the competitive rights to the book; both Kelly brothers will serve as co-executive producers.

 

Originally published: 1992, Image Comics
Optioned for: Film (Netflix/Fundamental Films)
What it’s about: Spanning nine comic-book titles and nearly 100 characters, Liefeld’s universe includes such superheroes as Bloodstrike, Brigade, Lethal, Re-Gex, Cybrid, Bloodwulf, Battlestone, Kaboom, and Nitro-Gen.
Status: Liefeld will work with Akiva Goldsman and Graham King to develop the property, with the potential opportunity to make it into a film franchise. Netflix bought the rights in early 2018, setting up a cinematic universe writers room helmed by Goldsman.

 

Originally published: 2018, Scholastic
Optioned for: Television (Fox 21 Television Studios)
What it’s about: Violet and her friends are diehard fans of dystopian book/movie franchise The Gallows Dance. But when a freak accident at Comic-Con catapults them into the story, and they accidentally kill heroine Rose, the only way out is for Violet to step into Rose’s role and play out the plot to the end.
Status: Producer Ileen Maisel (The Golden Compass) inked a first-look deal with Fox 21 in 2018, and is looking to develop Day’s novel as a TV series.

 

Originally published: 2015, Orbit Books
Optioned for: Television (TNT)
What it’s about: The series follows three women who possess the ability to control the civilization-causing earthquakes (the eponymous “fifth season”) that threaten their world… but they can also create them. Damaya is training to serve the Empire; ambitious Syenite is ordered to breed with her frighteningly powerful mentor; and Essun is searching for the husband who murdered her son and kidnapped her daughter mere hours after the last Season.
Status: Leigh Dana Jackson (Sleepy Hollow, Helix) will adapt the first installment of Jemisin’s Broken Earth trilogy.

 

Originally published: 2018, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures)
What it’s about: The United Nations teams up with international space agencies to create an unprecedented coalition of six intrepid teenagers who will establish humanity’s first settlement on Jupiter’s moon Europa. Not much else is known, but the book will have themes of global unity, leadership, and environmentalism.
Status: Sony optioned the rights based on the first few chapters alone, ahead of publication. Josh Bratman at Immersive Pictures is attached to produce.

 

Originally published: 1984, McClelland &amp; Stewart
Optioned for: Television (Temple Street)
What it’s about: Five people invited to Fionavar (the first of all worlds), ostensibly for the celebration of the king, discover that each of them has a role to play in the war that is brewing.
Status: Temple Street, the production company behind Orphan Black, will bring the series to television.

 

Originally published: 1974, St. Martin’s Press
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros.)
What it’s about: Channing Tatum has signed on to star as William Mandella, a soldier fighting a fearsome enemy, only to (thanks to time dilation) return to a world he doesn’t recognize.
Status: The project was initially announced in 2015. Screenwriter Jon Spaihts provided an update in late 2016, saying that the adaptation was still happening but had been delayed by the production of his film Passengers.

 

Originally published: 2013, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Film (Fox)
What it’s about: Edgar Wright will direct a part-live action, part-animated adaptation (written by Flight of the Conchords’ Bret McKenzie) of Gaiman’s children’s book. Johnny Depp will star as a father who, with his son, gets caught up in issues of time travel and breakfast cereal.
Status: Currently the aforementioned folks are in negotiations.

 

Originally published: 1951, Gnome Press
Optioned for: Television (HBO)
What it’s about: Foreseeing the imminent fall of the Galactic Empire, mathematician Hari Sheldon creates a foundation of artists, academics, and engineers to preserve and expand on humanity’s knowledge before said fall.
Status: At a 2015 Paley Center panel, Jonathan Nolan said he was still “incredibly excited” about the adaptation and that he was in talks with Robyn Asimov, Isaac’s daughter, about the project. He mentioned that it would be “coming together,” but didn’t give any specifics. No word how the success of Westworld affects the likelihood of the Foundation adaptation, but something to consider.

 

Originally published: 1996, Bantam Books
Optioned for: Television (HBO)
What it’s about: Not much is known yet, but the projects in development will explore different time periods in Westeros, meaning they could be prequels or spinoffs, but they won’t continue the storylines of established characters. (Which means no Dunk &amp; Egg or Robert’s Rebellion.) Martin prefers the term “successor show”; his latest update, from May 2017.
Status: HBO and Martin are working with five different writers (Max Borenstein, Jane Goldman, Brian Helgeland, Carly Wray, and one unnamed) to create potential spinoffs inspired by Martin’s series. The author will serve as executive producer on whichever project(s) get picked up; the same goes for Game of Thrones co-creators D.B. Weiss and David Benioff.

 

Originally published: 1977, St. Martin’s Press
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: The discovery of Gateway, a space station belonging to the Heechee alien race, in a hollow asteroid leads to a kind of gold rush for the human race, as they endeavor to learn more about the Heechee and turn these artifacts into fortunes.
Status: Syfy announced in 2015 its intention to adapt the novel to series, with David Eick (Battlestar Galactica) revising a pilot script written by Josh Pate (Falling Skies).

 

Originally published: 2016, Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill
Optioned for: Film (Fox Animation)
What it’s about: Every year, the people of the Protectorate leave a baby as an offering to an unseen witch. But when delivering a baby to waiting families on her yearly journey, witch Xan accidentally feeds moonlight to the infant, filling her with magic. Xan decides she must raise this enmagicked girl, whom she calls Luna, as her own, with the help of a wise swamp monster and a Perfectly Tiny Dragon.
Status: Kubo and the Two Strings co-writer Marc Haimes is adapting Barnhill’s book as a live-action/animation-hybrid film.

 

Originally published: 2018, Penguin Random House
Optioned for: Film (Fox)
What it’s about: Not much information is available about the book except that it’s described by Deadline as “a sci-fi time travel procedural.” Read our review of Sweterlitsch’s first novel, Tomorrow and Tomorrow, for an idea of his work.
Status: District 9 and Elysium’s Neill Blomkamp signed on to write and direct the film adaptation even before the novel was published.

 

Originally published: 1946, Eyre &amp; Spottiswoode
Optioned for: Television (FremantleMedia North America)
What it’s about: Titus Groan, reluctant heir to Gormenghast Castle, finds his legacy potentially threatened by the more charismatic kitchen boy Steerpike, who’s moving up through the ranks.
Status: Neil Gaiman and Akiva Goldsman will serve as non-writing executive producers alongside fellow EPs Barry Spikings (The Deer Hunter) and David A. Stern (Howards End).

 

Originally published: 2015, Saga Press
Optioned for: Film (DMG Entertainment)
What it’s about: Bandit Kuni Garu and Mata Zyndu, son of a deposed duke, become friends when fighting to overthrow the emperor. But once the throne is available for the taking, they become leaders of opposing factions, with very different views on the best way to run the world.
Status: DMG Entertainment has acquired the film and licensing rights to the entire Dandelion Dynasty series into a film series.

 

Originally published: 2014, Penguin Books
Optioned for: Film (New Regency)
What it’s about: Austin Szerba struggles with confusing sexual feelings for both his best friend and his girlfriend while preying mantises hatch in his Iowa town and threaten to take over the world.
Status: Edgar Wright (Scott Pilgrim vs. the World) is on board to direct. New Regency is in final negotiations after a bidding war against Netflix and others; the project had previously been set up at Sony.

 

Originally published: 2018, Grand Central Publishing (US) and Sphere Fiction (UK)
Optioned for: Film (Fox 2000/Working Title)
What it’s about: Described as “Sleepless in Seattle meets Her,” the novel follows a pair of AIs who attempt matchmaking with two lovelorn humans.
Status: Fox 2000, which adapted John Green’s Paper Towns and Nicholas Sparks’ The Longest Ride for the big screen, acquired film rights to Reizin’s partial manuscript before the London Book Fair in 2016. Fox 2000 is partnering with Working Title to adapt the novel.

 

Originally published: 1959, Viking
Optioned for: Television (Amblin TV/Netflix)
What it’s about: Shirley Jackson’s famous ghost story involves a summer at the eponymous house, as a doctor invites three strangers there to investigate the property’s supposed supernatural possession.
Status: Netflix has given a 10-episode straight-to-series order to the as-yet untitled series, a modern reimagining of The Haunting of Hill House.

 

Originally published: 2018, Flatiron Books
Optioned for: Film (Columbia Pictures)
What it’s about: Pursued by bad luck, teenager Alice and her mother live on the road, with no contact with Alice’s grandmother Althea Proserpine, author of the dark fairy tales Tales from the Hinterland. When her mother is kidnapped, Alice must confront the fact that the Hinterland is real—and journey into it to discover how her own story went so wrong.
Status: Ashleigh Powell (The Nutcracker and the Four Realms, The Paper Magician) will adapt the novel for the screen.

 

Originally published: 2016, Tor Books
Optioned for: Television (Warner Bros.)
What it’s about: The residents of Black Spring use apps and video surveillance to keep track of their resident witch, who in turn keeps them trapped in Black Spring. But when a group of teenage boys want to broadcast the existence of Katherine van Wyler outside of their tiny town, they risk unleashing an ancient and dangerous magic.
Status: Not much information beyond the initial announcement, but in the meantime, delve into the creepiness of Black Spring by reading an excerpt.

 

Originally published: 2017, Penguin Random House
Optioned for: Film (Studio 8)
What it’s about: Described as Interstellar meets Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, “The Hidden Girl” follows a group of female assassins who can cross between dimensions.
Status: Film rights were optioned before Liu’s story was even published; it appeared in the 2017 anthology The Book of Swords, edited by Gardner Dozois. Novelist and screenwriter Ellen Shanman will adapt the screenplay.

 

Originally published: 2016, Viking
Optioned for: Television (IM Global Television)
What it’s about: On a business trip in rural Pennsylvania, suburban family man Ben decides to take a short hike before his dinner meeting… only to find himself lost in the woods, his path crossed by a talking crab, a futuristic hovercraft, a 16th-century Spanish explorer, and even more surreal encounters.
Status: David S. Goyer (Batman v Superman) is producing the show, with Magary adapting his novel to pilot.

 

Originally Published: 1995, Scholastic UK/1996, Alfred A. Knopf
Optioned for: Television (BBC One)
What it’s about: Lyra, an orphan, and her trusty dæmon Pan travel through parallel universes in order to learn the truth about her parents, prophecies about Lyra’s place in the fight against celestial beings, and the meaning behind the mysterious Dust.
Status: The BBC is partnering with New Line Cinema (who produced the movie version of The Golden Compass in 2007) to adapt all three books for television, with author Philip Pullman drawing comparisons to Game of Thrones and The Wire. Jack Thorne (Harry Potter and the Cursed Child) will write the teleplay, under the watch of producers Jane Tranter and Julie Gardner (Doctor Who). Bad Wolf TV tweeted an update in early 2018, after wrapping production on A Discovery of Witches, saying that the HDM adaptation was next up. The first major casting news includes Logan’s Dafne Keen as Lyra, and Hamilton’s Lin-Manuel Miranda as Lee Scoresby.

 

Originally published: 2014, Quirk Books
Optioned for: Television (Fox)
What it’s about: The novel follows five employees at the ORSK furniture superstore, as they volunteer to take an all-nighter shift to find out what’s behind the mysterious damage at their store. Fox’s supernatural dramedy (co-written by The O.C. creator Josh Schwartz and produced by Charlie Kaufman) seems to be building out this story into more serialized form, focusing on slacker protagonist Amy.
Status: No update yet.

 

Originally published: TBA, Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux
Optioned for: Film (Netflix)
What it’s about: VanderMeer describes the novel, inspired by our dystopian present, as “a taut thriller set in the Pacific Northwest about a simple act of turning a key in the door of a storage unit, and changing someone’s life forever.”
Status: Netflix is nearing a deal to nab the movie rights to VanderMeer’s upcoming novel, announced in 2017.

 

Originally published: 2018, G.P. Putnam’s Sons
Optioned for: Film, 20th Century Fox
What it’s about: A retelling of the Donner Party tragedy, but with zombies.
Status: 20th Century Fox snapped up the film rights to former CIA analyst Katsu’s book proposal, with Luke Scott (The Martian) attached to direct the film.

 

Originally published: 1989, Doubleday
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: On the eve of armageddon brought about by galactic war, seven pilgrims set out to the Shrike, hidden in the Valley of Time Tombs. Each has a riddle, a hope, and a secret.
Status: Bradley Cooper, who has been trying to adapt the novel for years, is now working with Syfy to adapt the novel into an “event series” (i.e., miniseries). Itamar Moses (Boardwalk Empire) is set to write the screenplay.

 

Originally published: 2018, HarperCollins UK
Optioned for: Television (Carnival Films)
What it’s about: In 1997, 17-year-old Emma creates an artificial intelligence that she names Organon. As Emma grows up, the AI grows with her; but as rival companies begin developing their own AIs, Emma struggles with whether to hand over Organon, if it means saving humanity from itself.
Status: Carnival Films, a producer behind Downtown Abbey, is adapting the novel for television.

 

Originally published: 2015, Knopf
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros./Plan B Entertainment)
What it’s about: Told through a series of letters, chat conversations, and dossiers, a teenage hacker and her pilot ex must struggle with their broken relationship while unearthing an interstellar conspiracy.
Status: No update since the first announcement in 2015.

 

Originally published: 2018, Image Comics
Optioned for: Film (TriStar)
What it’s about: “A haunted house story for the 21st century, Infidel follows an American Muslim woman and her multi-racial neighbors who move into a building haunted by entities that feed off xenophobia.”
Status: Producer Michael Sugar acquired the rights to Infidel before the third of its five issues even came out.

 

Originally published: 2015, Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (Universal Cable Productions)
What it’s about: Five eccentric geniuses collaborate on an unprecedented artificial intelligence, created by both technology and shamanistic magic. Years later, the disbanded group must reunite when the AI they created reemerges, wreaking havoc inspired by superstition and folklore.
Status: UCP optioned the TV rights in 2018. Ellis is already working with UCP to adapt his vigilante crime graphic novel series El Pantera.

 

Originally published: 1976, Knopf
Optioned for: Film (Universal Pictures)
What it’s about: Louis de Pointe du Lac tells his life story to a reporter—but as life stories go, it’s a doozy, spanning over two centuries of being a vampire alongside his maker Lestat and their bloodthirsty charge Claudia.
Status: For a long time the rumors were that Josh Boone (The Fault in Our Stars) was working on a movie adaptation that combined the plots of The Vampire Lestat and The Queen of the Damned. Then Boone clarified in 2016 that he was remaking Interview, by sharing a page from the script on Instagram. He has also hinted that Jared Leto could play Lestat, though that has not been confirmed.

 

Originally published: 2011, Image Comics
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: Silas’ life is turned upside-down when he discovers that the voice in his head—an entire personality named Jake Ellis—is a result of human experimentation. With Jake Ellis’ help, Silas flees the people chasing him as he tries to learn what happened to him. (In the comics, Silas was former CIA analyst-turned-criminal Jon Moore; it’s unclear if the film will stick to this original background.)
Status: Josh Mond (James White) will direct the adaptation, taking over for David Yates; they’re currently looking for a screenwriter.

 

Originally published: 1940, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (DC Films/Warner Bros)
What it’s about: What would it be about? As Polygon argues, 75 years of comics “has yet to produce an origin story for the Joker that anyone gives a good goddamn about.” It’s unclear which established story the creative team will pull from.
Status: Todd Phillips (The Hangover) is set to co-write a script with Scott Silver (8 Mile), with Phillips directing alongside Martin Scorsese producing.

 

Originally published: 1993, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (DC Films/Warner Bros)
What it’s about: Described as “an insane and twisted love story. When Harry Met Sally on benzedrine.”
Status: Glenn Ficarra and John Requa (Crazy, Stupid, Love and This Is Us) are in final negotiations to write and direct the movie, to be released at some point after Suicide Squad 2.

 

Originally published: 1977, Rebellion
Optioned for: Television (IM Global Television)
What it’s about: The ensemble drama follows a team of Judges as they deal with crime in the future-shocked megalopolis of the 22nd century.
Status: IM Global Television president Mark Stern, who developed Battlestar Galactica and other Syfy series, will serve as executive producer.

 

Originally published: 2010, IDW Publishing
Optioned for: Television (Universal Cable Productions)
What it’s about: This Shakespeare crossover comic diverts the plot of Hamlet, joining the titular prince up with Richard III, Lady Macbeth, Juliet, and many more in a world where all of the Bard’s villains are banding together to kill the reclusive wizard known as William Shakespeare.
Status: UCP optioned the project in 2015, but there’s been no updates since.

 

Originally published: 2007, DAW Books
Optioned for: Film, Television, &amp; Video Games (Lionsgate/Showtime)
What it’s about: In Rothfuss’ fantasy trilogy—the first two books of which have been published—adventurer and musician Kvothe tells his life story, with the majority of the series made up by the flashbacks.
Status: Lionsgate plans to adapt the books into movies and a TV series and tie-in video games… and perhaps eventually for the stage? At any rate, it’s in good hands: Hamilton‘s Lin-Manuel Miranda will serve as creative producer overseeing this burgeoning franchise, and John Rogers will serve as showrunner of the TV series. In late 2017, Showtime announced that it would air the TV series, which will take place a generation before the events of Name of the Wind and follow “a pair of wandering performers on their adventures through the unique and startling world of Temerant.” Early 2018 brought word that Sam Raimi (Spider-Man, Evil Dead) would direct the feature film adaptation of The Name of the Wind.

 

Originally published: 2016, Thomas &amp; Mercer
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios)
What it’s about: Twenty-five years after a worldwide epidemic reduced the female birth population from 50 percent to 1 percent, an entire generation grows up with a population of fewer than a thousand women. Held captive in a scientific facility looking for the cure, Zoey seeks to escape beyond the walls of the facility rather than be subjected to a potentially fatal round of experiments. But after being isolated from her family for two decades, Zoey has no idea what kind of world awaits her outside of the walls of her prison.
Status: According to Publishers Marketplace, Amazon Studios has nabbed the TV rights to Hart’s dystopian novel.

 

Originally published: 2012, Quirk Books
Optioned for: Television (CBS)
What it’s about: Asteroid 2011GV1 is hurtling toward Earth, the human race has six months left to live, people are leaving their jobs to hole up in churches to pray, and yet Detective Hank Palace is still solving murders.
Status: No updates since the original announcement in 2012, so it’s likely in development hell.

 

Originally published: 2013, Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios)
What it’s about: In an alternate near future, the world has been divided up among 16 rival families ruling in a dystopian feudal system. The series follows Forever Carlyle, a military leader for the Carlyle family, who questions her identity in this nature-versus-nurture future.
Status: Rucka, who is adapting the comic, and Lark will co-produce with Angela Cheng Caplan.

 

Originally published: 1999, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: The ongoing comic book series teams up a bevy of Victorian characters from literature—including Mina Murray, Allan Quatermain, Captain Nemo, Doctor Jekyll/Mr. Hyde, and the Invisible Man—to fight various nasties.
Status: The 2003 movie adaptation starring Sean Connery tanked, but Fox is rebooting itself over a decade later. No cast has yet been announced.

 

Originally published: 1969, Ace Books
Optioned for: Television (Critical Content)
What it’s about: The novel follows Genly Ai, who travels from Terra to the planet Gethen (a.k.a. “Winter”), to try and convince the planet’s nations to join the Ekumen, a peaceful confederation of planets. But as he explores Gethenian culture, Ai is stymied by both the Gethenians’ ambisexuality—the androgynous inhabitants can shift their gender according to mating rituals—as well as the planet’s politics.
Status: Limitless producers Tom Forman, Andrew Marcus, and Raymond Ricord will oversee the adaptation, announced in mid-2017; no writer has yet been announced.

 

Originally published: 2006, Bantam Spectra
Optioned for: Television (TBA)
What it’s about: Elite con artists the Gentleman Bastards—counting among their ranks their leader Father Chains and his protege Locke Lamora—rob the rich in the Venice-like city of Camorr on a distant planet. As Locke comes of age, the Gentleman Bastards find themselves fighting the mysterious Gray King, looking to take over the criminal underworld.
Status: Warner Bros. had acquired the film rights shortly after the book’s release in 2006, but those seem to have lapsed. In 2014, TV writer Ryan Condal (The Sixth Gun) claimed that he was writing a pilot; Lynch neither confirmed nor denied that he was confirming or denying the news.

 

Originally published: 2013, Tor.com
Optioned for: Film (Paramount Pictures)
What it’s about: Nina, one of the few descendants of an abandoned Mars colony, discovers that she can breathe the toxic atmosphere of her home planet.
Status: A Quiet Place director/co-writer/star John Krasinski will adapt the story with fellow A Quiet Place producers Michael Bay, Andrew Form, and Brad Fuller. Krasinski is onboard as a producer and unlikely to direct or write, but no screenwriter has yet been announced.

 

Originally published: 2002, Tor Books
Optioned for: Television (AMC)
What it’s about: Presented in the form of a documentary, Chiang’s novella features arguments for and against calliagnosia, a simple (and reversible) procedure that removes ingrained biases against certain appearances.
Status: Arrival (based on Chiang’s “Story of Your Life”) screenwriter Eric Heisserer announced on Twitter in 2017 that he would be adapting Liking What You See (from the same collection, Stories of Your Life and Others) for AMC.

 

Originally published: 2008, Tor Books
Optioned for: Film (Paramount Pictures)
What it’s about: Cory Doctorow’s modern techno-thriller follows a 17-year-old hacker in the wrong place at the wrong time following a terrorist attack on San Francisco, and how he and his friends must fend for themselves when their home becomes a police state.
Status: In 2015, Paramount Pictures acquired Cory Doctorow’s hacker series as its own “reality-based” YA franchise; no update since then.

 

Originally published: 2013, Angry Robot Books
Optioned for: Television (ABC)
What it’s about: IT consultant Roen Tan must become a secret agent when he’s taken over by an ancient alien named Tao. He soon learns that whether he likes it or not, he’s part of a terrifying alien civil war—and one side is quite willing to wipe humanity out in order to win. Roen must fight to save his species, while also training to become a real secret agent.
Status: Tara Butters and Michele Fazekas, the executive producers behind Agent Carter, are developing the series with Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and Agent Carter‘s Chris Dingess. Chu will serve as a consultant.

 

Originally published: 2008, IDW Publishing
Optioned for: Television (Hulu)
What it’s about: After the gruesome murder of their father/husband, the Locke family moves in to their family estate on the island of Lovecraft, Massachusetts. As the Locke boys mourn their father, they also discover a set of magical keys that open strange doors in the house… but that also draw out creatures who’ve been looking for those locks and keys.
Status: Locke &amp; Key has gone through a number of failed adaptations, from a Dimension Films movie to a TV series—that Fox greenlit in 2011, only to pass on—to a movie trilogy from Universal Pictures. In 2017, Hulu ordered a pilot written by Hill, with Carlton Cuse (Lost, Bates Motel) producing and Andy Muschietti (It) directing. However, the pilot was not picked up; as of early 2018, it was still being shopped to other distributors.

 

Originally published: 2013, Disney-Hyperion
Optioned for: Television (Big Talk Productions)
What it’s about: The YA series, described as “Ghostbusters meets Sherlock Holmes,” takes place in an alternate-universe London where young people with the ability to perceive ghosts and supernatural creatures set up rival detective agencies. The most ramshackle of these is Lockwood &amp; Co.
Status: London’s Big Talk Productions has optioned the TV rights to the Lockwood &amp; Co. series.

 

Originally published: 1967, Dial Press
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros.)
What it’s about: In the dystopian future of 2116, the population lives only to 21; on citizens’ Lastdays, they are executed, or those who attempt to escape are run down by Sandmen. Logan-5, a Sandman, plans to ring in his 21st birthday by tracking down the rumored Sanctuary that takes in runners; instead, he becomes sympathetic to their cause.
Status: The 1976 movie adaptation became a cult classic but changed some key details (like raising the age from 21 to 30). Joel Silver, Simon Kinberg, and Ryan Condal are teaming up on a new film that will hew closer to the original novel.

 

Originally published: 1967, Doubleday
Optioned for: Television (Universal Cable Productions)
What it’s about: Generations after the survivors of a crashed spaceship took on the identities and powers of deities on their new planet, a former “god” tries to upend the system.
Status: Ashley Miller (X-Men) will write the adaptation and exec produce; Gale Anne Hurd (The Walking Dead) and Valhalla Entertainment will also produce.

 

Originally published: 1954, Allen &amp; Unwin
Optioned for: Television (Warner Bros. Television/Amazon Studios)
What it’s about: According to the press release in late 2017, the series will also explore “new storylines” preceding The Fellowship of the Ring, making this a prequel series.
Status: Amazon Studios will adapt the trilogy into an epic fantasy TV series alongside the Tolkien Estate and Trust as well as New Line Cinema. Amazon has made a five-season commitment but must begin production by 2020 per the terms of the deal.

 

Originally published: 2016, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Television (HBO)
What it’s about: Searching for his missing father, 22-year-old Army veteran Atticus Turner, accompanied by his Uncle George and childhood friend Letitia (Jurnee Smollett-Bell), encounters both “the mundane terrors of white America” and malevolent, otherworldly forces.
Status: Jordan Peele (Get Out) and J.J. Abrams will serve as executive producers along with Misha Green (Underground), who will write the pilot and serve as showrunner. Yann Demange (Dead Set) will direct.

 

Originally published: 2014, Boom! Studios
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: Boom! Studios describes its beloved series as “Buffy the Vampire Slayer meets Gravity Falls and features five butt-kicking, rad teenage girls wailing on monsters and solving a mystery with the whole world at stake.”
Status: Emily Carmichael (Powerhouse) will direct the adaptation.

 

Originally published: 2015, Tor Books/Gollancz
Optioned for: Television (CBS)
What it’s about: In 2110, fifty years after the Moon’s colonization, the top ruling families—the Five Dragons—are intermarrying, poisoning, sabotaging, and battling for control of the Moon.
Status: CBS Television Studios won the bidding war over adaptation rights in late 2015. In the meantime, we made a handy chart showing you how everyone is related in this drama some are likening to “Game of Thrones on the Moon.”

 

Originally published: 2003, Doubleday/Bloomsbury
Optioned for: Television (Paramount TV/Anonymous Content)
What it’s about: The speculative fiction trilogy follows the 21st-century human race before and after the Waterless Flood, brought about by corporations’ control and an overabundance of genetically-engineered organisms. The latter two books look at the survivors of the Flood and how they rebuild society.
Status: The adaptation that Darren Aronofsky was planning to helm for HBO was declared dead in 2016. In 2018, Paramount TV and Anonymous Content won the bidding war for television rights to Atwood’s series.

 

 

Originally published: 2016, Slate
Optioned for: Film (Netflix)
What it’s about: Bacigalupi’s short story “Mika Model,” written as part of Slate’s Future Tense initiative, has drawn comparisons to Ex Machina for its examination of whether a robot (a sex bot, no less) is capable of murder. Detective Rivera finds himself grappling not only with his attraction to the fantasy-in-the-synthetic-flesh, but also with issues of morality and justice.
Status: Up-and-comer David Weil is in talks to adapt the screenplay, as the subject matter matches one of his spec screenplays that made it onto the 2014 Hit List. Shawn Levy (Night at the Museum, Real Steel) will produce.

 

Originally published: 2004-present, Millarworld
Optioned for: Television &amp; Film (Netflix)
What it’s about: This collective universe contains Millar’s titles including Kick-Ass, Superior, American Jesus, Empress, Huck, and more.
Status: Netflix has snapped up the rights to the rest of the Millarworld titles not already adapted. According to THR, Netflix could mine properties like Reborn, MPH, and Jupiter’s Legacy.

 

Originally published: 2004, Image Comics
Optioned for: Film (Lionsgate)
What it’s about: In this modern-day retelling of the golem legend, ex-junkie Alice Cohen inherits a Brooklyn house from her grandmother, only to discover a diary from the 1930s detailing the creation of a monster that would avenge a good man’s death.
Status: Dave Wilson (creative director of the studio that made Deadpool) will direct a screenplay by Barnett Brettler.

 

Originally published: 2015, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Television (Marvel Animation/Disney Channels Worldwide)
What it’s about: Nine-year-old super-genius/Inhuman Lunella Lafayette teams up with her crimson dinosaur to save the day.
Status: Laurence Fishburne’s (black-ish, grown-ish) Cinema Gypsy Productions is developing the comic as an animated series, though it’s unclear if it will wind up on Disney Channel, Disney XD, or Disney Junior.

 

Originally published: 1987, Gollancz
Optioned for: Film (Narrativia)
What it’s about: Hapless Mort lives up to his name when he becomes the apprentice to Death. But he is torn between helping his master usher souls into the afterlife and the desire to change destiny for pretty princesses and others called before their time.
Status: Announced at Pratchett’s memorial in 2016. Terry Rossio (Aladdin, Shrek, Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl) will write the adapted screenplay.

 

Originally published: 2006, Archaia Studios Press
Optioned for: Film (Fox)
What it’s about: Peterson’s graphic novel series follows the Mouse Guard, a brotherhood of medieval mice in an alternate-history world without humans, protecting their fellow mice from predators.
Status: Rogue One screenwriter Gary Whitta will pen the adaptation, with War for the Planet of the Apes director Matt Reeves producing. The movie will employ motion-capture technology to try to mimic the art and feel of Peterson’s story.

 

Originally published: 2015, Image Comics
Optioned for: Film, TBD
What it’s about: “When a group of hard-luck teens in Motor City stumble upon a street drug called MPH, they gain the power of super speed. Will they use it to save the world? Hell no! Not when there’s dolla, dolla bills to be had, y’all.”
Status: Lorenzo di Bonaventura (Transformers, G.I. Joe) optioned the film rights in 2014 before the first issue was published, but there have been no major updates since.

 

Originally published: 2017, Tor.com Publishing
Optioned for: Film (Welle Entertainment)
What it’s about: For as long as Molly Southbourne can remember, she’s been watching herself die. Whenever she bleeds, another “Molly” is born, identical to her in every way and intent on her destruction. Any instance of bleeding—a scrape, a scuffle, and every month for a couple of harrowing days. And so, she has been trained in how to destroy the Mollys first. She finds herself wondering whether it’s better to kill herself or be killed by the inescapable horde of…herself.
Status: No word on screenwriting or casting yet, but Welle’s Cathy Schulman will produce with Krishnan Menon and Adam Stone of Phenomenon Entertainment. Brendan Deneen and the book’s editor, Carl Engle-Laird, will serve as executive producers.

 

Originally published: 1983, Playboy
Optioned for: Film (Miramax)
What it’s about: Silverberg’s short story follows “a devoted husband who will stop at nothing to save his marriage when it is destroyed by a time traveling rival.”
Status: 12 Years a Slave producer John Ridley will write and direct the adaptation.

 

Originally published: 1984, Ace
Optioned for: Film (Fox)
What it’s about: Gibson’s pioneering cyberpunk novel follows hacker Henry Dorsett Case, cut off from The Matrix after he steals from his employers. But a new job could give him back that access… assuming he can hack an AI orbiting Earth.
Status: Deadpool director Tim Miller will helm the adaptation, with Simon Kinberg producing. No writer has yet been set.

 

Originally published: 1971, DC Comics
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Entertainment)
What it’s about: The self-named New Gods, natives from the twin planets New Genesis and Apokolips, will join the DC Extended Universe.
Status: A Wrinkle in Time director Ava DuVernay, who has mentioned that her favorite superhero is Big Barda, will helm the film.

 

Originally published: 2010, Orbit Books
Optioned for: Film (Electric Entertainment)
What it’s about: In 2040, the post-zombie generation is all infected with a miracle-cure-turned-infection that will cause them to amplify at death, used to routine blood tests and carrying a gun to ward off wild undead, and get all their news from bloggers like the After the End Times. The first book, Feed, sees Georgia and Shaun Mason following the Republican senator on the campaign trail, though they hit a few zombie-shaped stumbling blocks. Learn more about the world of Newsflesh here.
Status: The rights were optioned in 2012, but there doesn’t seem to have been much movement made on the project so far. We want to see the Masons move from the computer screen to the silver screen!

 

Originally published: 2009, DAW
Optioned for: Television (Kung Fu Monkey Productions)
What it’s about: After being cursed by someone from the world of Fae, changeling October Daye is ready to embrace only the human half of her heritage. But when she gets geased into investigating a murdered fae, she must return to the kingdom of Fae, hidden just beneath the surface of the San Francisco Bay Area.
Status: The film rights were acquired in 2013, but as of 2014, McGuire had no updates to share on the project. In a recent column, Foz Meadows made the case for adapting the October Daye books—but as a TV series. As it turns out, The Lizzie Bennet Diaries writer Margaret Dunlap is adapting the series for television, but as she explained in a recent podcast, it’s a slow process. McGuire provided a brief update in 2017 that the rights had been licensed “and the people who have them are looking for a network.”

 

Originally published: 2005, Tor Books
Optioned for: Film (Netflix)
What it’s about: Good news: Humanity finally made it to the stars. Bad news: Humans have to fight aliens for the few habitable planets. As far as the the Colonial Defense Force is concerned, the older the soldiers, the better. So, on his 75th birthday, John Perry enlists, hoping to make it two years in exchange for a homestead on a hard-won planet. But the actual fight is far, far harder than he can imagine—and what he will become is far stranger.
Status: Netflix acquired the movie rights in late 2017. Scalzi will serve as an executive producer.

 

Originally published: 2014, 47North
Optioned for: Movie (Walt Disney Company)
What it’s about: After graduating from the Tagis Praff School for the Magically Inclined, Ceony Twill is heartbroken when she’s assigned an apprenticeship with paper magic instead of her true love, metal magic. And once she bonds to paper, she won’t be able to do any other magic. But as she finds herself warming up to bespelling paper, she also discovers forbidden, dark magic, at great price.
Status: Producer Allison Shearmur (The Hunger Games, Rogue One) has picked up the project for Disney, with Ashleigh Powell (The Hazel Wood) writing the screenplay.

 

Originally published: 2014, Berkley
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios/Warner Bros. Television)
What it’s about: A virtual reality world puts Flynne Fisher, a have-not from near-future America, in touch with Wilf Netherton, a have from “seventy-some years later, on the far side of decades of slow-motion apocalypse.”
Status: Amazon put the adaptation into script development with a series option in early 2018. Westworld creators Jonathan Nolan and Lisa Joy will executive produce the project, written by Scott B. Smith (Siberia, A Simple Plan) and directed by Vincenzo Natali (Westworld).

 

Originally published: 1890, Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine
Optioned for: Film (Lionsgate)
What it’s about: Dorian Gray sells his soul for eternal youth, leading an endlessly hedonistic existence while the eponymous portrait ages and decays, recording his every sin.
Status: Experimental rock multi-instrumentalist St. Vincent (who made her filmmaking debut as part of the female-driven XX horror anthology) will direct a genderbent adaptation starring a female Dorian.

 

Originally published: 2018, First Second Books
Optioned for: Film (Universal Pictures)
What it’s about: Instead of marrying a princess, as his parents want, Prince Sebastian would rather don gorgeous gowns and take Paris by storm as fashion icon Lady Crystallia. His secret weapon is dressmaker (and best friend) Frances, who thinks up his eye-catching ensembles. But Frances’ dreams of being recognized for her work may never come to pass, as being the prince’s secret weapon means she must be secret. How long can she put off her dreams to protect her friend?
Status: Universal and producer Marc Platt (La La Land) optioned the rights in 2018, shortly after the graphic novel’s publication.

 

Originally published: 2014, Action Lab
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures)
What it’s about: Princess Adrienne Ashe never wanted her royal pedigree, or the obligations it brings. But her parents expect her to play out a typical princess narrative, so they lock her in a tower on the eve of her 16th birthday, to await rescue by a handsome prince. Instead, Adrienne decides to rescue herself.
Status: Sony acquired the film rights in 2017.

 

Originally published: 2003, DC Comics
Optioned for: Television (The CW)
What it’s about: Based on the supporting character who has popped up in Superman comics and the DC Rebirth reboot, but not on any particular story, this hour-long drama will follow (according to Variety) “Traci, a twenty-something forensic scientist and believer in the paranormal who discovers her own hidden extra-sensory abilities when she joins her estranged, skeptic father to investigate mysterious cases of the paranormal and unexplained phenomena.”
Status: Elizabeth Banks will serve as executive producer alongside writer and producer Daegan Fryklind (Bitten).

 

Originally published: 2012, Bloomsbury
Optioned for: Television (Hulu)
What it’s about: In a land without magic, assassin Celaena Sardothien must fight 23 challengers in order to win her freedom… to become the champion of a tyrannical king.
Status: Kira Snyder (The 100, The Handmaid’s Tale) will write the pilot, with Anna Foerster (Outlander, Underworld: Blood Wars) set to direct.

 

The Queen of the Tearling by Erika Johansen

Originally published: 2014, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros.)
What it’s about: On her 19th birthday, princess Kelsea Glynn must return from exile, armed with the powerful Tearling sapphire and backed by the Queen’s Guard, to defeat the malevolent Red Queen in order to reclaim her dead mother’s throne.
Status: Emma Watson acquired the rights in 2013, ahead of the trilogy’s publication. Though there have been updates since, no word on production or projected release date.

 

Originally published: 2010, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Film (Amazon Studios/StudioCanal)
What it’s about: In this illustrated biography, artist and journalist Redniss tells the story of Nobel Prize winner Marie Curie and her husband Pierre, from their romance to their scientific discoveries and how they changed the world.
Status: Marjane Satrapi (Persepolis) will direct a script by Jack Thorne (Harry Potter and the Cursed Child), with Rosamund Pike (Gone Girl) playing Marie Curie.

 

Originally published: 2004, Philomel (US &amp; Canada) and Random House (Australia &amp; New Zealand)
Optioned for: Film (Dick Cook Studios)
What it’s about: After spending the first fifteen years of his life wanting to be a knight, Will instead is selected as a Ranger’s apprentice. But he quickly learns that not only are the Rangers the protectors of the kingdom, but there’s a battle brewing that will need every skill he can obtain.
Status: Paul Haggis and his daughter Alissa Sullivan Haggis are writing the screenplay, with Haggis directing and co-producing. Lou Xiaolou, chairman of China-based financier Film Carnival Co. Ltd., said, “Ranger’s Apprentice is only the beginning to our strategic plan of a more comprehensive collaboration.”

 

Originally published: 2012, Scholastic
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: “[F]our private school boys and a psychic’s daughter … quest for a sleeping king of Welsh legend in the mountains of Virginia, uncovering ancient magic, powerful dreams, and the devils in themselves.”
Status: Publishers Marketplace reported the news in mid-2017. Universal Cable Productions has set up the project at Syfy.

 

Originally published: 1973, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Millennium Media)
What it’s about: Millennium Media’s Avi Lerner cited the popularity of Wonder Woman and the demand for female superhero movies as the appropriate timing to bring back the swashbuckling comic book character for her own movie.
Status: We don’t know much aside from the deal being in the works, though Deadline reports that the new adaptation will be very different from the 1985 film starring Brigitte Nielsen and Arnold Schwarzenegger. Ashley Edward Miller (Andromeda, Fringe, Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles) will pen the script. In the meantime, check out our Nostalgia Rewatch of Red Sonja.

 

Originally published: 2012, Tor Books
Optioned for: Television (FX)
What it’s about: In the 25th century, five new recruits on the Starship Intrepid start to notice the suspiciously high death toll happening to their crew… but their investigations uncover a meta conspiracy. A year after Redshirts won the Hugo Award, FX bought the rights for a limited series on television. At the 2014 LA Festival of Books, Scalzi discussed the adaptation: “The book is the book; the book will always be the book. The book is designed for this medium: to be a novel. When we transfer it to television, we have to take what works in the novel that will also work in the medium of television. You have to understand when you get on the Hollywood train that your book is a source.”
Status: Still very much in the early stages. See also: Lock In.

 

Originally published: 2012, Image Comics
Optioned for: Film (Shatterglass Films)
What it’s about: One day, in a town in rural Wisconsin, the dead come back to life. Officer Dana Cypress must deal with outside interference from religious zealots and government quarantines while coping with the return of her recently deceased sister Em.
Status: Shatterglass Films’ Luke Boyce will direct a script co-written by Seeley and Sarah Fischer. Production is expected to start in early 2018; in the meantime, here’s the proof-of-concept teaser trailer.

 

Originally published: 1970, Ballantine Books
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios/MGM)
What it’s about: Celebrating his 200th birthday in 2850 A.D., Louis Gridley Wu has become bored with human society. When offered the opportunity to join a voyage to Ringworld, he jumps at the chance to explore the artificial ring floating beyond the edges of known space.
Status: Syfy had previously developed the books as a four-hour miniseries, but now it will be a television series.

 

Originally published: 1972, Macmillan
Optioned for: Television (WGN America)
What it’s about: This Russian sci-fi novel centers on Red Schuhart (Matthew Goode), who enters “the Zone”—a dimension formerly inhabited by aliens—to collect mysterious artifacts to sell on the black market. But when something goes wrong in his world, Red must return to the Zone over and over again to find answers.
Status: Jack Paglen (Alien: Covenant) is writing the pilot. Interestingly, Roadside Picnic had previously inspired the 1979 film Stalker.

 

Originally published: 2011, Doubleday
Optioned for: Film (Dreamworks)
What it’s about: Basically World War Z with robots, Daniel H. Wilson’s novel provides an oral history of the Singularity and its aftermath.
Status: Steven Spielberg has been circling the project for years, but it’s currently been postponed. In late 2014, Wilson clarified that it’s “basically in the queue” behind Spielberg’s other projects. In early 2016, Drew Goddard (The Martian) put a positive spin on the delays: “There are so many times when projects don’t go at a certain release date but find a better home later” and “It was just a joy to see [Spielberg] in action and learn from him.” In a 2017 Reddit AMA, Wilson described the project as “Spielberg aaaaalmost made it into a movie, and now it’s still being developed and not dead as far as I know.” In early 2018, Michael Bay signed on to direct.

 

Originally published: 2014, Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (Syfy/Fremantle Media)
What it’s about: Syfy describes the adaptation as “a sci-fi noir series about a human colony founded on a planet that borders a strange space anomaly.”
Status: Screenwriter Will Pascoe (Orphan Black) is the prospective showrunner, per the official announcement in early 2018.

 

Originally published: 2016, Tor.com Publishing
Optioned for: Film &amp; Television (Escape Artists Productions)
What it’s about: In a cyberpunk near-future, Marmeg Guinto cobbles together an exoskeleton from rich people’s garbage, and uses the money her mother gave her for nursing school, to enter the Minerva Sierra Challenge—the cyborg’s Tour de France—to earn a better life for herself and her younger brothers.
Status: Escape Artists optioned the rights in early 2018.

 

Originally published: 2013, CreateSpace Publishing
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: In a post-ecologically ravaged world of savage winds and shifting dunes, a family of sand divers try to navigate their dangerous society in order to find their missing father.
Status: Universal Cable Productions has set up the project at Syfy. Gary Whitta (Rogue One) will adapt the novel for television, with Marc Forster (World War Z) directing the pilot.

 

Originally published: 1989, Vertigo
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros/DC Films)
What it’s about: After escaping nearly a century of imprisonment, Morpheus, the Lord of Dreams and one of the Endless, goes about rebuilding his kingdom. Along the way, he visits Hell and Asgard, attempts to undo massive sins, and searches for his missing brother.
Status: The production team, which includes David S. Goyer (Batman v Superman) and Gaiman executive producing, is trying to condense the massive epic into a movie without going straight-up action movie. The production suffered a slight setback when Joseph Gordon-Levitt exited amid creative differences, but it looks as if Goyer and co. are continuing on. No release date set yet.

 

Originally published: 2009, Harper Voyager
Optioned for: Film (Studio 8)
What it’s about: James “Sandman Slim” Stark escapes over a decade in Hell as a gladiator to fight demons on the streets of Los Angeles, seeking revenge on the people who killed his lover.
Status: John Wick director Chad Stahelski will helm the adaptation, working off a screenplay penned by Kerry Williamson (What Happened to Monday).

 

Scary Stories to Tell in the Dark by Alvin Schwartz

Originally published: 1981, Harper &amp; Row
Optioned for: Film (CBS Films/Entertainment One)
What it’s about: The nostalgic collections of spooky tales are drawn from folklore and urban legends, including “The Hook,” “The Red Spot,” “High Beams,” and dozens more.
Status: Guillermo del Toro will co-write and produce the adaptation, to be directed by André Øvredal.

 

Originally published: 2016, Simon &amp; Schuster
Optioned for: Film (Universal/Bluegrass Films)
What it’s about: Despite eradicating all disease, hunger, and war, humankind must still keep the population levels manageable, through trained killers known as scythes. Two teens, Citra and Rowan, are unwillingly apprenticed to a scythe, knowing that they must learn this “art” of killing or risk losing their lives instead.
Status: Scott Stuber and Dylan Clark will produce the adaptation for Bluegrass Films, with 10 Cloverfield Laneadapting Shusterman’s YA novel screenwriters Josh Campbell and Matt Stuecken .

 

Originally published: 2015, William Morrow
Optioned for: Film (Skydance)
What it’s about: When the Moon unexpectedly blows up, it turns Earth into a ticking time bomb—prompting humans to create a multinational ark in the hopes of finding a new home before theirs is uninhabitable. Five thousand years later, the seven distinct races created from the survivors return to explore the foreign planet Earth.
Status: Director-producer duo Ron Howard and Brian Grazer are reteaming with Apollo 13 screenwriter Bill Broyles to adapt Neal Stephenson’s doorstopper of a generation ship novel.

 

Originally published: 2015, Arthur A. Levine Books
Optioned for: Film and Television (Roaring Virgin Productions)
What it’s about: During what’s supposed to be a relaxing summer, artist Sierra Santiago discovers shadowshaping, a magic that infuses ancestral spirits into paintings, music, and stories. But someone is killing the shadowshapers one by one. Now Sierra must unravel her family’s past, take down the killer in the present, and save the future of shadowshaping for generations to come.
Status: Actress and producer Anika Noni Rose, who also optioned Older’s Bone Street Rumba series in 2015, has acquired film and TV rights.

 

Originally published: 2013, Orbit Books
Optioned for: Film (Netflix)
What it’s about: Travel writer Zoe takes a shady job in New York City’s publishing industry… writing a travel guide to the Big Apple for the undead.
Status: Netflix, which has begun releasing other feature films including Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: Sword of Destiny and Pee-wee’s Big Holiday, is counting on The Shambling Guide to hit the sweet spot between YA and urban fantasy with this adaptation.

 

Shazam!, from various comics

Originally published: 1939, Fawcett Comics
Optioned for: Film (DC Films)
What it’s about: When kid Billy Batson speaks the word “SHAZAM,” he turns into the titular superhero.
Status: DC confirmed the movie at SDCC 2017. It’s unclear if Dwayne Johnson, who is set to play Shazam’s arch-nemesis Black Adam, will appear in this movie or only in his own standalone film.

 

Originally published: 2013, Mulholland Books
Optioned for: Film (MRC)
What it’s about: Beukes’ celebrated time travel centers on Midwest serial killer Harper Curtis, who discovers a wormhole in a house that allows him to jump through time and hunt down the “shining girls” whose auras compel him; and Kirby Mizrachi, the only victim to survive an attack and (as she grows up) his eventual nemesis.
Status: Previously considered for television, The Shining Girls looks to be a film now. Morten Tyldum (The Imitation Game, Passengers) is in talks to direct the adaptation, with Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Davison Killoran producing. Danny Boyle was previously attached to write the screenplay but left the project; perhaps Beukes, who is adapting her novel Zoo City as a screenplay, will take a stab at it.

 

Originally published: 2010, Little, Brown Books for Young Readers
Optioned for: Film (Far East)
What it’s about: The novel, set after the melting of the polar ice caps, contemplates a world in which many major cities are underwater and follows a young boy named Nailer who tries to help a girl named Nita escape a blackmail plot.
Status: Oscar-winning writer/director Paul Haggis (Million Dollar Baby, Crash) will direct the adaptation, the first in a planned trilogy.

 

Originally published: 1985/1979, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures)
What it’s about: The Spider-Man spinoff will follow mercenary Silver Sable and cat burglar (and Spidey love interest) Black Cat.
Status: Chris Yost (Thor: Ragnarok) is writing the current draft of the script; Lisa Joy (Westworld) had previously worked on it. Gina Prince-Bythewood (Cloak &amp; Dagger) will helm the series, which is set to begin production in fall 2017.

 

Originally published: 1953, Geoffrey Bles
Optioned for: Film (TriStar Pictures)
What it’s about: The fourth Chronicles of Narnia installment sees Aslan calling upon Eustace Scrubb (from The Voyage of the Dawn Treader) and his classmate Jill Pole to recover King Caspian X’s missing son and only heir.
Status: TriStar, The Mark Gordon Company, Entertainment One, and the C.S. Lewis Company are rebooting the Narnia movie franchise as of 2016. David Magee (Finding Neverland, Life of Pi) has adapted the script; Captain America: The First Avenger director Joe Johnson will helm the project.

 

Originally published: 1959, Delacorte
Optioned for: Television (Universal Cable Productions)
What it’s about: Vonnegut’s classic novel introduces readers to Malachi Constant—the richest, most depraved man in 22nd-century America, who is offered the chance to journey to distant worlds… but for a catch.
Status: Dan Harmon (Community, Rick and Morty) and Evan Katz (Small Crimes) are adapting the novel.

 

Originally published: 2011, Tor.com
Optioned for: Television (NBC)
What it’s about: Charlie Jane Anders’ Hugo-winning Tor.com novellette tracks the doomed relationship between a man who can see the future and a woman who can see many futures.
Status: In 2013, NBC nabbed the rights to adapt the novelette (with Krysten Ritter producing) into “a light procedural” that recasts the man and woman as bickering private investigators who know they’ll fall in love… if they can save him from getting killed in six months and three days. Unfortunately, no update since then.

 

Originally published: 1989, Orion Publishing
Optioned for: Television (Cinemax)
What it’s about: George R.R. Martin describes his 1988 novella as an “offbeat werewolf noir”: Private investigator Randi Wade gets involved in a string of gruesome serial killings (taking the skin of victims) that reminds her of her father’s death two decades prior. But when a close friend becomes a target, she’s pulled into a hairy underworld.
Status: Cinemax ordered a pilot script, to be written by Kalinda Vazquez (Prison Break, Once Upon a Time), in 2015. No update since then.

 

Originally published: 2017, Scribner
Optioned for: Television (TBD)
What it’s about: The inhabitants of a women’s prison in a small Appalachian town become shrouded in gauze when they go to sleep every night; if their slumber is disturbed, they turn feral and violent. All except Evie, who seems to be immune…
Status: Michael Sugar and Ashley Zalta (The OA, Maniac) will serve as executive producers. No update since the 2017 announcement.

 

Originally published: 1992, Bantam Books
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios/Paramount TV)
What it’s about: Neal Stephenson’s classic, neo-quasi-cyberpunk novel introduces us to pizza deliveryman/hacker Hiro Protagonist, his business partner YT, and their adventures in a future divided between life in a grim corprocracy and in the Metaverse, a virtual reality threatened by a terrifying virus.
Status: The one-hour drama series will be executive-produced by Joe Cornish (Ant-Man) and Frank Marshall (Back to the Future, Raiders of the Lost Ark).

 

Originally published: 2018, Saga Press
Optioned for: Film (Universal Pictures)
What it’s about: Once every cycle, the great galactic civilizations gather for the Metagalactic Grand Prix—part gladiatorial contest, part beauty pageant, part concert extravaganza, and part continuation of the wars of the past. But when Earth makes first contact, the fate of humanity will depend on Decibel Jones and the Absolute Zeroes, and their ability to rock.
Status: Marc Platt (La La Land) and Colin Trevorrow (Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom) will produce.

 

Originally published: 2005, Tor Books
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: The Big Blackout cuts Earth off from the stars and sun through an alien barrier. With time passing faster outside of the barrier than on Earth, the youngest generation discovers that they may be the last: The sun will die in forty years unless someone figures out how to reverse this apocalypse or find new life on Mars.
Status: Syfy is supposedly planning a six-hour miniseries, but it wasn’t announced with the last crop of premieres, so it’s likely on the back burner.

 

Originally published: 1978, Doubleday
Optioned for: Television (CBS All Access)
What it’s about: King’s novel explores the aftermath of a worldwide pandemic that has wiped out most of the population.
Status: Josh Boone’s (The New Mutants) adaptation has taken many forms over the years, the most current (as of early 2018) being a 10-hour limited series on CBS All Access.

 

Originally published: 2014, Knopf Doubleday
Optioned for: Film (Stone Village Productions)
What it’s about: The Arthur C. Clarke Award-winning novel envisions a post-apocalyptic future twenty years after a flu pandemic wiped out much of civilization. The story is told through Kirsten Raymonde and The Traveling Symphony, a roaming troupe of actors keeping the arts and humanity alive.
Status: Stone Village, who is also adapting Lidia Yuknavitch’s The Book of Joan, recently acquired movie rights.

 

Originally published: 1961, Putnam Publishing Group
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: Heinlein’s classic novel tells the story of Valentine Michael Smith, a human who was raised by Martians, and who has to find way to adapt to human society after coming to live on Earth.
Status: Paramount TV and Universal Cable Productions (who have also collaborated on the series Shooter and Pendergast) are teaming up to adapt the novel.

 

Originally published: 2010, Icon Comics (Marvel Comics)
Optioned for: Film (Fox)
What it’s about: Diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, a 12-year-old boy has his greatest wish granted: to become Superior, his favorite superhero. But after he discovers that the alien monkey who granted his wish is a demon, he must sell his soul to keep his powers.
Status: Matthew Vaughn (Kick-Ass, Kingsman: The Secret Service) is attached to adapt the project. The most recent update is from January 2016.

 

Originally published: 1984, Viking
Optioned for: Film (Amblin Entertainment)
What it’s about: Jack Sawyer, on a desperate quest to save his mother’s life, must search for a prize across an epic landscape of innocents and monsters, of incredible dangers and even more incredible truths.
Status: Josh Boone (The Fault in Our Stars, The New Mutants) has been tapped to adapt the novel for the big screen.

 

Originally published: 2000, Harcourt
Optioned for: Film (Bayview Films)
What it’s about: Le Guin’s first Hainish Cycle followup novel since 1974’s The Disposessed follows Sutty Dass, a Terran sent to the planet Aka. While Sutty is supposed to be an observer, she becomes embroiled in the political and religious conflicts spawned by Aka’s outlawing of all customs and beliefs.
Status: Following Le Guin’s passing in early 2018, Bayview Films confirmed that it was developing the project, written and directed by Leena Pendharker (20 Weeks) and starring Battlestar Galactica’s Rekha Sharma. The film is projected for a 2019 release.

 

Originally published: 2006, Del Rey
Optioned for: Film or Television (TBD)
What it’s about: Alternate-history Napoleonic Wars in which protagonist Captain Will Laurence is part of the Aerial Corps, battling the French forces on the backs of fearsome dragons like his own, Temeraire.
Status: Peter Jackson optioned the rights in 2006 but has not made any moves to develop the project. According to quotes he gave in 2009, it would seem that he had originally intended to make a film trilogy, then realized that the material would be better suited to a miniseries. Unfortunately, that was in a pre-Game of Thrones world where epic fantasies didn’t exist so comfortably on the small screen. There’s been no word since, and Jackson is busy with a number of other projects; but more than one outlet has suggested he turn his attention back to Temeraire.

 

Originally published: 2016, Del Rey
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures Entertainment)
What it’s about: After falling through the ground and into the palm of a giant metal hand as a child, Rose Franklin, now grown-up and a physicist, leads a team to discover the answers behind the hand… and where the rest of the body is.
Status: Josh Bratman (Fright Night) and Matt Tolmach (The Amazing Spider-Man) will co-produce the film adaptation.

 

Originally published: 2006, Chongqing Press
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Prime)
What it’s about: During China’s Cultural Revolution, a secret military program sends signals into space to initiate first contact with aliens. Years later, a physicist uses the virtual reality video game Three-Body to discover a secret organization and uncover what the aliens might actually want from Earth.
Status: While Liu told The Atlantic in late 2017 that the film project had wrapped in 2015, there are reports that Amazon is also working on a three-season adaption of the entire Remembrance of Earth’s Past trilogy.

 

Originally published: 2013, Disney Hyperion
Optioned for: Television (Freeform)
What it’s about: When the massive luxury spaceliner Icarus crashes into the closest planet, the only survivors are Lilac LaRoux (daughter of the richest man in the universe) and Tarver Merendsen (a war hero with humble origins). As these literally star-crossed lovers help each other survive, they begin to wonder if they even want to get off their new planet.
Status: Actor and producer Eric Balfour is teaming up with his producing partner Stephanie Varella and Fargo producer Warren Littlefield to adapt the first book in the Starbound trilogy (which includes This Shattered World and Their Fractured Light, both published). Continuum creator/showrunner Simon Barry will write the teleplay.

 

Originally published: 2016, HarperCollins
Optioned for: Film (Sony Pictures/Safehouse Pictures)
What it’s about: In the dystopian V-City, violent acts have bred actual monsters. One monster, August, can steal a soul with a simple strain of music. But as he tries to tamp down his murderous impulses, he finds himself teamed up with Kate, the daughter of an extortionist, after an assassination attempt.
Status: Sony optioned the film rights in 2016.

 

Originally published: 2015, Tor Books
Optioned for: Film (Paramount Pictures)
What it’s about: Convicted criminal James Griffin-Mars is a chronman: He jumps back and forth in time to help delay humanity’s demise in the future. But when he brings a scientist from the past into the future with him, they both become fugitives.
Status: Michael Bay will direct the film adaptation, with Wesley Chu executive-producing and Zak Olkewicz (Fear Street, Malignant) adapting Chu’s novel.

 

Originally published: 2014, Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (Hardy Son &amp; Baker/NBCUniversal)
What it’s about: Aliens land on Earth, but they don’t make contact—they just stand on the surface, exerting silent pressure, refusing to acknowledge humans as intelligent life.
Status: Tom Hardy’s production company is currently developing the TV adaptation.

 

Originally published: 2012, Top Shelf Productions/IDW Publishing
Optioned for: Film (Anonymous Content)
What it’s about: Jack is an offshore oil rig worker who undertakes the dangerous work of underwater welding to repair the rig. Deep on one dive, Jack encounters a supernatural creature that allows him to interact with the ghost of his father.
Status: Ryan Gosling, Ken Kao, and Anonymous Content will serve as producers on the adaptation.

 

Originally published: 2017, Hyperion
Optioned for: Film (Cross Creek Pictures)
What it’s about: Unearthed is the first book of a forthcoming duology by the writing duo behind These Broken Stars and is described as “Lara Croft meets Indiana Jones, set in deep space.”
Status: Edge of Tomorrow director Doug Liman is planning to direct the adaptation.

 

Originally published: 1966, G.P. Putnam’s Sons
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: Heinlein’s Hugo-winning novel depicts the revolt of a former Lunar penal colony against the Lunar Authority controlling it from Earth (no doubt where the movie’s title comes from)—a rebellion that counts among its numbers a technician, an academic, and an artificial intelligence committed to the cause.
Status: Fox picked up the movie rights in 2015, with X-Men‘s Bryan Singer attached to direct. This will be the third attempted adaptation of the novel; DreamWorks and Phoenix Pictures both had projects in the works at some point, but each time the rights reverted back to Heinlein’s estate.

 

Originally published: 2015, Del Rey
Optioned for: Film (Warner Bros)
What it’s about: Plain, clumsy, loyal Agnieszka is handed over to the Dragon, a fearsome wizard who takes one girl from her village every ten years. She never expected to be taken—expected that he would take her beautiful, brave best friend Kasia—but as Agnieszka begins exploring the magic she never knew she had, it soon becomes clear why the Dragon felt compelled to take her instead.
Status: Naomi Novik is working with Ellen DeGeneres to adapt the novel.

 

Originally published: 2012, IDW Publishing
Optioned for: Television (Netflix/IDW Entertainment)
What it’s about: Dr. Luther Swann (The Vampire Diaries’ Ian Somerhalder) is horrified when a disease transforms his best friend Michael Fayne into a bloodthirsty predator. As more and more people fall to the same disease, Swann searches for a cause and cure, while Fayne rises to lead the new species of vampires. From the cover copy: “No matter how it ends, the world is going to bleed.”
Status: Somerhalder is the first big star to sign on for the 10-episode TV adaptation.

 

Originally published: 1976, Knopf
Optioned for: Television (Paramount Television/Anonymous Content)
What it’s about: Beginning with Interview with the Vampire, Rice’s series follows vampire Lestat de Lioncourt through his long eternal life.
Status: Paramount Television and Anonymous Content have optioned the rights to all 11 novels in the series; the author describes the adaptation as “an open ended series.” Rice will serve as executive producer alongside her son Christopher Rice, who will be main writer and showrunner. Alex Kurtzman, who was attached to a previous potential film adaptation at Universal Pictures, will also serve as a producer. Bryan Fuller joined the project in early 2018. Rice has invited fans to submit their suggestions for up-and-comers to play Lestat.

 

Originally published: 1898, William Heinemann
Optioned for: Television (The Firm/MTV)
What it’s about: An unnamed protagonist in Surrey and his brother in London watch as Martians invade southern London.
Status: There is a second adaptation in the works! Teen Wolf creators Jeff Davis and Andrew Cochran will adapt Wells’ iconic novel for MTV, but there’s been no update on this project since late 2016.

 

Originally published: 2009, Del Rey
Optioned for: Film (New Harlem Partnership)
What it’s about: Three young survivors of vicious demon (or coreling) attacks step beyond the safe bounds of warded magic to discover secrets about the past and figure out how to level the playing field between humans and corelings.
Status: After Paul W.S. Anderson’s hold on the rights expired, Spike Seldin (The A-Team) and Hans Futterman picked them up. Brett will adapt his novel into a screenplay. New Harlem is currently meeting with potential financiers and distributors.

 

Originally published: 1965, E.P. Dutton
Optioned for: Television (Paramount TV/Hulu)
What it’s about: When they’re framed for the murder of the leader of New York City’s street gangs, the eponymous Warriors must race back to their home turf of Coney Island before the rival gangs tear them apart.
Status: The Russo brothers (Captain America: The Winter Soldier and Civil War) will direct a script from Frank Baldwin as a one-hour drama.

 

Originally published: 1983, Colin Smythe
Optioned for: Television (Narrativia/BBC Studios)
What it’s about: While it is unclear exactly which parts of the Discworld universe the six-part series will pull from, the working title would imply that the story will center on the Ankh-Morpork City Watch—perhaps as a “Pratchett-style CSI” procedural.
Status: An adaptation has been in the works since late 2015, but it was an announcement in early 2018 that confirmed that The Watch is actively in development.

 

Originally published: 1986, DC Comics
Optioned for: Television (HBO)
What it’s about: In alternate-universe 1985—after the emergence of costumed heroes in the 1940s and ’60s turned the tide in historical events such as the Vietnam War—the murder of The Comedian brings these retired vigilantes out of hiding.
Status: Damon Lindelof will write and executive produce the series, alongside director and EP Nicole Kassell (The Leftovers). Lindelof shared updates with fans in mid-2018 in a five-page open letter. Most notable? That the series would be a “remix” set in present day, starring Regina King, Don Johnson, and others in currently unknown roles.

 

Originally published: Delacorte, 2017
Optioned for: Television (Sonar Entertainment)
What it’s about: Twins Vick and Tara, who is autistic (communicative but faced with worsening systems), and their loyal robot watchdog Daisy fend for themselves on the streets of futuristic, economically devastated Chicago.
Status: Art Brown and Douglas Sloan (Dragons: Race to the Edge) will serve as showrunners on the animated series.

 

Originally published: 2016, Quercus
Optioned for: Film (Studio 8)
What it’s about: The first book in Smythe’s YA sci-fi trilogy follows the inhabitants of the spaceship Australia, plagued by gang warfare, as they search for a habitable planet.
Status: Studio 8 optioned the rights in 2015.

 

Originally published: 2010, Tor Books
Optioned for: Film (DMG Entertainment)
What it’s about: The first installment in The Stormlight Archive follows Kaladin, a medical apprentice turned slave; Brightlord Dalinar Kholin, commanding one of ten armies in a war that makes no sense; Shallan, an untried woman seeking to train under an eminent scholar and notorious heretic; and the fallen Knights Radiant and the Shardblades they left behind.
Status: In 2016, DMG Entertainment made a licensing and film deal for the rights to Sanderson’s Cosmere universe. DMG likened the acquisition to obtaining the rights for a comic-book universe, as the Cosmere contains The Stormlight Archive, Mistborn, White Sand, and more. They are currently fast-tracking an adaptation of Way of Kings; screenwriters Patrick Melton and Marcus Dunstan, the writing team behind several Saw films, will adapt the screenplay. DMG is also adapting the Mistborn series for film but has not determined a screenwriter yet. Sanderson will serve as an executive producer. In his State of the Sanderson 2017, he said that part of selling the series to Hollywood will include “a Stormlight VR experience.” In the meantime, check out our Way of Kings dream-cast.

 

Originally published: 2014, Tachyon Publications
Optioned for: Television (Syfy)
What it’s about: Psychotherapist Dr. Jan Sayer brings together the final girls (and final boys) of various horror-movie scenarios for a support group. But in trying to help these survivors, Dr. Sayer unwittingly unlocks the supernatural evils buried within their consciousnesses.
Status: After Wes Craven’s death in 2015, Syfy announced that it still intends to move forward with a number of projects, including We Are All Completely Fine.

 

Originally published: 1962, Viking Press
Optioned for: Film (Further Films/Great Point Media)
What it’s about: One of Jackson’s best-known stories, We Have Always Lived in the Castle centers on a perverse, possibly murderous family whose isolation from the outside world is upended by a distant cousin (Sebastian Stan) looking to uncover dark secrets.
Status: Michael Douglas is producing the thriller adaptation, from a screenplay written by Stacie Passon (Concussion) and Mark Kruger (Damien, Teen Wolf).

 

Originally published: 2003, Doubleday
Optioned for: Film (Narrativia &amp; The Jim Henson Company)
What it’s about: The first of several Tiffany Aching stories, about the young witch-to-be’s discovery of her powers. Armed with her frying pan and common sense, and aided by the Wee Free Men, Tiffany faces off against headless horsemen, dreams come true (in the worst way), and the Elf Queen.
Status: Pratchett’s daughter Rhianna Pratchett announced back in 2013 that she was adapting the novel as a feature-length film, but there were no updates until the project was confirmed at Pratchett’s memorial. The Jim Henson Company will co-produce with Narrativia.

 

Originally published: 1990, Tor Books
Optioned for: Television (Amazon Studios/Sony Pictures Television)
What it’s about: Everything you need to know is in the Wheel of Time Reread Redux.
Status: In early 2015, a baffling Wheel of Time “pilot” appeared online. Harriet McDougal, the late author’s wife and CEO of the Bandersnatch Group (to whom the movie and TV rights reverted back to in February 2015), released a statement clarifying that the pilot was neither seen nor approved by the Jordan estate. In April 2016, McDougal announced that legal issues had been resolved and “WoT will become a cutting edge TV Series.” A year later came the announcement that Sony Pictures Television would adapt the epic fantasy series alongside Red Eagle Entertainment and Radar Pictures, with Rafe Judkins (Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., Hemlock Grove, Chuck) serving as showrunner. In mid-2018, Amazon Studios head Jennifer Salke confirmed that the streaming service was developing the TV series, and that she would be looking at the scripts in the near future.

 

Originally published: 2010, DAW
Optioned for: Television (HBO)
What it’s about: Onyesonwu, whose name means “who fears death,” is Ewu—conceived by rape, expected to live a life of violence as a half-breed rejected by her community. Instead, Onye discovers that she manifests the beginnings of a remarkable and unique magic.
Status: George R.R. Martin will serve as an executive producer on the television adaptation; Okorafor will also be very involved in the project. HBO officially closed on the deal in September 2017.

 

Originally published: 1987, Bantam Books
Optioned for: Television (Universal Cable Productions)
What it’s about: Martin’s shared-universe anthology tracks the aftermath of an alien virus released after World War II, which killed 90% of those who contracted it but imbued a small number of survivors with extraordinary powers. Some have used them for good, others for evil. The 22 published installments have featured stories by dozens of authors, including Roger Zelazny, Pat Cadigan, Daniel Abraham, Ty Franck, Cherie Priest, Paul Cornell, and more.
Status: In late 2016, Martin announced that Universal Cable Productions is adapting the mosaic novels for television, with co-editor Melinda Snodgrass (Star Trek: The Next Generation) as showrunner alongside producer Gregory Noveck from Syfy Films. Martin also invites readers to share their dream casts! In mid-2017, Martin shared an update that he is in talks with UCP about three potential Wild Cards series.

 

Originally published: 2011, Balzer + Bray
Optioned for: Film (LAIKA)
What it’s about: Set in an alternate version of Portland, OR, the middle-grade epic fantasy follows young Prue McKeel, who must enter the Impassable Wilderness after her little brother is abducted by a murder of crows.
Status: LAIKA picked up the rights shortly after publication, but the film, a stop-motion adaptation, has not been released yet.

 

Originally published: 1995, Top Cow Productions/Image Comics
Optioned for: Television (Sony Pictures Television/NBC Universal)
What it’s about: NBC’s adaptation will be a police procedural following homicide detective Sara Pezzini, on the hunt for a serial killer only to discover that the bracelet she has worn her entire life is actually the mystical Witchblade amulet, giving her supernatural insight into cases.
Status: Fresh off The Vampire Diaries, Caroline Dries and Brian Young (who wrote the pilot) will executive produce. The last time Witchblade was adapted was as a short-lived TV series in 2001 starring Yancy Butler.

 

Originally published: 2008, Orbit Books
Adapted for: Television (Netflix)
What it’s about: The Witcher (a series of novels and stories, later highly acclaimed video games) tells the story of Geralt Of Rivia, who is a member of a secretive group of professional monster-hunters. He finds himself caring for a young girl named Ciri, a magician who is forced to escape her home. The games, particularly The Witcher 3, invite players into a sandbox offering hundreds of sidequests as well as developing Geralt into a complex and endlessly-memable character.
Status: Sapkowski is set to be a creative consultant on the TV series, along with executive producers Jason Brown and Sean Daniel. Tomasz Bagiński, an animator who previously worked on the games with studio Platige Image, and who was set to direct a film based on The Witcher saga, is now onboard as a producer, and will also direct “at least one episode of each season.” Lauren S. Hissrich (Daredevil, The Defenders, The West Wing) will write and serve as showrunner.

 

Originally published: 2013, Simon &amp; Schuster
Optioned for: Film (20th Century Fox)
What it’s about: In a post-apocalyptic future characterized by a ruined and toxic landscape, surviving humans live in a silo deep underground. When Sheriff Holston breaks the community’s most important rule, asking to go outside, he is replaced by mechanic Juliette. But as Juliette is entrusted with fixing her silo, she begins to discover just how broken their society is.
Status: Guardians of the Galaxy screenwriter Nicole Perlman was hired to revise previous drafts of the screenplay. However, there’s been no update on the project since mid-2015.

 

Originally published: 2006, Crown/Archetype
Optioned for: Film (Paramount Pictures)
What it’s about: In Brooks’ oral history of the zombie apocalypse, the unnamed narrator interviews key figures who were present for the plague that reshaped the world.
Status: The first film, an action thriller starring Brad Pitt and released in 2013, was so rewritten as to not resemble the source material aside from title. Presumably, the sequel will pick up from the ending of the film. David Fincher (Gone Girl, The Social Network) will direct.

 

Originally published: 2009, Text Publishing
Optioned for: Film (Independent)
What it’s about: Sixteen-year-old Miles Sperry digs up the grave of his girlfriend Bethany Baldwin, who hasn’t been dead for much longer than a year, to recover the bad love poetry he buried with her.
Status: You can follow along with the production on Facebook and the official website.

 

Originally published: 1977, Ballantine Books &amp; Del Rey
Optioned for: Television and Film (SP Entertainment Group)
What it’s about: Anthony’s long-running fantasy saga takes place in the eponymous land of Xanth, whose inhabitants develop their “talent,” or magic, to become powerful magicians while encountering mythological creatures and maybe popping back and forth into Mundania.
Status: Producer Steven Paul’s (Ghost in the Shell, Ghost Rider) SP Entertainment Group is launching development of the Xanth novels into both a feature film and a television series.

 

Originally published: 2002, Vertigo
Optioned for: Television (FX)
What it’s about: Brian K. Vaughan’s landmark comic book series—and the series that got me hooked on the medium—examines the fallout of a worldwide plague that wipes out everyone with an XY chromosome, except for aspiring escape artist Yorick and his monkey Ampersand. While the female survivors struggle to rebuild society, several groups target the last man and chase him across the Earth.
Status: The producer who wooed Vaughan into adapting his beloved series (which was wrapped up in movie deals for ages) for television? Nina Jacobson, who has a little hit on her hands with the Hunger Games franchise. Fans will be heartened to hear that Vaughan is very involved in the project as an executive producer. Michael Green (American Gods) and Aïda Mashaka Croal (Jessica Jones, Luke Cage) will serve as co-showrunners. FX ordered a pilot (which Melina Matsoukas (Insecure, Master of None) will direct) in early 2018.

 

Originally published: 2016, Scribner
Optioned for: Television (FX)
What it’s about: Billionaire Ross Lockhart sends his wife Artis Martineau, diagnosed with a terminal illness, to a secret compound where bodies are preserved and death is staved off. With a personal investment now joining his financial stake, Ross hopes that Zero K can help save Artis’ life… but the story is told from the POV of Jeffrey Lockhart, their son.
Status: The rights were optioned before the book was even published.

 

Originally published: 2011, First Second Books
Optioned for: Film (Fox Animation)
What it’s about: When her best friend is abducted by an alien doomsday cult, Zita leaps to the rescue—encountering ancient prophecies, doomed planets, and mysterious con men along the way.
Status: Screenwriting duo Morgan Jurgenson and Alex Ankeles (Hyperdrive, Tucker &amp; Dale vs. Evil) will adapt Eisner Award winner Ben Hatke’s Miyazaki-esque graphic novel trilogy.

 

Originally published: 1964, Marvel Comics
Optioned for: Film (Marvel Studios)
What it’s about: No word if a standalone Natasha Romanoff (Scarlett Johansson) film would be an origin story, something set after Avengers: Infinity War, or something in-between.
Status: Very much rumored, though an interesting (albeit unconfirmed) report in early 2018 claimed that Marvel had hired screenwriter Jac Schaeffer (TiMER, The Shower, Nasty Women) to write the script.

 

Originally published: 1984, Random House
Optioned for: Film (TBD)
What it’s about: Lifelong friends who had gone their separate ways are reunited by a mysterious woman with a crystal staff, destined to become something they never would have expected: heroes.
Status: Joe Manganiello (Magic Mike) is enthusiastic about making a Dungeons &amp; Dragons movie happen—specifically, this adaptation of the first Dragonlance novel, from a screenplay developed with John Cassel. Manganiello has been in talks with Wizards of the Coast, but so far this project seems to be in the very early planning stages. In the meantime, revisit our Dragonlance Reread!

 

 



Adapted from: various Marvel Comics by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1965, Marvel Comics
What it’s about: Phil Coulson (Clark Gregg) and the rest of S.H.I.E.L.D. must deal with unusual cases and threats from Hydra and Inhumans.
Status: Renewed for a sixth season, which won’t return until summer 2019, setting it after the events of Captain Marvel and Avengers 4.

 



Adapted from: Altered Carbon by Richard K. Morgan
Originally published: 2002, Gollancz
What it’s about: In a post-cyberpunk future, human consciousness can be stored, downloaded, and reuploaded into “sleeves,” or new bodies. Soldier Takeshi Kovacs (Joel Kinnaman) is downloaded into the body of a disgraced cop to investigate the death of a Meth, or aristocrat, who’s convinced that he was murdered. The rest of the cast includes James Purefoy (as Laurens Bancroft, a Meth), Dichen Lachman (as Takashi’s sister Reileen Kawahara), Will Yun Lee (as Takeshi’s former body), and more.
Status: Unclear if the series will be renewed for season 2.

 

American Gods Season 1 2017

Adapted from: American Gods by Neil Gaiman
Originally published: 2001, William Morrow
What it’s about: Showrunners Bryan Fuller (Hannibal) and Michael Green (Heroes) made Gaiman’s novel, about the battles between old gods and new, into a sort of anthology series.
Status: Renewed for a second season, although Jason Alexander has replaced Fuller and Green as showrunner. Read our coverage of season 1.

 



Adapted from: various DC Comics by various authors and artists
Originally published: 1977, DC Comics
What it’s about: “Jefferson Pierce (Cress Williams) is a man wrestling with a secret. Nine years ago, Pierce was gifted with the superhuman power to harness and control electricity, which he used to keep his hometown streets safe as the masked vigilante Black Lightning. However, after too many nights with his life and his family on the line, he left his Super Hero days behind. Almost a decade later, Pierce’s crime-fighting days are long behind him…or so he thought. But with crime and corruption spreading like wildfire, Black Lightning returns—to save not only his family, but also the soul of his community.”
Status: Renewed for a second season. Read our season 1 coverage.

 

Image copyright BBC/Mammoth Screen, photographer Des Willie

Adapted from: The City &amp; the City by China Miéville
Originally published: 2009, Del Rey
What it’s about: To solve a murder, Inspector Tyador Borlú must move between the overlapping twin cities of Besźel and Ul Qoma.
Status: Tony Grisoni (The Young Pope, Philip K. Dick’s Electric Dreams has adapted the novel into a four-part series) starring David Morrissey (The Walking Dead) and Mandeep Dhillon (Wolfblood). The BBC released the first four episodes for UK viewers on April 6, but no word yet on when U.S. viewers will be able to watch.

 



Adapted from: the Marvel Comics character created by Stan Lee (writer) and Bill Everett (artist)
Originally published: 1964, Marvel Comics
What it’s about: After an accident takes away his sight but gives him heightened senses, lawyer Matt Murdock (Charlie Cox) must protect Hell’s Kitchen from criminals while dealing with other vigilantes like The Punisher (Jon Bernthal), as well as his ex-girlfriend Elektra Natchios (Élodie Yung).
Status: Season 3 will premiere sometime in 2018, after Daredevil’s appearance in Marvel and Netflix’s The Defenders.

 



Adapted from: The Expanse series by James S.A. Corey (Daniel Abraham and Ty Franck)
Originally published: 2011, Orbit Books
What it’s about: Hundreds of years in the future, humans have colonized the solar system, but tensions have war simmering among Earth, Mars, and the Asteroid Belt. The disappearance of Julie Mao (Florence Faivre) brings together a hardened detective (Thomas Jane) and a rogue ship’s captain (Steven Strait), pointing them toward a massive conspiracy.
Status: Season 3 premiered April 11; follow along with our coverage. Following Syfy’s cancellation of the series, Amazon will pick up The Expanse for a fourth season.

 

Photo: Rainmark Films

Adapted from: Frankenstein by Mary Shelley
Originally published: 1818, Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor &amp; Jones
What it’s about: Loosely based on Shelley’s novel, this mystery series sees Inspector John Marlott (Sean Bean) piecing together who is behind the murders of up to eight children, having sewn together various body parts into the body that Marlott initially discovers.
Status: Netflix acquired seasons 1 and 2 to stream in the U.S. after it was a hit in the UK. No word yet on whether the series will be renewed for a third season.

 

Lena Headey as Cersei Lannister and Nikolaj Coster-Waldau as Jaime Lannister – Photo: Helen Sloan/HBO

Adapted from: A Song of Ice and Fire series by George R.R. Martin
Originally published: 1996, Bantam Books
What it’s about: In Westeros, rival ruling families—Starks, Lannisters, Greyjoys, Targaryens, and more—wage war for control of the Iron Throne, aided or hindered by fire-breathing dragons and the mysterious Others.
Status: Season 8, the final season, will premiere sometime in 2019.

 

Photo: Ryan Green/FOX

Adapted from: various X-Men comics by various writers and artists
Originally published: various
What it’s about: After their son has a Carrie-like outburst that reveals his latent mutant powers, his parents (Amy Acker and Stephen Moyer) must go on the run with gifted son and daughter. With the help of mutants Eclipse (Sean Teale) and Blink (Jamie Chung), they must evade government agents who want to study their superpowered children.
Status: Premiered October 2. Renewed for a second season; no release date yet, though likely to be fall 2018.

 



Adapted from: The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood
Originally published: 1985, McClelland and Stewart
What it’s about: Offred (Elisabeth Moss) is a handmaid, or concubine, belonging to a wealthy couple in the totalitarian Republic of Gilead. She narrates the story of how Gilead came to be, as well as her small and large acts of sedition within the established hierarchy, and her search for her missing family.
Status: Season 2 premiered April 25. Follow along with our coverage.

 



Adapted from: HAPPY! by Grant Morrison (writer) and Darick Robertson (artist)
Originally published: 2012, Image Comics
What it’s about: After a shootout lands him in the ICU, ex-cop-turned-hitman Nick Sax (Chris Meloni) gets visited by a tiny blue horse named Happy (Patton Oswalt)… the invisible friend of a girl being held captive by a child murderer dressed as Santa Claus. As Christmas bells begin ringing, Sax must team up with this figment of a child’s imagination to find her. Morrison and writer-director Brian Taylor co-wrote the pilot and are set as executive producers.
Status: Renewed for season 2.

 



Adapted from: the Marvel Comics character created by Roy Thomas (writer) and Gil Kane (artist)
Originally published: 1974, Marvel Comics
What it’s about: Danny Rand (Finn Jones) returns to New York City after 15 years to reclaim his place in his family’s company. But when a threat endangers the city, he must choose between his family’s legacy and his duties as Iron Fist.
Status: Read our coverage of the first season. Season 2 is likely to premiere late 2018 or early 2019.

 



Adapted from: Jessica Jones: Alias by Brian Michael Bendis (writer) and Michael Gaydos (artist)
Originally published: 2001, Marvel Comics/MAX
What it’s about: Superhero-turned-private investigator Jessica Jones (Krysten Ritter) juggles her messy love life and whiskey habit with helping other wayward souls. After facing off with Kilgrave (David Tennant), she concentrates on keeping Alias Investigations open, while being drawn into the mystery of how she lost her family and gained her powers.
Status: Season 2 premiered March 8. Renewed for a third season!

 

Photo: Syfy

Adapted from: various Superman comics by various writers and artists
Originally published: 1938, DC Comics
What it’s about: “Set two generations before the destruction of the legendary Man of Steel’s home planet, Krypton follows Superman’s grandfather (Cameron Cuffe, The Halcyon)—whose House of El was ostracized and shamed—as he fights to redeem his family’s honor and save his beloved world from chaos.”
Status: Season 1 premiered March 21.

 



Adapted from: New Mutants #25 by Chris Claremont (writer) and Bill Sienkiewicz (artist)
Originally published: 1985, Marvel Comics
What it’s about: David Haller (Downton Abbey‘s Dan Stevens) is a troubled young man who experiences visions and hears voices in his head… only to realize that his supposed mental illness is actually a mutation, and he may even be the son of a member of the X-Men. Aubrey Plaza, Amber Midthunder, Katie Aselton, and Bill Irwin also star.
Status: Read our review of season 1. Season 2 premiered April 3.

 

Photo: David Lee/Netflix

Adapted from: the Marvel Comics character created by Archie Goodwin (writer), John Romita, Sr. (artist), and George Tuska (artist)
Originally published: 1972, Marvel Comics
What it’s about: After a sabotaged experiment makes him unbreakable, Luke Cage (Mike Colter) battles for the heart of Harlem while trying to get over the death of his wife Reva as well as his fling with Jessica Jones.
Status: Season 2 premieres June 22.

 



Adapted from: The Magicians by Lev Grossman
Originally published: 2009, Viking
What it’s about: In this adaptation of Lev Grossman’s bestselling series, Quentin Coldwater (Jason Ralph) discovers that the magical world he read about as a child is real when he is accepted to the prestigious (and very secret) Brakebills University. Alongside old and new friends, Quentin learns that magic is just one part of a curriculum that goes live work play study screw drink cram… drink.
Status: Season 3 premiered January 10.

 



Adapted from: The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick
Originally published: 1962, Putnam
What it’s about: The Man in the High Castle presents an alternate history where America loses World War II and is split between Nazi Germany and Japan. Juliana Crain (Alexa Davalos) receives a mysterious film reel from her sister, who is then murdered; the film reel contains glimpses of an alternate reality in which the United States won the war. Juliana sets out to find the person who created the reel—The Man in the High Castle. Read our review.
Status: Amazon has greenlit a third season, though no premiere date has yet been set; watch a clip.

 



Adapted from: Midnight, Texas by Charlaine Harris
Originally published: 2014, Ace
What it’s about: In Charlaine Harris’ series, phone psychic Manfred Bernardo relocates to Midnight, Texas, and then winds up overstaying his welcome—probably because of all the murders. It’s certainly an intriguing town, from the way executive producer David Janollari (Six Feet Under) describes it: “It’s where humans and the supernatural co-exist, and where everyone has a secret. It’s equal parts humorous, sexy, and downright scary.”
Status: Renewed for a second season, expected to air in summer or fall 2018.

 



Adapted from: Mr. Mercedes by Stephen King
Originally published: 2014, Scribner
What it’s about: When a killer dubbed “Mr. Mercedes” (Penny Dreadful’s Harry Treadaway), due to the grisly nature of his automobile crime, taunts retired detective Bill Hodges (Brendan Gleeson) with a series of lurid letters and emails, Hodges must stir himself from his depression to stop Mr. Mercedes from killing again.
Status: Renewed for season 2, which will be based on King’s Bill Hodges trilogy: Mr. Mercedes, Finders Keepers, and End of Watch. The new season is expected to premiere in summer 2018.

 



Adapted from: Outlander by Diana Gabaldon
Originally published: 1991, Delacorte Books
What it’s about: On a second honeymoon in Scotland in 1945, former WWII nurse Claire Randall (Caitriona Balfe) is transported back in time to Scotland in 1743, where she falls in love with Highland warrior Jamie Fraser (Sam Heughan).
Status: Season 4 premieres sometime in 2018.

 



Adapted from: the works of Philip K. Dick
Originally published: various
What it’s about: Ronald D. Moore’s (Battlestar Galactica, Outlander) anthology series series will draw from PKD’s entire body of work, adapting his stories in order to “illustrate Dick’s prophetic vision and celebrate the enduring appeal of the prized sci-fi novelist’s work.” The impressive cast includes Bryan Cranston, Steve Buscemi, Anna Paquin, Terrence Howard, Benedict Wong, and Janelle Monáe.
Status: Harry Potter and the Cursed Child writer Jack Thorne co-wrote scripts with Moore, who executive produced alongside Michael Dinner (Justified, Masters of Sex) and Bryan Cranston (Breaking Bad). Unclear if there will be a second season.

 



Adapted from: Preacher by Garth Ennis (writer) and Steve Dillon (artist)
Originally published: 1995, Vertigo
What it’s about: After getting accidentally possessed by a heavenly (and hellish) creature called Genesis, Reverend Jesse Custer (Dominic Cooper) goes on a quest to find God. Joining him along the way are his ex-girlfriend Tulip O’Hare (Ruth Negga) and wise-cracking Irish vampire Cassidy (Joseph Gilgun).
Status: Season 3 will premiere sometime in 2018.

 



Adapted from: the Marvel Comics character created by Gerry Conway (writer) and John Romita, Sr. (artist)
Originally published: 1974, Marvel Comics
What it’s about: Brutal vigilante Frank Castle (Jon Bernthal) will bring his own brand of “justice” to Hell’s Kitchen in this spinoff after his supporting role on Daredevil.
Status: Read our coverage of season 1, which premiered November 17. No word yet on season 2 premiere date, though it’s not expected before 2019.

 

 



Adapted from: Archie Comics by Mark Waid (writer) and Fiona Staples, Annie Chu, and Veronica Flash (artists)
Originally published: 2015, Archie Comics
What it’s about: Based on some of the more daring Archie Comics issues of recent memory, Riverdale (executive produced by Greg Berlanti, Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa, and others) looks to be a mashup of Pretty Little Liars and Twin Peaks: The usual high-school angst and love triangles are all still here, but set against an ominous backdrop that begins with the mysterious death of Riverdale’s golden boy. Watch the first trailer!
Status: Season 2 premiered October 11.

 



Adapted from: Runaways by Brian K. Vaughan and Adrian Alphona
Originally published: 2003, Marvel Comics
What it’s about: Upon discovering that their parents are supervillains, six teenagers steal or embrace newfound superpowers and fight to right their parents’ wrongdoings.
Status: Josh Schwartz (The O.C.) and Stephanie Savage (Gossip Girl) wrote the pilot and executive produced alongside Marvel Television’s Jeph Loeb (who had a hand in Jessica Jones) and Jim Chory (Daredevil). Season 1 premiered November 21; read our non-spoiler review of the pilot. Renewed for a second season.

 

Photo: Aidan Monaghan/AMC

Adapted from: The Terror by Dan Simmons
Originally published: 2007, Little, Brown and Company
What it’s about: In 1847, a Royal Naval expedition crew searching for the Northwest Passage is attacked by a mysterious predator that stalks their ships and crew.
Status: Ridley Scott’s anthology series starring Jared Harris (Mad Men) and Tobias Menzies (Outlander) premiered March 26. Renewed for a second season that will apply the “ghost haunts historical period” format to Japanese internment camps during World War II, as well as the Japanese-American community in Southern California at the time and the Pacific theater.

 



Adapted from: A Series of Unfortunate Events by Lemony Snicket
Originally published: 1999, Scholastic
What it’s about: Orphans Violet, Klaus, and Sunny Baudelaire are sent to live with their odious guardian Count Olaf (Neil Patrick Harris), who seeks to murder them and steal their inheritance. Over the course of Snicket’s tongue-in-cheek series, the Baudelaires weather adventures more perilous than the last and discover the truth behind their parents’ death in a fire. The 2004 movie, with Jim Carrey as Count Olaf, was underwhelming.
Status: Netflix has renewed the series for even more unfortunate second (premiered March 30) and third seasons, with the latter ending the series.

 



Adapted from: the Cormoran Strike series by Robert Galbraith
Originally published: 2013, Sphere Books
What it’s about: In Galbraith’s (a.k.a. J.K. Rowling’s) mystery series, war veteran-turned-private detective Cormoran Strike (War and Peace‘s Tom Burke) copes with physical and psychological wounds while solving three complex cases that have stumped the police.
Status: Three adaptations of Strike have been broadcast, based on each of the novels: The Cuckoo’s Calling, The Silkworm, and Career of Evil. (HBO and BBC One also worked together on the adaptation of Rowling’s The Casual Vacancy.) It’s unclear if there will be another adaptation, as the original intention was to follow the books and not write new material.

 



Adapted from: New England Comics Newsletter by Ben Edlund
Originally published: 1986, New England Comics Press
What it’s about: Deadline sums it up: “The Tick centers on an underdog accountant with zero powers who comes to realize his city is owned by a global super villain long-thought dead. As he struggles to uncover this conspiracy, he falls in league with a strange blue superhero.”
Status: Ben Edlund, who created The Tick and oversaw the first two TV iterations, serves as writer and executive producer. The second half of season 1 premiered February 23; read our review! And it’s been renewed for a second season.

 



Adapted from: Wynonna Earp by Beau Smith
Originally published: 1996, Image Comics (currently published by IDW Publishing)
What it’s about: The great-granddaughter of Wyatt Earp, saddled with the family curse and a six-shooter, fights the demonic Revenants—ghosts of the criminals Wyatt once put down—in her hometown of Purgatory.
Status: Renewed for season 3, which premieres July 20.

 

This article has been updated since its original publication in April 2016, and continues to be updated based on new information and suggestions in the comments.

Natalie Zutter never in all of her dreams thought she’d see this many SFF properties getting adapted at once. Geek out with her about all these adaptations on Twitter.

Receive notification by email when a new comment is added. You must be a registered user to subscribe to threads.




All comments must meet the community standards outlined in Tor.com's Moderation Policy or be subject to moderation. Thank you for keeping the discussion, and our community, civil and respectful. 