Central American migrants being held at a detention facility outside Houston have been told they can reunite with their children if they agree to sign a voluntary deportation order, The Texas Tribune reports.

Two immigration attorneys and a Honduran man at the facility told The Texas Tribune that the majority of the roughly two dozen men held at the IAH Polk County Secure Adult Detention Center had been offered reunification with their children in exchange for voluntary deportation.


The man, who spoke anonymously to the Tribune, said he abandoned his asylum case in the hopes of being reunited with his 6-year-old daughter, who was taken from him in late May.


"I was told I would not be deported without my daughter," the man told the Tribune. "I signed it out of desperation ... but the truth is I can't go back to Honduras; I need help."

An ICE spokesman told the Tribune it couldn't research "vague allegations" about children being exchanged for signed deportation orders.


More than 2,500 immigrant children have been separated from their parents since the Trump administration's zero tolerance policy was put in place, according to a fact sheet from the Department of Homeland Security released late Saturday.


The department said 522 of those children had been reunited with family and turned over to Customs and Border Patrol since the policy began. 2,053 children remained in the custody of the Department of Health and Human Services as of June 20. 

Homeland Security said the U.S. government knows the location of all children and parents in its custody and is working on "reuniting every minor and every parent or guardian via well-established reunification processes."

But immigration attorneys and advocates have said there's not a clear protocol for reunification, and migrant parents face plenty of hurdles when trying to find their children again, said Efrén Olivares, racial and economic justice director for the Texas Civil Rights Project. For one, the line migrant parents are told to call to locate or communicate with their children is only staffed Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., according to the fact sheet.


Some parents have already been deported without their children, The New York Times reported. Parents ordered deported are allowed to ask for their children to accompany them, though "many parents have elected to be removed without their children," DHS said.


It's unclear how many parents have been deported without their children, Olivares said on a call with reporters Sunday. The Texas Civil Rights Project has interviewed hundreds of separated families since the zero tolerance policy began, and Olivares said the parents' ultimate goal is to reunite with their children.


"If parents are being told that to do that, they have to sign a voluntary deportation order, it's a catch-22 that's unconscionable from the government," he said.

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.