In the wake of allegations law enforcement botched the response to the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, one Texas sheriff is assuring the public his department will properly respond to an active shooter situation.

Denton County Sheriff Tracy Murphree posted an internal memo to Twitter on Tuesday that informed deputies the proper response to an active shooter situation.

It said:

With the recent tragedy in Florida, I wanted to make clear my policy on responding to an active shooter. All commissioned Deputies, if you respond to an active shooter you are expected to take immediate action. We do not stage and wait for SWAT, we do not take cover in a parking lot, and we do not wait for another agency. We go in and do our duty. We go in to engage and stop the shooter and save lives. If for any reason you feel you can not follow this directive please inform your supervisor and we will work to get you re-assigned.

Thank you for all you do every day!!

The sheriff ended the letter with a Bible verse — Romans chapter 13, verse 4 — which says: “For he is God’s servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be afraid, For he does not bear the sword in vain. For he is the servant of God, An avenger who carries out God’s wrath on the wrongdoer.”

Along with a picture of the letter, Murphree wrote on Twitter there is “no doubt” where his agency stands on responding to active shooters.

“Just in case you were wondering. There is NO DOUBT where we stand. Denton County Sheriff’s Office, BUILT ON INTEGRITY!” he wrote.

Just in case you were wondering.  There is NO DOUBT where we stand.  Denton County Sheriff's Office, BUILT ON INTEGRITY! pic.twitter.com/xYC7dmNVr3

— Denton Co Sheriff (@DentonCoSheriff) February 27, 2018



The letter was widely praised on social media.

Florida Gov. Rick Scott (R) has ordered the Florida Department of Law Enforcement to investigate the Broward County Sheriff’s Office and its response to shooting.

In the weeks following the tragedy, it has been revealed that the school resource officer — now-resigned Broward County deputy Scot Peterson — did not enter the building during the shooting. Instead, he stood outside the school with his firearm drawn behind cover. It has also been reported that three other Broward County deputies arrived to the scene and joined their colleague in not entering the building.

In addition, an anonymous EMS first responder who was one of the first to arrive at the school that day said law enforcement prevented medical personnel from entering the school until the building was cleared. The EMT said he believes more lives could have been saved had he and other medical personnel been allowed into the building.

Because of how seemingly botched the response was, nearly every Republican in the Florida House has called on Scott to suspend Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel.

In a short interview with a local reporter, Murphree had some brutal advice for Sheriff Israel.

“My first advice to him would be to shut up. My first advice would be to quit trying to cover your own butt and lets find out why these officers did not enter the building, lets find out why continual reporters of this shooter were basically ignored and lets find out why we have 17 kids who are dead,” Murphree said.

“He’s the one who threw his deputies under the bus, he’s the one who came out and talked about the SRO not going into the school. And then he appears on CNN as this anti-gun advocate while the investigation is still going on,” he continued.

@DentonCoSheriff has some strong words for Broward Co. Sheriff Scott Israel. @ntTV_News pic.twitter.com/nA3QwxchKt

— Blake Holland (@tblakeholland) February 28, 2018



Approved posts to MyVoice will be live on the site within a few hours. MyVoice is for posting intelligent, engaging, entertaining and thought-provoking commentary and stories, so following these guidelines will help get your post prioritized and noticed.

Moderators assign strikes for violations of our comment policy. Strikes will disappear automatically in 24 hours, provided you have no further violations. However, if you earn three strikes within 24 hours, your account will be temporary suspended.

Please email moderation@theblaze.com to let us know you would like it removed.

If you notice something is not working as expected, please email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

You can report offending posts by clicking on the little flag icon below every post. This will automatically inform our moderators. If you spot a troublemaker, you can also email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

Speak your mind. Please be respectful of our rules and community. No spam, abuse, obscenities, off-topic comments, racial or ethnic slurs, threats, hate, comments that incite violence or excessive use of flagging permitted.

Please be respectful of our community and spread some love. Any of the following may result in a permanent ban:

For more information, please see our Terms of Use. Now, go have fun and speak your mind!