


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Acting Sheriff Richard Schmidt asked the National Institute of Corrections to review all operations at the jail in the wake of seven custody deaths over two years.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Acting Milwaukee County Sheriff Richard Schmidt gives a tour of the Milwaukee County Jail.
    Mike De Sisti

Acting Milwaukee County Sheriff Richard Schmidt talks about the facilities in the 6D floor day room surrounded by cells, where the general prison population is held. Inmates kept in this area are in stable physical and mental health. Schmidt conducted a tour of the Milwaukee County Jail for an invited group of elected and county/city officials, along with the media.
(Photo: Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

An outside review of the Milwaukee County Jail found outdated policies, lengthy waits for inmate medical screenings, widespread use of overtime because of staff shortages and other problems.   


But in the weeks since the Milwaukee County Sheriff's Office received the findings, the agency "has aggressively worked" to address those issues, according to a copy of the report released Thursday.


Acting Sheriff Richard Schmidt asked the National Institute of Corrections to review all operations at the jail in the wake of seven custody deaths over two years. 


One of those deaths — that of Terrill Thomas who died of dehydration in April 2016 — led to criminal charges being filed against three jail staffers and Armor Correctional Health Services, the private medical contractor at the jail.


RELATED: Milwaukee County Jail's health care contractor charged with falsifying inmate records


RELATED: Former commander, 2 staffers charged in dehydration death of Terrill Thomas in Milwaukee County Jail


RELATED: The history of deaths at detention facilities


"The National Institute of Corrections does not pull punches," Schmidt said Thursday. "They document those areas needing correction and they also document what's working."


Of the report's 17 recommendations, 15 already have been implemented, he said.


The two not yet completed are a review of policies and a staffing analysis. A separate state inspection in December found no violations, he added.



	
LIKE  US ON FACEBOOK: Get the latest Journal Sentinel news in your feed
	
	

On Thursday, Schmidt took local officials and reporters through the jail in an unprecedented one-hour tour and to see what he called the "transparent transformation" of the jail since he took over in September.


More than 34,000 people are booked into the jail every year. At the time of the tour, the jail was housing about 900 inmates, less than its capacity of about 960.


The 6D floor day room surrounded by cells, where the general prison population is held. Inmates kept in this area are in stable physical and mental health. Acting Milwaukee County Sheriff Richard Schmidt, led a tour of the Milwaukee County Jail (MCJ) for an invited group of elected and county/city officials, along with the media. (Photo: Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

"Every inmate must be treated with respect, with proper humanity," Schmidt said.


The report, known as an "operational assessment," was paid for by the National Institute of Corrections, which sent two expert consultants to do the evaluation. They visited the jail Feb. 28 through March 2.


The report noted the findings were their opinions and do not represent the official opinion of the U.S. Department of Justice.


The report outlines 17 recommendations and includes a detailed review of the jail.


Among the findings:


Outdated policies


The Sheriff's Office's policies and procedures were last reviewed and revised in October 2014. Best practice calls for annual reviews.


Sheriff's officials said a "thorough and complete policy review" for the agency is underway and will be completed by the end of this year. 


Lock downs


The consultants heard complaints from inmates about what they saw as unnecessary lock-downs. They recommended the agency do a time audit to determine how much time inmates spend in lock-downs.


The Sheriff's Office did the audit and has made changes so inmates now are locked down about two hours less each day.


The inside of a cell is seen in the medical screening area where prisoners are brought to determine their medical condition. Acting Milwaukee County Sheriff Richard Schmidt, led a tour of the Milwaukee County Jail (MCJ) for an invited group of elected and county/city officials, along with the media. (Photo: Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Staffing analysis


The report recommended undertaking a staffing analysis, and the Sheriff's Office says it's working to find a company to do that. 


Consultants also told the agency to have a better system for tracking overtime. One jail staffer said he had worked 207 hours in the last two-week period. 


Sheriff's officials said the agency should be at full staff by June, which will eliminate widespread overtime. They have a budget for 260 correctional officers employed, and as of right now, have 239 employed. A captain also has been assigned to track all overtime.


Turnover is an ongoing issue. About one-third of the jail's correctional officers leave the job each year, officials said Thursday.


Suicide watch logs


Inmates on suicide watch are supposed to be checked on every 15 minutes. A review of the watch logs found one officer making entries at specific times, but the second-shift officer was writing down "observation times" at exactly 15-minute intervals.


The report said staff should note the actual time they make the checks. Sheriff's officials said this has been addressed with training.


Programming coordinator


Only one jail staffer was assigned to coordinate programs in the jail — and had only two days a week to do so. 


The position is responsible for a host of activities, including volunteer training, volunteer background checks, law library requests and coordinating with the nonprofit organizations and teachers that work in the jail. 


Since then, the staffer now has three days to focus on the role and another officer is being trained to cover the other two days.


The jail is facing a nursing shortage, and that has led to a backlog in the initial and secondary medical screenings, the report found.


The nurses who conduct the screenings are employees of Armor Correctional, a Miami-based for-profit company.


New inmates are required to undergo two screenings before they are accepted into the jail.


During their visit, the consultant observed 28 inmates waiting for the secondary health screening in the booking area, which is required before they can be housed in the jail. 


The consultant watched the screening of two young men who had been waiting overnight in the booking area for about 10 hours.


The on-duty nurse said staff got behind because two other inmates had to go the hospital for seizures and another had to go to the hospital for treatment of a head injury from an earlier traffic crash.


The third screening the consultant observed was of an obese man who told the nurse he had come from the hospital where he had very high blood pressure. The nurse looked for his discharge papers, which showed his blood pressure was normal.


The inmate said that couldn't be right. The nurse opened the file and saw a photo and "it clearly was not the inmate being assessed," the report says. 


The nurse told the corrections officer it was the wrong inmate and requested another inmate be brought up for screening. The nurse waited for 15 minutes and the officer still had not brought another inmate up to be assessed.


The inmate with the wrong file did have a bracelet on with his correct identity, and he was sent back to the waiting area. The nurse never took his blood pressure.


The inmate whose file the nurse had been using was sent to housing without the second screening, according to the report.


The Sheriff's Office says it has reworked the process so correctional officers are checking wristbands and talking with medical staff prior to the inmates being accepted into the jail and being housed.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The typical wait time for the booking process, which includes the second medical screening, is about four hours, said Deputy Inspector Aaron Dobson, the jail administrator, during the tour.


About 100 people are booked into the jail each day and depending on the person, the medical screening alone can take 30 minutes, he said.


The county, which spends about $16.5 million annually in medical and mental health care for inmates, is developing a request for proposals for that contract — a process that could lead to a new provider coming in.


Armor Correctional currently is the medical provider for the jail and the House of Correction in Franklin. The administration at the House of Correction handles the contract.


Schmidt said Thursday he is pushing for a requirement that the next medical vendor achieve accreditation by the National Commission on Correctional Health Care within one year.


As far as Schmidt's future, he said he anticipates serving as acting sheriff through the end of 2018. He said he still is considering if he will run for sheriff and expects to announce a decision within the next two to three weeks.


Schmidt took over as acting sheriff in August after former Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. abruptly resigned his post and took a job with a super PAC supporting President Donald Trump. 


Since then, he has made numerous changes in the jail, including moving several top commanders from the sworn law enforcement ranks to the jail and adding three wellness monitors who make daily one-on-one contact with inmates in the mental health, medical and discipline units.


"Everything rises and falls with leadership," Schmidt said Thursday.


He said he wanted to bring transparency to the jail after public outcry following the series of custody deaths. Other than the Thomas case, no criminal wrongdoing was found in four of the deaths and two remain under investigation, he said.


"I want the public to see this is a different day, it's a different office, it's a different sheriff, it's a different outcome," Schmidt said.



	
Sun Prairie firefighter killed by explosion that destroyed his own bar





Tensions boil in tiny Northwoods school district after board member asks about finances




	
'Pivot counties' will be key in fight for Senate control



 
