Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In the wake of a deadly school shooting in Florida, some private schools have reached out to law enforcement.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    U.S. Education Secretary Betsy DeVos says she's interested in hearing suggestions to improve school safety from students at a Florida high school where 17 people were killed last month in mass shooting. (March 7)
    AP

Williamson County Sheriff Jeff Long has been tasked with forming a committee to address school safety at private schools.
(Photo: File photo / Melanie Balakit / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Williamson County Sheriff's Office may take an extra look at private school security.


Williamson County Mayor Rogers Anderson asked Sheriff Jeff Long to assess private school security earlier this week. 


"Are we prepared at all schools?" asked Anderson. 


"Maybe all of them are up to par," he said. "But it would make me sleep better at night, our county commission sleep better at night, knowing we are doing the best we can with the best we got."


He added: "I want to know we're prepared." 


► More: Williamson County Sheriff's Office to assess private school security


► More: Tennessee lawmakers unveil bipartisan legislation aimed at boosting school security


Long said Monday he supported the task. 


"All of our kids are part of our jurisdiction," Long said. "I think this county needs to be a leader." 


The county's law enforcement officials already have relationships with private schools. But in the wake of a deadly school shooting in Florida last month, some have reached out to law enforcement to talk school security again. 


Battle Ground Academy in Franklin recently met with the WCSO and Franklin Police Department, said Andy Graham, BGA's associate head of school.  


BGA gave law enforcement officials a tour of their campus, a copy of their school floor plans and a copy of the school's crisis plan. They also discussed their school's safety plan.


The more information police have about a school, the better they can respond in the event of an emergency, Long said. 



    Sean Burke, president of the School Safety Advocacy Council, says too many people are in denial about the threats to school safety after the shooting in Parkland, Fla.
    Ayrika Whitney/USA TODAY Network-Tennessee

Franklin's St. Matthew Catholic School recently talked with the WCSO about the possibility of having a school resource officer, said Tim Forbes, the school's principal.


An SRO is a trained law enforcement official responsible for the security of the school building. They are funded by the county. 


"Sheriff Long has been very willing to have that conversation," Forbes said. "Whether it's possible that his department can do anything at all, at least he's willing to sit down and and have that dialogue."


He added: "It is something that is important to our families, and given today's climate, we have to be able to provide a safe and secure learning environment for our students." 


The county currently funds SROs for all public schools. It's up to private schools whether or not they staff a security guard on campus. 


In the event of a school shooting, all available law enforcement will respond, said WCSO spokeswoman Sharon Puckett.


Cities would respond first in corporate limits, she said. The sheriff's office would be the first to respond in unincorporated areas.


Williamson County Schools closed for a day in February so all staff could review safety plans. They've also requested funding for an assistant to the district's head of security and safety. Later this month, they're hosting a public meeting on school safety. 


Franklin Special School District held several meetings this week with staff to discuss school safety.


Reach Melanie Balakit at mbalakit@tennessean.com. 


 
