U.S. Naval Academy Color Guard presents colors during march-on ceremonies during 106th playing of Army vs.Navy football game, Dec. 3, 2005 / Getty

BY:  Jack Heretik				Follow
					@JackHeretik
				December 8, 2017 5:09 pm


Enthusiasm for the annual Army-Navy football game is spilling over from the football field to the Pentagon.

Cheerleaders from both the U.S. Military Academy and the Naval Academy walked the halls of the Pentagon on Friday to cheer and taunt before Saturday's game in Philadelphia. The rivalry between the two service academies dates back to 1890.

Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of Defense James Mattis were waiting for the Navy crew outside of Mattis' office. Pence, whose son is in the Marines, allowed his bias to show.

"Thank you for stepping up to serve your country," Pence said. "We're incredibly proud of all of you, and go Navy, beat Army!"

Are you ready for the @ArmyNavyGame?If not, here's your morning motivation from the @USNAband. pic.twitter.com/0J1ziDDAf5

— DoD Outreach (@DoDOutreach) December 8, 2017



The Navy crew then went to the office of Secretary of the Army Mark Esper, who greeted the mob.

"We beat you last year, we'll beat you this year. While you guys were winning football games, we were winning wars," Esper said before taking a more conciliatory tone with the midshipmen.

It was not just the Naval Academy, located in Annapolis, Maryland, that invaded the Pentagon. Cadets from the U.S. Military Academy in West Point, New York also stopped by.

The cadets went to Mattis' office, making the retired four-star Marine general laugh.

The cadets also swung by Chief of Naval Operations Adm. John Richardson's office, where they cheered loudly and were greeted by Richardson. Army Chief of Staff Mark Milley took care of the cymbals himself.

Look who stopped by the #Pentagon today! The @WestPoint_USMA Band and @ArmyWP_Cheer held a pep rally throughout the Pentagon halls in advance of tomorrow's #ArmyNavy game. pic.twitter.com/9ZBOEGYUQC

— DoD Outreach (@DoDOutreach) December 8, 2017



Richardson and Milley also got into it while waiting for their respective sides' mascots, Bill the Goat and Black Jack, to respond to a phone call. The two exchanged some books on losing while waiting to hear from the mascots who had some "phone trouble."

GoNavy! BeatArmy! – Learn more about that book and several other titles that I personally recommend to @ArmyChiefStaff as we head into Saturday's #ArmyNavyGame. Bill the Goat and Black Jack are no where to be found unfortunately… pic.twitter.com/lVcVxq90dK

— Adm. John Richardson (@CNORichardson) December 8, 2017



Jack Heretik   Email Jack | Full Bio | RSSJack is a Media Analyst for the Washington Free Beacon. He is from Northern Ohio and graduated from the Catholic University of America in 2011. Prior to joining the Free Beacon, Jack was a Production Assistant for EWTN's The World Over and worked on Sen. Bill Cassidy's 2014 campaign.					