Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A groundbreaking was held at the Gratiot jail site under the leadership of former Wayne County Executive Robert Ficano in September 2011.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

The half constructed Wayne County jail on Gratiot Avenue in downtown Detroit in August 2016.
(Photo: Romain Blanquart, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

A plan that would have restarted construction on the long-stalled jail project on Gratiot near Greektown has been scrapped after Wayne County announced Friday it's nearing a deal with Dan Gilbert’s Rock Ventures to build a $520-million criminal justice center at a different site.


Negotiations remain under way for the criminal justice center near I-75 and Warren Avenue, but Rock Ventures tentatively has agreed to pay a previously approved $500,000 stipend to Walsh Construction — the lone bidder to respond to a request for proposals — to finish the so-called failed jail project.


“The stipend ensured we received a proposal so we could fully evaluate finishing the jail at Gratiot," said Wayne County Executive Warren Evans in a statement. “As we dug into the project with an actual proposal, the more we recognized it had too much inherent risk for the county at too high a price. We’re negotiating a deal with Rock that caps the county’s costs and creates the best solution available to our jail problem.”


It has been a long road for the county.


A ground-breaking was held at the Gratiot jail site under the leadership of former Wayne County Executive Robert Ficano in September 2011. 


But work was halted in June 2013 when it was revealed that cost overruns were pushing the project $91 million over its $300-million budget. The idled site is costing taxpayers about $1.2 million a month in bond payments, storage and security.


In February, the Wayne County Commission approved the administration’s recommendation to pay the $500,000 stipend to Walsh if its proposal to complete Gratiot was not accepted.


According to the county, the stipend compensates Walsh for the costs associated with submitting a substantive response to the county’s request. The stipend was approved as questions were raised about whether the Gratiot jail would be built.


Wayne County Commissioner Ray Basham, who told the Free Press several weeks ago he feels the commission has been left largely in the dark during the negotiation process, again questioned why the body hasn't been kept in the loop. 


Basham said the commission was notified of Evans' decision to eliminate Walsh at 9:18 a.m. Friday morning, about 30 minutes before it was made public.


"The legislative branch, which is what I'm part of, we just got notified today that he's scrapping the plan and he's going to go with Dan Gilbert," Basham said. 


"I'm glad that they're doing something but quite frankly we're part of the process, too," Basham said. "You think he'd respect the commission. ... In my opinion, we should have went with Walsh to begin with.


The county’s decision has propelled Rock Venture’s proposal forward and comes just a week after the Detroit City Council approved a land swap deal allowing the city to trade land with Wayne County in exchange for the massive former American Motors headquarters site on Plymouth Road.  


More on Freep.com:


Detroit inches closer to Major League Soccer franchise


See all 4 possible MLS expansion stadiums


Gilbert and Tom Gores, owner of the  Detroit Pistons, originally planned to develop the Gratiot site into a soccer stadium, as part of a $1-billion development. But Gilbert announced earlier this month that plans for a 23,000-seat soccer stadium had been scrapped. 


Instead, the Ford family added its weight behind Detroit’s bid to land a MLS franchise and offered Ford Field as the venue to host the team if the bid is successful.


Rock Ventures Principal Matt Cullen previously said the company remains committed to building a mixed-use development on the Gratiot site.


“From the time we started working on the Gratiot site, we have always been focused on the importance of a great mixed-use development at the gateway to downtown Detroit, soccer was just a potential component of our vision,” Cullen said. 


Khalil Rahal, Wayne County's economic development director, at the time called council's affirmative vote a "step in the right direction," but said there's more work on the horizon.


The land swap deal also needs to be approved by the Wayne County Commission and the Wayne County Land Bank, which owns the American Motors property.


Rahal told the Free Press that the county hopes to have something to submit to the Wayne County Board of Commissioners before year's end. Rahal said he hopes the commission will take it up early next year. The final definitive agreement with Rock Ventures will also require the Wayne County Building Authority’s approval.


But despite the council's approval and the county’s decision to eliminate Gratiot as a site for the future criminal justice complex, uncertainty remains.


According to the county, an Internal Revenue Service decision is pending related to the use of jail bond proceeds on an alternative site to Gratiot. The IRS is working to determine whether the county can use the bonds at Rock's proposed site.


Without a ruling in its favor, the county said no agreement with Rock is possible.


The most recent Moody's Investors Service credit opinion from May 2017 said the county has substantially improved its fiscal profile and has a positive outlook due. And a Moody's spokesperson said: "We’re monitoring the development to see how much additional debt the county may ultimately take on, but at this point, it’s too preliminary to comment."


Evans said the county is making progress and moving toward a deal with Rock.


“But there hasn’t been a simple step in this entire process, nor will there be,” Evans said. “We’ve had to vet two proposals, are working to acquire land from the city, need to settle an issue with the IRS and are negotiating a half a billion dollar development deal — it all takes time, but we’re confident we’ll get there.”


Concerns also have been raised by nearby residents, who have said they don't want the criminal justice complex near their homes.


Nicholas Miller, who lives within three blocks of the proposed site, filed a lawsuit two weeks ago in Wayne County Circuit Court against the City of Detroit, Mayor Mike Duggan, the City Council and Council President Brenda Jones. Miller alleged the city should not be allowed to circumvent its own zoning ordinance. A judge tossed the lawsuit.


The county has said it plans to hold more community engagement meetings in the coming weeks but Miller said Friday it isn't enough.


"Further community engagement will be pointless if the county and city remain unwilling to adjust the proposal," Miller told the Free Press. "So far, both entities have rejected all our concerns and suggestions, including very minor alterations. This is not merely a communication problem."


Contact Katrease Stafford: kstafford@freepress.com or 313-223-4759.
