
                                                            Politico

Shia Kapos' must-read rundown of political news in the Land of Lincoln

Get the Illinois Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

03/27/2018 07:14 AM EDT

By Mark Guarino (markguarino10@gmail.com; @markguarino) and Kristen East (keast@politico.com; @kristenicoleast)

Happy Tuesday, Illinois! I am handling Playbook all week for Natasha Korecki.


Story Continued Below

Facebook continues to lose friends, virtually and otherwise. The latest is Cook County State’s Attorney office, which announced Monday it is suing the social media outlet and Cambridge Analytica, saying that both schemed to misuse all the data it’s been mining over the past decade or so. Cook County State’s Attorney Kim Foxx says both companies violated a fraud law in Illinois. 

According to the Chicago Tribune’s Ally Marotti, the suit states that “‘(Facebook) sought to keep developers building on its platform and provide companies with all the tools they need to influence and manipulate user behavior … That’s because Facebook is not a social media company; it is the largest data mining operation in existence.’ Facebook users, including their profiles, locations and what they like. The firm claimed its tools Facebook said it could not comment immediately on the lawsuit, and Cambridge Analytica did not respond to requests for comment.

“The lawsuit joins others brought against the social media giant and Cambridge Analytica in response to a report from The New York Times and The Observer of London earlier this month. The newspapers reported that Cambridge Analytica, whose U.K.-based parent SCL Group was also named in Cook County’s suit, gained access to private information of more than 50 million could analyze voters’ personalities and influence their behavior with targeted messages.” Story here.

The Chicago Sun-Times’ Mitch Dudek adds that Foxx will not be on the case but is farming it out to Edelson PC, a private law firm. They’ll be paid from whatever money is generated from the suit. He adds also that Foxx is not the only prosecutor in the state to go after Facebook. He writes: “Attorney General Lisa Madigan, along with 36 other attorneys general, signed a letter demanding answers from Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg about the company’s business practices and privacy protections, her office announced Monday.

“‘Facebook must provide detailed information about how it uses the vast amount of data it collects, how it protects that data and what steps it takes to maintain privacy of users’ data,’ Madigan said in an emailed statement.” Story here

LIPINSKI REFLECTS — U.S. Rep. Dan Lipinski of the 3rd District is speaking out about his narrow path to victory last week against primary challenger Marie Newman. In an op-ed posted to RealClear Politics, Lipinski credits his survival in Washington to his desire for compromise, a rare trait on the Hill. 

He writes: “My victory proves that elected leaders willing to work hand-in-hand with peers who hold different points of view — across party lines, or even beneath a single party tent — can and should take that risk. Grassroots organizations frustrated by Washington’s inability to work in a bipartisan fashion — outfits like No Labels and its allied political operation — have put a stake in the ground, making clear that they are prepared to provide the air cover required when committed problem solvers come under attack from the partisan extremes.

“I understand that my determination to work across party lines is seen by some as unacceptable in the face of President Trump’s policies and pronouncements. But I continue to believe that American democracy is miraculous explicitly because it demands that the great bulk of us — public leaders both to my right and to my left — work together. Better ideas emerge because of Congress’s ideological diversity. And as before, I’m eager to collaborate with anyone determined to solve the nation’s problems. That is what Americans want.” Read more.

WEBB REJECTS TRUMP — He defended disgraced Illinois Governor George Ryan, tobacco maker Phillip Morris, and Monsanto, but President Donald Trump was too toxic for prominent Chicago attorney Dan Webb. Webb said no to Trump who is actively seeking legal counsel. Webb cited “business conflicts,” according to the Chicago Tribune’s Tony Briscoe and Liam Ford. 

They write: “Chicago-based Webb and Tom Buchanan, head of the firm’s litigation department in Washington, D.C., have declined an opportunity to represent the president. In a statement Monday, the law firm said: ‘President Trump reached out to Dan Webb and Tom Buchanan to provide legal representation. They were unable to take on the representation due to business conflicts. However they consider the opportunity to represent the President to be the highest honor and they sincerely regret that they cannot do so. They wish the president the best and believe he has excellent representation in Ty Cobb and Jay Sekulow.’” Story here.

PLAYBOOK POOL — DOWN TO FOUR: The final four is set, with Villanova, Kansas, Loyola University Chicago, and Michigan heading to San Antonio. The leaderboard is tight with Taras Stratelak of Rimforest, California, holding a 4-point lead over Chris Linsmayer of Denver, Colorado. Rich Levesque, of Trenton, New Jersey, and Chad Kreikemeier of DC remain in the hunt. Over on our VIP board, Seema Mehta, political reporter for the Los Angeles Times leads the way, with Rachel Adler, a talent agent from CAA, and lobbyist Brian Ballard of Florida close behind. Congressman Bill Pascrell (D-NJ), Illinois Comptroller Susana Mendoza, and attorney Charlie Spies are also near the top of the board— but Adler and Pascrell are among the many to have picked Virginia to win the championship, all but eliminating their chances of winning. Best of luck to all of our Playbook Pool participants as we head to the Final Four.

GOVERNOR’S RACE

— “Commentary: Instead of campaigning, here’s what Rauner, Pritzker should do with those millions,” by Chicago Tribune’s Allen R. Sanderson: “Is there anything that we don’t already know about Bruce Rauner and J.B. Pritzker — the men themselves, their platforms and policy agendas — after the preliminary round? So here is a modest proposal: What if both candidates pledged not to run any television spots or plant posters on lawns between now and the fall? That is, zero campaigning, save for the requisite sit-downs with newspaper editorial boards, WTTW-sponsored debates, small non-fundraising gatherings, and going from door to door (without a television crew in tow to record the stops). Instead, each would agree to donate $100 million of his own money to Illinois charities, selected from a list of, say, a couple hundred organizations.” Story here 

— “More McHenry County Democrats voted early than Republicans,” by Northwest Herald’s Ed Komenda: “The breakdown of early voting totals in McHenry County might offer a glimpse into the crystal ball of local politics. Does the future include a blue wave? In 2014, the last time there was a gubernatorial race in Illinois, 460 Democrats voted early — a droplet compared with the 3,165 Republicans who turned out, McHenry County Clerk Mary McClellan said. Before Tuesday’s primary, more Democrats than Republican voted early. In total, McClellan estimated that 6,988 voters turned in ballots early – and 3,767 of them came from Democrats. On the Republican side, 3,221 early voters showed up, making this year’s early voting period a near split down the middle.” Story here 

STATE

— “In withdrawal: Treating the babies of Illinois’ opioid crisis,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Kristen Schorsch: “The opioid epidemic has unleashed a storm that's battering its tiniest victims, whether their moms used legally or not during pregnancy. The number of babies born with withdrawal symptoms—inconsolable crying, trembling and, in the worst cases, seizures—is skyrocketing across the country as opioid use grips their parents. A severe drought of treatment options in Illinois for pregnant women in the throes of addiction suggests there's no resolution in sight. The burden to treat these babies is enormous—on the hospitals that care for them, on the state Medicaid program that largely incurs the cost, and on the generation of children who face little-understood long-term consequences. … It's hard to capture the full scope of how the opioid epidemic impacts babies. Hospitals across the state, the Illinois Department of Public Health and the federal government have different methods of gathering or interpreting data on cases of so-called neonatal abstinence syndrome. The data also lags several years, making it difficult to assess the fast-paced epidemic's impact on its most vulnerable casualties.” Story here 

— “Illinois governor denies clemency for veteran facing deportation,” by CNN’s Nicole Chavez: “Illinois Gov. Bruce Rauner has denied clemency for a Chicago veteran who is facing deportation after serving two tours in Afghanistan with the US Army, CNN affiliate WLS reported. ‘It's not appropriate to go into detail on reason for a decision, but we take every review of clemency and pardon very seriously,’ Rauner told WLS. ‘We made the decision not to grant it in that case.’ Miguel Perez Jr., 39, has been detained at an US Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention center in Kenosha, Wisconsin, since last year. ICE began deportation proceedings while Perez was serving a sentence for a felony drug charge.” Story here 

— “Residents have their say on proposed Deerfield assault weapons ban,” by Pioneer Press’ Steve Sadin: “Though no final action was taken during the first reading of Deerfield’s proposed assault weapons ban when it came before the Village Board of Trustees March 19, there was plenty of public comment from residents on both sides of the issue. With a near capacity crowd making suggestions for more than 90 minutes, trustees and Mayor Harriet Rosenthal heard support for the legislation, suggestions on how to modify it and outright opposition. Of the 26 people who spoke, 15 were against banning assault weapons and high-capacity magazines and 11 said they wanted it to become law. Six Deerfield High School students were part of the group encouraging the board to pass the ordinance. Of the 15 opponents, six were Deerfield residents and nine were from elsewhere.” Story here 

— “Illinois at heart of U.S. Interstate System,” by Rock River Times’ Shane Nicholson: “Its neighbor to the east may claim ‘The Crossroads of America’ title, but by nearly any measure, Illinois is the heart of the U.S. Interstate System. Illinois has the third highest total of interstate routes and mileage. Only New York and California have more I-designated roadways, with 7 million and 25 million more residents, respectively. Only Texas and California routes cover more mileage, though those states are five and three times larger by territory. And the importance of the routes — many of which were designed to pass through or near Chicago, with its access to the global economy — further spell out the importance of Illinois as a hub of trans-U.S. travel. The two longest treks of the interstate system, I-90 and I-80, pass through Illinois on their coast-to-coast journeys.” Story here 

— “Illinois case could help other utilities seeking to fund microgrids,” by Energy News Network’s Kevin Begos: “Energy experts and consumer groups are monitoring the recent Illinois decision to allow ComEd to build a microgrid and recoup the $25 million cost from a broader group of ratepayers. But while a bill to authorize similar cost recovery is in motion in Pennsylvania, most observers plan to wait for details on how the Chicago microgrid performs before pushing similar regulatory changes.” Story here 

CHICAGO

—“Chicago Public Schools' huge pension debt just got $1 billion deeper, new estimates show,” by the Chicago Tribune’s Juan Perez Jr.: “Less aggressive investment return estimates have carved an additional $1 billion hole in the severely underfunded pension system for Chicago teachers, reviving questions about how a retirement plan for tens of thousands of public workers can survive without additional money from taxpayers. Consultants for the Chicago Teachers’ Pension Fund now conclude the system is about $11 billion in the red and faces an even steeper climb to comply with a state law that requires it to be 90 percent funded by 2059, financial documents show. Schools and households won’t feel the worst pain of the impending pension payment spike for several years. Experts say that’s because the state-mandated payment plan pushes an enormous and growing burden onto future taxpayers.” Story here

— “Aldermen OK borrowing $4 billion to begin $8.5 billion O’Hare expansion project,” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Fran Spielman: “Mayor Rahm Emanuel’s $8.5 billion O’Hare Airport expansion plan — and the $4 billion borrowing needed to get it started — are now cleared for take-off at Wednesday’s City Council meeting. There’s nothing a Chicago mayor loves more heading into a difficult re-election campaign than to have a massive public works project under way that provides thousands of jobs and billions of dollars in contracts to dole out to allies and campaign contributors. Emanuel will have that marquee project, thanks to Monday’s vote by the City Council’s Finance Committee.” Story here 

— “Listen to ‘The Daily’: When gun violence is a daily threat,” by The New York Times’ Michael Barbaro: “As hundreds of thousands of demonstrators prepared to march in Washington in response to the school shooting in Parkland, Fla., students on the South Side of Chicago felt sympathy, but also frustration. Why hadn’t the gun violence in their community earned the nation’s outrage?” Story here 

— “Study blames ‘ACLU effect’ for spike in Chicago’s violence in 2016, but experts differ,” by Chicago Tribune’s Jeremy Gorner: “A new study blames Chicago’s sudden spike in gun violence in 2016 on the dramatic drop in street stops by Chicago police that year, but several crime experts quickly discounted its findings, particularly its conclusion that the Laquan McDonald scandal wasn’t a factor. Chicago’s 58 percent jump in homicides in 2016 has fueled fierce debate about its cause among law enforcement officials, politicians and academics. The study by two professors from the University of Utah cited the so-called ACLU effect as the most likely explanation for the sharp rise in violence to levels unseen in two decades.” Story here 

— “Chicago’s deal with ACLU, Black Lives Matter changes political calculus for police reform,” by Chicago Tribune’s Dan Hinkel: “Now, the activists and advocacy groups will share influence in the process with city and state officials. Some of those activist groups take positions unlikely to appeal to the local political elite; Black Lives Matter Chicago, for example, advocates for de-funding the police and criminally prosecuting Emanuel, among others, in the alleged ‘cover-ups of the murders’ of people by police. While the news may have come as a surprise, the benefits of the deal to each party are clear — as are the risks the participants would have faced without the agreement.” Story here 

— “United Airlines passenger gets $10,000 voucher to give up seat on overbooked flight,” by Los Angeles Times’ Hugo Martin: “United Airlines confirmed that it offered a passenger named Allison Preiss a $10,000 voucher toward future flights to give up her seat on an overbooked flight Thursday from Washington Dulles International Airport to Austin-Bergstrom International Airport. Preiss, a communications manager for the Center for American Progress, chronicled her plight via her Twitter account, noting that she was chosen to give up her seat because she paid the lowest fare on the plane.” Story here 

— “After 23 years in prison as an innocent man, former White Sox groundskeeper returns to his old job,” by Chicago Tribune’s Gregory Pratt: “Coleman’s first day back at work Monday couldn’t be more remarkable. He’d been on the White Sox groundskeeping crew in 1994 when he was charged with a heinous rape and murder. He spent the next 23 years behind bars until DNA evidence last November led prosecutors to vacate Coleman's conviction, leading to his freedom. A Cook County judge granted him a certificate of innocence this month, clearing his name. Soon after, the White Sox agreed to give him his old job back, helping Coleman realize a dream he often discussed in prison.” Story here 

— “Afghan war vet deported to Mexico and left ‘homeless and penniless,’ his Chicago family says,” by Chicago Tribune’s Manya Brachear Pashman: “Ending a 16-month quest to stay in a country where he was raised and that he fought to defend, Miguel Perez Jr., a veteran with a green card and a felony drug conviction, has been deported to Mexico, where he has not lived since childhood. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement confirmed Sunday that Perez boarded an ICE Air Operations flight at Gary International Airport and was flown to Brownsville, Texas. There, ICE officers escorted Perez across the U.S.-Mexico border and turned him over to Mexican authorities.” Story here 

— “Stormy Daniels’ lawyer saw ‘soft underbelly of politics’ while working for Rahm Emanuel,” by The Washington Post’s Manuel Roig-Franzia: “Avenatti, now 47, won't say how he ended up representing Daniels beginning about six weeks ago. … Avenatti was born in Sacramento, California, and lived as a young child in Utah and Colorado before the family settled in St. Louis, Missouri, in the midst of a hot 1982 baseball pennant race that turned him into a rabid Cardinals fan. His father worked as a liaison between wholesalers and the Anheuser Busch brewery. After Avenatti left to attend the University of Pennsylvania, his father was unexpectedly laid off, and the son went to work to earn tuition money by doing opposition political research on Republicans and Democrats for a firm owned by Rahm Emanuel, the future Obama White House chief of staff and current mayor of Chicago. Avenatti says he saw the ‘soft underbelly of politics,’ and left the job with a ‘significant degree of cynicism.’” Story here 

— “Railroad buys ‘Dark Knight’ site,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Alby Gallun: “It has been pretty quiet at the Brach's property in Austin since the Joker blew up Gotham General Hospital there more than a decade ago. But the property's new owner, Union Pacific Railroad, may break the silence soon after buying the vacant site at 401 N. Cicero Ave. The Omaha, Neb.-based railroad giant paid $12.2 million this month for the 30-acre parcel, buying it from a developer that tried unsuccessfully for about 10 years to attract an industrial tenant there, according to Cook County property records.” Story here 

— “Sister Jean, breakout March Madness star, celebrated by her fellow nuns,” by NPR’s Maggie Hendricks: “With 41 seconds left in Loyola-Chicago's Sweet 16 game with Nevada, Sister Mary Fran McLaughlin points out just how close the game is — just like Loyola's two previous games in this unexpected NCAA Tournament run. She and two other retired Sisters of the Charity of Blessed Virgin Mary are focused on the flat screen television in their apartment on the northwest side of Chicago, about nine miles from the campus that has become the center of the city's attention — as much for a charismatic, feisty nun as the basketball team. ‘There's our girl!’ said Sister Peggy Geraghty as the camera pans to a friend they've known for 50 years.” Story here 

— “Sister Jean bobblehead sets sales record,” by The Washington Post’s Gene Wang: “To the surprise of no one who has paid even casual attention to the NCAA tournament, a bobblehead of Sister Jean Dolores Schmidt became the best seller in the history of the National Bobblehead Hall of Fame and Museum within 48 hours of its release. The 98-year-old nun, who leads the Loyola men's basketball team in prayer before each game, is perhaps college basketball's most recognized new personality in the midst of the Ramblers' improbable march to the Final Four as a No. 11 seed, a feat accomplished only three previous times.” Story here 

— Mary Ann Ahern (@ahernnbc5) on Instagram: “Loyola bookstore is packed with fans! #loyolachicago #finalfour #marchmadness #sisterjean”

AROUND THE COLLARS

— “Flyers connected to white supremacist group show up in Wauconda, Mundelein,” by The Daily Herald’s Lee Filas and Russell Lissau: “Anti-immigrant flyers containing the address of a white supremacist website were distributed in neighborhoods in Wauconda and Mundelein last weekend. The propaganda was delivered in small plastic bags weighed down with rocks. It urged people to ‘report any and all illegal aliens’ to a U.S. Department of Homeland Security tip line.” Story here 

— “Suburban voters angry with Trump threaten GOP control of the U.S. House,” by The Washington Post’s Kari Lydersen and Michael Scherer: “Control of the U.S. House will be decided in America's next political battleground of above ground pools, bike trails and oversized Tudor and Victorian houses full of working professionals like Karrie Sullivan, a Republican voter who cast her primary ballot last week for a Democrat. In a suburb outside of Chicago, Sullivan is determined to replace her congressman, six-term Rep. Peter Roskam, R, whom she has supported in the past. His sin, she said, was his affiliation with President Donald Trump. … She is not alone. In Illinois' 6th Congressional District, 62,990 people voted Democratic last week for seven candidates, up from just 8,615 in the 2014 primary. In a district that voted for Mitt Romney in 2012 and Hillary Clinton in 2016, a warning is being sent in letters as big and bold as any that has hung on the outside of a Trump building.” Story here 

NATION

— “Trump expels Russian agents as gap between words and actions widens,” by POLITICO’s Louis Nelson and Michael Crowley: Story here

— “‘It’s very difficult to overestimate the potential danger John Bolton could put us in,’” by POLITICO Magazine’s Susan B. Glasser: Story here

— “Trump can’t stop tweeting, but goes silent on Stormy Daniels,” by The New York Times’ Michael D. Shear and Maggie Haberman: Story here

— “U.S. stocks surge as trade worries ease,” by The Wall Street Journal’s Gunjan Banerji and Georgi Kantchev: Story here

— “Attorneys general ‘profoundly concerned’ over Facebook user data,” by The Wall Street Journal’s Georgia Wells: Story here

EVENTS

The Illinois Campaign for Political Reform is hosting a look back at the Illinois Primary on Thursday, April 5 at noon at the Chicago Board of Election Commissioners, 69 W. Washington St. Speakers include Shari Runner (The Chicago Urban League), Scott Kennedy (Illinois Election Data Website for Campaign Information), Matt Dietrich (Illinois State Board of Elections), Jaime Dominguez (Northwestern University), and Jim Allen (Chicago Board of Election Commissioners). Sarah Brune with the ICPR moderates. It’s $15. Visit ilcampaign.org for information about how to RSVP.

WHERE’S RAHM? He’s talking about early college STEM programs at eight Chicago schools, 9 a.m. at Belding Elementary, 4257 N. Tripp Ave. Then he heads to Lane Tech for an announcement by Apple. That’s at 11 a.m. at 2501 W. Addison St., Chicago.

WHERE’S RAUNER? The governor is also attending the Apple announcement, 11 a.m. at Lane Tech, 2501 W. Addison St., Chicago.

POLITICO Space is our new, free weekly briefing on the policies and personalities shaping the second space age in Washington and beyond. Sign-up today to start receiving the newsletter right at launch on April 6th. Presented by Boeing.

Want to make an impact? POLITICO Illinois has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Land of Lincoln. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: jshapiro@politico.com.



                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew


                                            By Edward-Isaac Dovere


                                            By POLITICO Magazine

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC