
				JapanToday
				Higashi-Azabu IS bldg, 4F
				1-8-1 Higashi-Azabu
				Minato-ku
				Tokyo 106-0044
				Japan
				Tel: +81 3 5561 7755
				Fax: +81 3 5561 7756
				Email: editor@japantoday.com
				©2018 GPlusMedia Inc.
			


						The requested article has expired, and is no longer available. Any related articles, and user comments are shown below.					

A convenient, reasonable, and reliable fleet with 24/7 English-speaking service.

Book Now

Get a SIM card to use in Japan- with a Japanese phone number &amp; UNLIMITED data- no visa requirements

Mobal.com

If you don’t want to be separated from your children, don’t try to illegally immigrate or game the refugee/asylum system. It’s very simple.

Good luck with that. How about California following the Federal Law. How about these stupid politicians stop blocking ICE from doing their job. I hope Sessions goes in and have these defiant politicians arrested. California is so out of control. A total embarrassment for the rest of the nation.

"A lot of these kids are already afraid because they're fleeing something and they know they're fleeing something," Brané said. "And to have them pulled away, that can be devastating for a parent."

Pretty sure it's "devastating" to the children as well. What could be more sadistic than to separate children from their parents, warehouse them in separate facilities two thousand miles from one another, for months? MONTHS!

I have zero sympathy for anyone that breaks the law. I feel for any child being separated from their parent, but if they are illegal and commit crimes on top of being illegal, you need to be arrested and deported. Period! You don’t get rewarded for breaking the law and this is probably one of the best decisions Sessions has ever done since she became AG.

but if they are illegal and commit crimes on top of being illegal

You mean if they are undocumented and committ crimes on top of being undocumented.  People cannot be illegal.  You'll get it one day, Sport.

You mean if they are undocumented and committ crimes on top of being undocumented. People cannot be illegal. You'll get it one day, Sport.

Nice one Tommy!

Nice one Tommy!

Thanks.  It's necessary to be accurate if you want to engage in a reasonable discussion of an issue.  Referring to undocumented immigrants as "illegal aliens" is a transparent attempt to dehumanize them so it is easier to act in a repugnant manner towards them.

Bass:  California is so out of control.

Mess with California and they'll smack you back.  I like that.  Just their style, no pulled punches and no apologies.  Straight talking and ass kicking.

If the Feds don't like it, they can take a hike.

Breaking a law to enter the USA makes someone illegal.

If they aren't originally from the USA, but are here now, then they are aliens. 

Put those two together and we get someone breaking the law to be in the USA, they are illegal aliens.  Illegal immigrants works for me too.

Asylum seekers ...  seems that would be arranged BEFORE they arrived with sponsoring groups willing to get them started in the USA.  I vaguely remember my family helping some Vietnamese men in the mid-1970s for a few weeks. I was too young to understand much, but Dad had done a few tours in Vietnam in the 60s. They ended up settling near New Orleans.

People in the USA legally originally from other counties are legal aliens / legal immigrants - until they become citizens.  My grandparents were legal aliens. No issues with people in the USA legally.  Some of the rules are broken, but when people follow the rules, it isn't their fault.

I think separating minors from a parent shouldn't be done either. That doesn't mean the family is kept together, but 1 parent should remain with a minor child ... until they are deported or granted asylum.

Economic immigration is not a reason to grant asylum - unless Japan wants to accept them.  What other countries do is their business.

Breaking a law to enter the USA makes someone illegal.

No, it doesn't.  It makes them a criminal.

Crazy: What could be more sadistic than to separate children from their parents, warehouse them in separate facilities two thousand miles from one another, for months? MONTHS!

Blame it on the lame lawsuit filed by groups like the ACLU that forced the federal government to keep children and adults in separate facilities. 

The two Texas facilities that it opened were found by a federal judge in 2015 to violate a long-standing 1997 settlement requiring children be released or otherwise held in the "least restrictive setting" available.

Blame it on the lame lawsuit filed by groups like the ACLU that forced the federal government to keep children and adults in separate facilities.

Yeah, lame lawsuits that ensure everyone's civil liberties aren't violated.  Totally lame.

Immigration requires documents. So no such thing as undocumented immigrant. You could call them a want to be immigrant, but they have no documents to be one. 

seems unintended consequences here of the previous lawsuit to not lock kids in jail with their criminal parents. So they didn’t want kids jailed with parents but now complaining they are separated?

It comes across as a barbaric punishment meant to make some white people feel really, really good.

Yeah, lame lawsuits that ensure everyone's civil liberties aren't violated. Totally lame.

So which is it - do you want the illegal alien parent to be with their child or do you want their civil liberties protected?

There is a really good chance that the parent and child would still be together right this moment had the mother chose not to break the law and illegally reside in a foreign country. But hey, let’s not hold people responsible for their actions. Blame it on someone, anyone else.

Confusing article.

immigrant families seeking asylum. Asylum seekers are not immigrants or illegals. They are protected by international laws and treaties. People who are immigrants or illegal immigrants are not asylum seekers.

An asylum seeker is a person who has sought protection as a refugee, but whose claim for refugee status has not yet been assessed. Many refugees have at some point been asylum seekers, that is, they have lodged an individual claim for protection and have had that claim assessed by a government or UNHCR.

When arriving at a country border they must immediately request asylum. They are usually kept at refugee centers until their application is heard.

Someone who enters the country illegally and later discovered are not asylum seekers, they are illegally immigrants.

When people are detained along with children, whether asylum seekers or illegal immigrants they should not be separated which must be very stressful for the children and parents.

"the case of a Congolese woman and her 7-year-old daughter,"

that sounds like someone with a good reason for asylum considering what's happening in her country.

Genuine asylum seekers are fleeing from terrible stories and experiences and should be treated with care.

Immigration requires documents. So no such thing as undocumented immigrant. 

Someone clearly hasn't used a dictionary or checked the INA.

So which is it - do you want the illegal alien parent to be with their child or do you want their civil liberties protected?

Your presenting a false duality.  We can have both.  Undocumented immigrants and their children can be kept together whilst protecting everyone's civil liberties.

&gt; There is a really good chance that the parent and child would still be together right this moment had the mother chose not to break the law and illegally reside in a foreign country. But hey, let’s not hold people responsible for their actions. Blame it on someone, anyone else.

Nobody is blaming it on anyone but the parent that made the choice.

*You're

bass4funk

I have zero sympathy for anyone that breaks the law.

Asylum seekers are not breaking the law. Any persons regardless of age or status that sets foot on the soil of the country can make a claim for asylum, regardless of whichever country they entered from although if the applicant does not meet the criteria for asylum then it won't be granted and will be deported. During their detention the family should not be divided.

For asylum applications filed on or after April 1, 1997, the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) states that the initial interview should take place within 45 days after the date the application is filed. A decision should be made on the asylum application within 180 days after the date the application is filed, unless there are exceptional circumstances.

No, it doesn't. It makes them a criminal.

Yes, illegal aliens are criminals. That is precisely what the phase implies. I don’t see what the pro illegal immigration crowd hopes to gain by playing word games. Must simply be a case of virtue signaling. 

Your presenting a false duality. We can have both. Undocumented immigrants and their children can be kept together whilst protecting everyone's civil liberties.

Yes we could have both. But when pro illegal immigration groups like the ACLU file lawsuit after lawsuit tying the bureaucracy into knots complying with court orders with the goal of overturning immigration law we end up with nonsensical government policies like this. 

*You're

Don’t sweat it - I know what you meant. There are not many spelling commissars on JT.

Yes, illegal aliens are criminals. That is precisely what the phase implies. 

No, it doesn't.  The phrase "illegal immigrant" implies that the person is illegal instead of their actions.

I don’t see what the pro illegal immigration crowd hopes to gain by playing word games. Must simply be a case of virtue signaling.

First, I'm not pro criminal anything.  Second, I already covered what is to be gained by being accurate: the ability to have a reasonable discussion about the issue without dehumanizing undocumented immigrants.

Yes we could have both. 

Then why did you present a false duality?  

But when pro illegal immigration groups like the ACLU file lawsuit after lawsuit tying the bureaucracy into knots complying with court orders with the goal of overturning immigration law we end up with nonsensical government policies like this.

The ACLU is not pro criminal anything, it is pro civil liberties.  The ACLU is not trying to overturn immigration laws, it is trying to ensure the constitution is respected.  If the price of the constitution being upheld is the bureaucracy being tied into knots complying with court orders, so be it.

Why do you hate the constitution?  It's clear from your comments that you prefer a more efficient justice system than the constitution permits.  Why is that?  The constitution is exactly why you are allowed to be inaccurate when referring to undocumented immigrants.

No, it doesn't. The phrase "illegal immigrant" implies that the person is illegal instead of their actions.

That’s nonsensical. It was their actions that are illegal. Everyone understands what the phrase means. To immigrate illegally makes one an illegal immigrant. You are just playing  word games from the Leftist handbook in order to evoke sympathy for someone who broke the law. I am not buying the emotionalism you are selling. 

The ACLU is not pro criminal anything,

Of course they are. They are attempting to prevent illegals from being deported. 

 It's clear from your comments that you prefer a more efficient justice system than the constitution permits. 

I prefer that visitors be respectful of the people and the laws of the host nation. Why do you endorse lawlessness? Do you hate the common sense immigration laws that all countries have to choose who is allowed to become residents rather than having citizens of other countries making such decisions for you? That’s anti-democratic. can I enter your home without permission?

Use your Facebook account to login or register with JapanToday. By doing so, you will also receive an email inviting you to receive our news alerts.

A convenient, reasonable, and reliable fleet with 24/7 English-speaking service.

Book Now

An enjoyable lifestyle in an elegant modern residence. A true international community welcomes you warmly.

MORI LIVING

A mix of what's trending on our other sites


					Club 360				


					GaijinPot Travel				


					GaijinPot Travel				


					GaijinPot Travel				


					TONI &amp; GUY Ebisu Salon				


					Savvy Tokyo				


					Savvy Tokyo				


					GaijinPot Blog				


					GARB DRESSING				


					Savvy Tokyo				


					Takamine Onsen				


					Fratelli Paradiso				