By

Mollie Cahillane For Dailymail.com







  Published:
  09:25 EDT, 26 April 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  14:10 EDT, 26 April 2018







          15

View  comments

Raquel Eleana Spencer, 28, was arrested and charged after she was found with heroin on school property

A Georgia high school English teacher was arrested on Wednesday after she was found to have heroin on school property.


Raquel Eleana Spencer, 28, has been charged with charged with possession of heroin after students and school officials at Northwest Whitfield High School in Tunnel Hill reported that she appeared to be under the influence of narcotics.


Spencer teaches English at the school and is also an assistant cheerleading coach and assistant track and field coach. She has been an employee since January 2013.


'Administrators went to check on the teacher and escorted her to the office,' Whitfield County Schools spokesman Eric Beavers said to the Dalton Daily Citizen.


Beavers added: 'Since the safety of our students and staff is a top priority in our schools, the (school resource officer) asked the teacher if she would consent to a search. The teacher consented to the search. The officer found an illegal substance which led to her arrest.'


Spencer teaches English at Northwest Whitfield High School and is also an assistant cheerleading coach and assistant track and field coach

The drugs were found on her personal property on school grounds, which could lead to further charges

Video courtesy WRCB 


Spencer is currently being held at the Whitfield County Jail without bond. Upon her release, she will be placed on administrative leave pending further actions upon her employment.


The drugs were found on her personal property on school grounds, which could lead to further charges.


On her Facebook page, Spencer wrote: 'My number one love right now is my job as a high school English teacher in Dalton.'


She also has several Bible verses in her 'favorite quotes' section, including: 'The steadfast love of the LORD never ceases, his mercies never come to an end; they are new every morning; great is thy faithfulness. 'The LORD is my portion,' says my soul, 'therefore I will hope in him' (Lamentations 3:22-24) and 'I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me' (Phillians 4:13).


She is being held without bond and will be placed on administrative leave from the school when she is released from jail

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group