By

Hannah Moore For Dailymail.com


and 
Associated Press






  Published:
  13:39 EDT, 1 May 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  17:20 EDT, 1 May 2018







           1

View  comments

A federal judge has moved a suburban Fort Worth couple from a detention facility to house arrest as they await trial on forced-labor charges.


The defendants, Mohamed Toure and his wife Denise Cros-Toure, are the son and daughter-in-law of the first president of the West African country of Guinea, the Star-Telegram reported.


An arrest affidavit says they arranged for a girl, referred to in court documents as Jane Doe, to travel from her rural Guinean village in 2000, when she was just five years old, and forced her to work in their Southlake, Texas, home for 16 years without pay.


In the home, the girl was allegedly forced to cook, clean and care for the couple's children, the affidavit said.


Southlake, Texas couple Mohamed Toure (left) and Denise Florence Cros-Toure (right), both 57, have been charged with forced labor of a domestic servant after they allegedly brought a five-year-old girl from Guinea and forced her into servitude for 16 years

Despite being close in age to the children she was allegedly ordered to care for, it is alleged the girl was never able to go to school, and was never paid for her work.


The defendants allegedly also held the girl's documents, forcing her to remain in the US illegally when her visa expired. 


The affidavit further claims Cros-Toure and Toure physically abused the girl when chores were not up to standard, and that her punishment was increased as her pain tolerance grew higher. 


Cros-Toure is accused of slapping the girl and using a belt and electrical cord to harm her.


The mother-of-five is also accused of calling the girl a 'w****', a 'slave' and 'just a little nothing'.


Her plight was only revealed when she finally escaped the home and reported her ordeal to the authorities, leading to the Toure's arrests. 


The girl was allegedly never taught to speak English, to swim or to use a computer.


The couple lived in this Texas home where the girl allegedly cooked, cleaned and cared for the couple's five children for 16 years before she escaped with the help of her former neighbors

But the attorneys for Toure and Cros-Toure told the court the girl was able to leave the home on her own, had social media accounts and had been taken on holidays within the US with the family. 


Federal court documents show U.S. Magistrate Judge Jeffrey Cureton signed the home detention order during a hearing on Monday, leading to celebration in the courtroom by family and friends.


Cureton also ordered them to surrender their passports while the case proceeds. 


The couple's attorneys deny the charge, and their eldest daughter tearily testified in support of her parents on behalf of the five children. 


'They love us,' she said in defence of her parents. 'I believe my father to be a good man, my mother a good woman.'


The maximum penalty for a forced-labor conviction is 20 years in a U.S. prison.


  


 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group