Oct. 29 (UPI) -- An escaped West Virginia inmate was captured in Texas on Sunday while attempting to cross the border into Mexico, the state's Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety said.

Todd Boyes, 43, was arrested by U.S. Border Patrol Agents in Laredo, Texas at about 4 a.m. after escaping from South Central Regional Jail in Charleston, W.V. by disguising himself in street clothes.


Boyes was found attempting to cross the border between the United States and Mexico after he escaped from the jail on Wednesday.

"After a medical evaluation, Boyes was taken to the Webb County Jail, according to the information provided to our state police," West Virginia Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety spokesman Lawrence Messina said, according to CNN.

Boyes was scheduled to be sentenced to between three and 20 years in prison the Friday after he got a hold of khaki pants and a dark green or gray zip-up jacket, and walked out of the jail, WCHS reported.

He wasn't reported missing until a formal headcount conducted at 7 p.m. on Thursday, and four facility officers were suspended without pay while the Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety conducts an investigation into the escape.

Boyes was arrested in February 2016 for leading police on a chase through West Virginia after a string of carjackings.

During the chase he injured a Charleston officer by ramming a vehicle into her police cruiser and was shot in the hand before being detained by police.

He was considered armed and dangerous before being captured by Border Patrol.

United Press International is a leading provider of news, photos and information to millions of readers around the globe via UPI.com and its licensing services.
						


With a history of reliable reporting dating back to 1907, today's UPI is a credible source for the most important stories of the day, continually updated  - a one-stop site for U.S. and world news, as well as entertainment, trends, science, health and stunning photography. UPI also provides insightful reports on key topics of geopolitical importance, including energy and security.
					