Gallery: Woman fatally stabbed in Union City 


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

"Asesino!" yelled the mother of a woman who was stabbed to death in Union City two weeks ago when her daughter's alleged killer made his first court appearance on the murder charge yesterday.

"Coward" yelled another person as Kevin Cortes, 26, was being led from court after appearing before the judge on charges he killed Giselle Bravo, 20, on March 23 in an apartment on New York Avenue.



Officers who responded to the location found Bravo suffering from multiple stab wounds and she was taken to the Jersey City Medical Center where she was pronounced dead at 5:30 a.m.

Officers took Cortes into custody after finding him in the building holding a knife. He was taken to Palisades Medical Center for evaluation and remained hospitalized until he was turned over to Hudson County Prosecutor's Office Homicide Unit detectives yesterday, an officials said.

At yesterday's hearing, defense attorney Lynda Benzenhoefer noted that she had filed an application form with Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale seeking to have Cortes undergo psychological evaluation.

The defendant stood silently beside his attorney at the defense table in handcuffs and wearing the green garb of Hudson County jail during the hearing.

At the hearing, Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Leo Hernandez said the state file a motion to have Cortes detained through the course of his prosecution. DePascale said a detention hearing will be held on Friday.

Neighbors said Cortes lived in the building and that they were not aware of Cortes having been involved in relationship.

Investigators have not released any information on the relationship between Bravo and her alleged killer, if any.

Friday's detention hearing will be before DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City. Benzenhoefer said the result of Cortes' psychological evaluation will not be ready in time of Friday's hearing.

Brovos' family members chose not to comment after the brief hearing that ended around 3 p.m.

There are a number of translations for the Spanish word "asesino," including "murderer."


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        