
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A 30-year-old West New York man has been charged with sexually assaulting a teen girl in an abandoned building.

The alleged assault occurred in early August, a criminal complaint said.

On Aug. 4 police saw the 15-year-old girl, who had been reported missing, enter the building with Juan Carlos Ruiz, 30, of the 400 block of 52nd Street, the criminal complaint says.



Ruiz was arrested on an outstanding warrant and the girl was taken to Palisades Medical Center due to her intoxication, the complaint says.

The girl told police that she met Ruiz in the building two days earlier and they undressed each other and had consensual sex, the complaint says. The legal age of consent in New Jersey is 16.

A warrant for Ruiz's arrest on the charges of sexual assault and endangering the welfare of a child was issued on Nov. 6 by the Hudson County Prosecutor's Office Special Victims Unit, the complaint says.

Ruiz made his first appearance on the charges on Monday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.  

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution and a detention hearing is scheduled for tomorrow before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale.

A court official said there is also a warrant for Ruiz's arrest out of West New York on a drug charge and out of Hudson County Superior Court for a violation of probation.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        