

The former Semporna Umno youth chief was arrested last Sunday and remanded five days together with two other Umno youth chiefs, over a graft investigation by MACC.


KOTA KINABALU: The remand order for Parti Warisan Sabah youth chief Mohd Azis Jamman who was held to assist in a graft probe reportedly involving RM1.5 billion has been extended for three days.

The former Semporna Umno youth head will now be detained until Oct 17. He was arrested on Oct 9 at the Malaysia Anti-Corruption Commission (MACC) office here and was remanded for five days on Oct 10.


Azis remains the only prominent Warisan member still being held in custody following the release of vice-president Peter Anthony on Friday.

Peter, who was detained by MACC on Oct 5, was released on a RM50,000 MACC bail by magistrate Cindy Mc Juce Balitus after his remand order expired.

His lawyer Martin Tommy confirmed this.


The release order was issued at a private hospital where Anthony was warded for treatment as he was too ill to go to the MACC office to sign the release form.

Other than Peter and Azis, five other individuals have been arrested by MACC, including two Umno youth leaders Jamawi Jaafar and Ariffin Kassim, as well as Hamid Apdal, the brother of Warisan president Shafie Apdal.

The other individuals were local contractor Yu Sin Kong, and a 40-year old former deputy undersecretary (infrastructure) from the rural and regional development ministry who was detained in Putrajaya.

The anti-graft agency is investigating alleged siphoning of federal funds for rural projects in Sabah since 2009.

The RM1.5 billion was said to be part of RM7.5 billion allocated for projects in Sabah involving water, electricity and road infrastructure development projects.

MACC arrests 3 political leaders in Sabah



Warisan veep to be released from remand tomorrow







A note to FMT readers: The reader's comments section is closed. You are welcome to give your feedback on Facebook, or write to us by email.

Ariffin Kassim, Azis Jamman, Cindy Mc Juce Balitus, Corruption, FMT, Hamid Apdal, Jamawi Jaafar, KL, MACC, Malaysia, Martin Thomas, Parti Warisan Sabah, Peter Anthony, remand, Rural and Regional Development Ministry, Sabah, siphoning, Top News, Yu Sin Kong



Home | About Us | Disclaimers / Copyright | Privacy &amp; Policy | Advertise | Contact Us | Copyright © 2018 FMT Media Sdn. Bhd. All Rights Reserved. 

