For older souls with a penchant for pressing the needles onto wax, the likes of Frank Turner, DJ Yoda and others have got you covered tomorrow.

Published: 21/11/17

Pioneering online radio station Soho Radio has announced its final line-up of Vinyl Sessions for 2017, as part of an ongoing partnership with Jägermeister, and the #JagerSoho season of events. This year has seen Soho Radio cut live sessions direct to vinyl at #JagerSoho, showcasing the work of art that is cutting straight to acetate. They are taking it to the next level with a back to back 24-hour vinyl session, taking place tomorrow, November 22nd.

Taking to the decks, the likes of Frank Turner, Unkle, Paradise, DJ Yoda, Nubya Garcia, Theon Cross, Kitty, Daisy &amp; Lewis, Dennis Bovell, Raf Rundell, Human, Andrew Hung, Dizraeli, Elijah Minelli and Shumba Youth will lend their two cents into what will be a memorable occasion.

Head over to Soho Radio's website for full details.



If you're a fan of his and love your football memorabilia, better hit him up on Twitter.

'There’s Always More At The Store' will be released on Ninja Tune's Technicolour imprint.

No men in sight.

Danish pop's elder statesmen are back after a five-year absence.

At what point does vinyl fetishism crossover into necrophilia? London company And Vinyly offers to press your ashes into vinyl when you pass away.

The releases highlight some of Atlanta DJ’s most powerful club tracks to date and seamlessly weaves genres - grime,  house,  funk and rap to name a few.

THEY. discuss the return of rock music, being in the booth with Timbaland and drop 'U RITE' ahead of their new album, Hyena. 

Rome's Capibara delivers a 'sad-ravey hymn' with the coolest video you'll ever see

Beyoncé drops a new video ahead of her Super Bowl Halftime Show appearance tomorrow.

Jumping Back Slash brings together the best sounds emanating out of the burgeoning South African electronic music scene in the visuals for 'The Siren's Call'.

Stream the "best dj"s frenetic Boiler Room set from London Men's Fashion Week. 

We caught up with Prez T and discovered what makes the perfect grime beat and the song that was so hard, it made him launch a chair across the room.

Watch the enchanting video for Bastien Keb's infectious, funk-fuelled new track, 'Pick Up'. 

Stream Detroit don Norm Talley's choice cut from Illusion Recordings' Connections Volume 1 Compilation

The new Drones Club video is ambitious, political and pretty funny, just like the band itself

Nineties electronic dons The Micronauts return with nine minute acid odyssey and female android visual to match.

A Parisian festival with great taste in music and excellent eco credentials.

Hockeysmith's immersive R&amp;B is informed by leftfield electronica and rave - and Aphex Twin is a fan

Stream the label's first vocal-project featuring Lord Pusswhip, Yayoyanoh, Damndef and more.

Jazz and sunshine help Field Day navigate a successful move south of the river.

With one week to go Field Day announce stage times, Village Mentality programme and a final addition to the line-up

These are 19 of the best shows we caught at Brighton's annual new music festival

We've made a playlist featuring the freshest artists appearing at next week's The Great Escape.

London's best festival adds Mahalia, Conner Youngblood and Aaron Unknown

Listen to the new album from the grime legend.

The fiercely DIY rapper shares his latest opus.

With over 900 songs now available on Spotify and Apple Music, it's a good day for fans of the Based God.

© 2018 Dummy. All rights reserved.