President Cyril Ramaphosa will launch the Youth Employment Service (YES) tomorrow, Tuesday, 27 March 2018, at the Riverside Incubation Hub in Fourways, Johannesburg.

The YES initiative aims to see more than one million young South Africans being offered paid work experience over the next three years, as part of placing the needs of and opportunities for young people at the centre of inclusive economic growth.

The initiative takes the form of a partnership - led by President Cyril Ramaphosa - between government, business, labour and civil society.

The programme has three channels through which employment opportunities can occur:

Corporate work experiences: businesses that participate in the programme create one-year paid positions for youth aged between 18 and 35, in addition to these organisations' current employment numbers, YES is additive;

SMME host placements: businesses that do not have the capacity to place more people in their organisations, have the option of sponsoring the salary for a one-year placement in small and medium enterprises (in year one for 7 to 10 months); and

SMME development: young people are empowered to start and grow their own businesses, with support from YES in the form of training, seed funding and value-chain integration.

Research has shown that one year of work experience, coupled with a CV and reference letter, increases a young person's chances of finding employment by three times.

At tomorrow's launch, President Ramaphosa will meet the first 100 young people to participate in this programme.

Issued by: The Presidency

South Africa's Raven Klaasen and partner Michael Venus of New Zealand are into the semi-finals of the men's doubles… Read more »

Read the original article on Govt of SA.

President Cyril Ramaphosa - Launch of Youth Employment Service Initiative

President Cyril Ramaphosa - Launch of Youth Employment Service Initiative


  Copyright © 2018 Government of South Africa. All rights reserved. Distributed by AllAfrica Global Media (allAfrica.com).
  To contact the copyright holder directly for corrections — or for permission to republish or make other authorized use of this material, click here.


AllAfrica publishes around 800 reports a day from more than 140 news organizations and over 500 other institutions and individuals, representing a diversity of positions on every topic. We publish news and views ranging from vigorous opponents of governments to government publications and spokespersons. Publishers named above each report are responsible for their own content, which AllAfrica does not have the legal right to edit or correct.

Articles and commentaries that identify allAfrica.com as the publisher are produced or commissioned by AllAfrica. To address comments or complaints, please Contact us.
































        AllAfrica is a voice of, by and about Africa - aggregating, producing and distributing 800 news and information items daily from over 140 African news organizations and our own reporters to an African and global public. We operate from Cape Town, Dakar, Abuja, Monrovia, Nairobi and Washington DC.
      


        © 2018 AllAfrica
        Privacy
        Contact
      