
                                AVI SELK
                            


                            
                            Last updated 10:14, April 26 2018
                            







A DNA match in the past six days tied a former US police officer to some of the crimes committed by a notorious serial killer who is believed to have killed at least 12 people and raped 45 throughout California in the 1970s and '80s, police say.


Joseph James DeAngelo, 72, who was fired from the Auburn Police Department, was arrested after a DNA sample came back as a match to the Golden State Killer, Sacramento County District Attorney Anne Marie Schubert said.


Officials said DeAngelo had been arrested on suspicion of committing four killings in Sacramento and Ventura counties and charged with two counts of murder in the Ventura case.


"We knew we were looking for a needle in a haystack, but we also knew that needle was there," Schubert said. "We found the needle in the haystack and it was right here in Sacramento."


READ MORE: US serial killer set to walk free after plea deal 20 years ago


"The answer was always going to be in the DNA," she said.

Joseph James DeAngelo, 72, has been arrested by police investigating the Golden State Killer deaths.

California authorities say they studied the behaviour of DeAngelo and surprised him when they arrested him.


Sacramento County's Scott Jones told reporters that DeAngelo was taken into custody without incident Wednesday as he left his Sacramento-area home.


Jones said DeAngelo also was an officer in Exeter, in Southern California, from 1973 to 1976 "around the time of the Visalia Ransacker cases". That serial criminal was tied to burglaries and one killing.


Sacramento County District Attorney Anne Marie Schubert says DeAngelo's name hadn't been on authorities' radar before last week in connection with the "East Area Rapist" case.


CRIME SPREE


The Golden State killer rapes and deaths formed one of the worst unsolved crime sprees in US history.


Beginning in 1976, the Golden State Killer is believed to have raped dozens of women in their homes - meticulously planning his intrusions, sometimes ambushing entire families, and killing several of his victims toward the end of his spree, before he vanished in 1986.


"This individual was responsible for approximately 45 rapes, 12 homicides, and multiple residential burglaries throughout the State of California," according to the FBI.


                Over the years, detectives collected massive amounts of physical evidence and tips, but were unable to crack the decades-old serial murder case until recent advances in DNA technology.  

            

Since his disappearance, investigators and amateur detectives have searched for the man across the United States and inquired as far away as Australia.


Their efforts finally paid off early Wednesday, the Sacramento Bee reported, when FBI agents and police from cities across California came to a Citrus Heights home, and arrested its 72-year-old occupant on two counts of murder.


FIRED FROM POLICE FORCE


DeAngelo was fired from the Auburn Police Department in 1979 after he was arrested for stealing a can of dog repellent and a hammer from a drug store, according to Auburn Journal articles from the time.


The FBI said it had a team gathering evidence at a Sacramento area home linked to DeAngelo.


Sacramento County jail records show DeAngelo was arrested overnight on suspicion of murder cited in a Ventura County warrant.


Jane Carson-Sandler, who was sexually assaulted in California in 1976 by a man believed to be the so-called "East Area Rapist" said she received an email on Wednesday from a retired detective who worked on the case telling her they had identified the rapist and he was in custody.


"I have just been overjoyed, ecstatic. It's an emotional roller-coaster right now," Carson-Sandler, who now lives near Hilton Head, South Carolina, told The Associated Press.

One of the suspect sketches released by the FBI of the man thought to be the Golden State serial killer.

"I feel like I'm in the middle of a dream and I'm going to wake up and it's not going to be true. It's just so nice to have closure and to know he's in jail."


Carson-Sandler was attacked in her home in Citrus Heights, the same area where the house authorities were examining was.


COLD CASES


"He was young - anywhere from 18 to 30 - Caucasian, and athletic, capable of eluding capture by jumping roofs and vaulting tall fences," the crime writer Michelle McNamara wrote in a Los Angeles magazine profile of the old cases.


"To zero in on a victim he often entered the home beforehand when no one was there, learning the layout, studying family pictures, and memorising names," she wrote. "He disabled porch lights and unlocked windows. He emptied bullets from guns. He hid shoelaces or rope under cushions to use as ligatures.


"These manoeuvres gave him a crucial advantage because when you woke from a deep sleep to the blinding flashlight and ski-masked presence, he was always a stranger to you, but you were not to him."


Police first dubbed the man the East Area Rapist, as he would not begin killing until much later in his spree.

The first known attack, Katie Mettler wrote in The Post, took place in the middle of the night in the summer of 1976, when the man snuck into a home in east Sacramento County, raped a young woman and left.


He raped again a few weeks later, then again and again, dozens of times. After a year, two dozen women had been attacked and a sheriff's department spokesman told the Associated Press that some residents had started "sleeping in shifts," because the man would strike even if others were home.


His 44th victim was a 13-year-old girl in the Walnut Creek area in 1979, the Mercury News reported. He allegedly raped her at knifepoint while her father and sister slept down the hall, told her he'd kill her if she told anyone, and departed through the back yard, past her playhouse.


'ORIGINAL NIGHT STALKER'


Police rebranded him the Original Night Stalker after he began to kill in 1978, Mettler wrote. He found a married couple walking their dog in the Sacramento Area, chased them and shot them to death.


Future killings would be much more meticulous, and spread from Sacramento to southern California.


On December 30, 1979, police in Goleta found a husband and wife dead in their house - one shot through the heart and one in the back of the head.


"As detectives processed the crime scene, they stepped around a turkey carcass wrapped in cellophane that had been discarded on the patio," McNamara wrote in Los Angeles Magazine. "The killer had opened the refrigerator and helped himself to [victim Robert] Offerman's leftover Christmas dinner."







Another couple were murdered in Ventura three months later, she wrote. Then yet another couple, in a gate community in Dana Point.


He left few clues, and only betrayed a few patterns as his violence escalated: he often ate from his victims' fridges; often took tokens from their personal belongings, like class rings.


He usually tied up the men before he killed them and almost always raped the women.


Police did not even realise the East Area Rapist and Original Night Stalker were the same person until DNA tests linked all the crimes in the early 2000s, McNamara wrote.


By then, his spree was long over - the last victim being 18-year-old Janelle Cruz, bludgeoned to death in Irvine in 1986 - and the trail had gone cold.

A poster released by the FBI in the hunt for the Golden State Killer.

US SERIAL KILLERS


Here's a look at some well-known serial killers in the US since 1971:


- 2014: Darren Deon Vann was arrested in the killing of a 19-year-old woman at a motel in Indiana and later confessed to the murders of six other women. He is currently awaiting trial.


- 2007-2009: Anthony Sowell was convicted of killing 11 women and hiding the remains in and around his home in Cleveland, Ohio. He was sentenced to death and is on death row in Ohio.


- 2005-2006: Mark Goudeau, a former construction worker who was also known as the "Baseline Killer," was convicted of killing eight women and a man in Phoenix, Arizona. He was sentenced to death in 2011 and remains on death row in Arizona.


- 2002: Lee Boyd Malvo and John Allen Muhammad randomly killed 10 people in Washington, DC, Virginia and Maryland as they pumped petrol and went about their business during a three-week period in 2002. Malvo is serving several life sentences at a Virginia prison; Muhammad was executed in Virginia in 2009.


- 1997-1999: Angel Maturino Resendiz was convicted of murdering a Houston woman, but was linked by confessions and evidence to at least 12 other killings nationwide. He's on death row in Texas.


- 1996-1998: Robert L Yates Jr was convicted of two murders but admitted to 15. He's on death row in Washington state.


- 1990-1993: Heriberto Seda, aka "the Zodiac Killer," killed three people and wounded four in New York City and is serving a 235-year sentence.


- 1989-1990: Aileen Wuornos, a rare female serial killer, was convicted of murdering six men while working as a prostitute along highways in central Florida. She was executed on October 9, 2002.


- 1985-2007: Lonnie Franklin, known as the "Grim Sleeper," was convicted in the deaths of nine women and a teenage girl in Los Angeles. Franklin was linked at trial to 14 slayings, including four women he wasn't charged with killing. Police have said he may have had as many as 25 victims. He was sentenced to death and is on death row in California.


- 1984-1985: Charles Ng and Leonard Lake were convicted of murdering 11 people. Ng is on death row in California; Lake committed suicide.


- 1984-1985: Richard Ramirez was convicted of killing 14 people during break-ins in the Los Angeles area. He is on California's death row.


- 1983: Henry Lee Lucas was arrested on murder charges and told police he had have killed as many as 600 people. He later recanted. Lucas had 13 murder convictions and was sentenced to at least 10 life terms, then was sentenced to death in Texas for the murder of a hitchhiker known as "Orange Socks." Then-Governor George W Bush commuted that to life in prison, his only commutation as governor. Lucas died in prison in March 2001.


- 1979-1981: Wayne B Williams of Atlanta was convicted and sentenced to two life terms for killing two boys, but police believed he may have been responsible for up to 28 deaths.


- 1978-1995: Theodore Kaczynski, aka "the Unabomber," carried out a series of mail bombings that killed three people and injured 23. He is serving a life sentence at a federal prison in Colorado.


- 1978-1992: Jeffrey Dahmer was sentenced to 16 consecutive life terms for killing 17 men and boys, most in Milwaukee. He was killed in prison in 1994.


- 1977-1978: Ted Bundy was convicted of three Florida slayings, including that of a 12-year-old girl. He confessed to more than 30 and was executed in 1989.


- 1977-1978: Angelo Buono Jr was convicted of murdering nine young California women and sentenced to life in prison without parole. Kenneth A Bianchi pleaded guilty to five of the murders, agreeing to testify against his cousin in return for being spared a possible death sentence. He was sentenced to five concurrent life terms in prison.


- 1976-1986: Joseph James DeAngelo, a former police officer in Auburn, California, is suspected of being the so-called Golden State Killer. He has been booked on two murder charges but is suspected of 170 crimes, including a dozen murders and 45 rapes between 1976 and 1986.


- 1976-1977: David Berkowitz, aka "Son of Sam," killed six people and wounded seven others in New York City. He is serving six consecutive 25-years-to-life sentences.


- 1974-1991: Dennis Rader, who called himself BTK for "bind, torture and kill," killed 10 people in Wichita, Kansas. He was arrested in 2005 and is currently serving 10 consecutive life sentences at a Kansas prison.


- 1972-1978: John Wayne Gacy of suburban Chicago killed 33 young men and boys. He was executed in 1994.


- February-May 1971: Juan Corona was convicted of murdering 25 farm workers whose bodies were found buried near Yuba City in northern California. He is serving a life sentence.


- Washington Post and AP

Authorities believe the killer murdered Katie and Brian Maggiore in February 1978.

Officer gives firefighter apology cake: 'Sorry I tased you'

World Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Elon Musk: The viral tourist?
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        The will to live: New cave rescue details
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Remarkable Thai cave survivor
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Trump lashes out at Nato allies
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys salute from hospital
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescues that gripped the world
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Why we care for the Thai boys
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Urged suicide 'free speech'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescue almost went horribly wrong
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Hero cave doctor's tragic loss
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Amid the Brexit turmoil
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys given sedative
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave casualty 'hero in my heart'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Coach, three boys 'stateless'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys were extraordinary
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            