Covering crime, police and courts in the Sacramento region 

By Brad Branan



                                            bbranan@sacbee.com
                                        


                        
                            September 26, 2017 07:12 AM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

Yolo County officials say they have confiscated more than $5 million worth of illegally grown marijuana in a case that has similarities to other recent suburban pot busts.

Sheriff’s deputies removed 2,227 plants and 41 harvested pounds of marijuana during a Sept. 19 raid on a property in the 7000 block of Highway 16, the Sheriff’s Office said in a news release.

While California voters legalized recreational marijuana use in 2016, local governments restrict how many plants can be owned.

Deputies arrested Guangyang Bao, 60, of Sacramento; Jian Fang, 54, of Sacramento; Sinh Lieu, 52, of Sacramento; Bobby Lieu, 55, of Sacramento; and Paofu Chen, 34, of Queens, New York. They were booked into the Yolo County Jail.

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

As in the Yolo County case, recent marijuana grow busts in Elk Grove and Roseville also involved suspects with New York connections. 

Earlier this month, Elk Grove police announced they had seized 2,800 plants and more than 50 pounds of marijuana. Two of the men arrested were from Elk Grove, while the other three were from the East Coast, including two from New York City. A department spokesman said it was unusual to have suspects from so far out of town involved in a marijuana growing case.

Also this month, Roseville police and a Placer County law-enforcement task force announced they had seized more than $1 million worth of marijuana in two homes. Three Roseville residents were arrested. Police said they intended to ship the marijuana to New York.

Sgt. Matt Davis, a spokesman for the Yolo County Sheriff’s Office, said he could not comment on whether there are connections between the three cases, pending further investigation.



In January 2018, state and local authorities will begin issuing licenses for the sale of legal recreational marijuana. But what do you need to know before you rush to the dispensary? Information courtesy of Ballotpedia.com. 






Brad Branan: 916-321-1065, @BradB_at_SacBee



                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    