Updated on June 29, 2018, at 11:30 A.M.:


Connie Odom, the public affairs manager of Williamson County, Texas, returned Teen Vogue's request for comment after the publication of this story to clarify that the county's decision to end its contract with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) does not mean the facility ICE operates there will be shut down. ICE can still contract directly with CoreCivic, Inc., the private prison company that operates the facility.


Previously...


Amid the fallout of the Trump administration’s zero-tolerance immigration policy and subsequent family separations, a privately run immigrant detention center in central Texas has lost its contract with the county its located in, according to The Independent.


According to NBC affiliate KXAN, commissioners of Williamson County, located approximately 40 miles north of capital city Austin, voted 4-1 on Tuesday to end its Intergovernmental Services Agreement with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) regarding its operations at T. Don Hutto Residential Center in Taylor, Texas. The contract will expire on January 31, 2019.


Open since 2006, and operated by private prison company CoreCivic, Inc. (previously known as Corrections Corporation of America), the detention center houses approximately 500 women, including asylum seekers. Teen Vogue has reached out to the county government to learn what will happen to these women if the facility closes.


The commissioners’ vote comes after the Department of Homeland Security confirmed over 2,000 immigrant children had been separated from their parents since early May due to the Trump administration’s zero-tolerance immigration policy. Under Attorney General Jeff Sessions’ directive, the policy called for the prosecution of all immigrants who did not have proper documentation. If parents crossed with their children — even if seeking asylum — they could be separated.


According to The Independent’s report, advocacy groups say that they know of between 35 and 45 women housed in the facility who have been separated from their children.


The Independent viewed an anonymous letter written by an asylum-seeking detainee whose children were taken from her. She wrote that she was unable to speak to her children for 21 days, during which time they were transported to a facility in Michigan. The letter also recounted how officers treated T. Don Hutto detainees, saying “they treated us so horribly as though we were animals.”


An ICE official told The Independent that the letter appears to refer to Border Patrol, not ICE; Customs and Border Patrol detains immigrants at the border and ICE handles detentions and deportations. Border Patrol did not respond to The Independent’s request for comment.


More than just the Trump administration’s policy and the anonymously penned letter led to the T. Don Hutto Residential Center’s demise: Immigration advocacy group Grassroots Leadership communications director Cristina Parker told The Independent that several detainees have alleged that they were sexually abused by the center’s guards.


One of these women, Laura Monterrosa, came forward with allegations of sexual abuse in November 2017. In February, The Independent reported she was placed in solitary confinement at the facility, which she believed was retaliation against her coming forward. She was released in March.


Before Monterrosa, a Hutto resident supervisor was convicted in 2010 of sexually abusing several female detainees, according to the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU).


And even earlier, the ACLU, in March 2007, filed 10 cases in federal court “to challenge the federal government’s policy of illegally detaining children from around the world at the T. Don Hutto detention center.” The cases were settled and the center eventually stopped housing children at the facility.


Get the Teen Vogue Take. Sign up for the Teen Vogue weekly email.


Want more from Teen Vogue? Check this out: A Border Patrol Agent Reportedly Mocked Crying Immigrant Kids on Tape


© 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and  Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement  (updated 5/25/18). Teen Vogue  may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. Your California Privacy Rights.  The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 


CNWN Collection