EL PASO -- Martin Giovanni Portillo picked Saturday to propose marriage to his girlfriend, Daisy Arvizu, in front of family, including her father, in an unusual reunion in the dry riverbed of the Rio Grande. She said yes.

Alejandra Guerrero Hernandez, from Dallas, hadn't seen her family in nine years and buried her face in her hands and sobbed at the mere sight of them. Erik Jimenez, 37, nearly fell to his knees when he saw his mother for the first time 17 years.


"It's always special to see your mother, but especially on Mother's Day weekend," he said, tears rolling down his face. "You're the best gift, mi hijo cacheton," responded his mother, Ana Maria Zavala, touching her son's chubby cheeks.


The whipsaw of emotions Saturday was part of the Hugs Not Walls event in which hundreds of families, many of them separated by deportations, reunited a day before Mother's Day under the watchful eye of the Border Patrol. Some hadn't seen each other for years, some even decades.

Saturday's emotional drama played out against the backdrop of the Trump administration's new stepped-up policy to prosecute parents who cross the border illegally with their children, separating their families in the hopes of deterring such crossings and sending a loud message to would-be immigrants throughout the world, particularly Central America: Don't even dare cross illegally.


President Donald Trump and his administration have in recent weeks stepped up his campaign promise to crack down on illegal immigration. Other efforts include building a proposed wall along the U.S.-Mexico border; deporting unlawful immigrants with families here; ending the DACA program that allows unauthorized immigrant children to get permits to work and go to school; sending the National Guard to the border; and ending Temporary Protective Services protections for groups of immigrants that been have in the nation for decades, particularly Central Americans.


Last month, U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions visited the border here and outlined the administration's goal of "zero tolerance" as a response to what he called a "crisis" on the border, despite historic lows of illegal migration.

"The only crisis," responded former El Paso County Judge Veronica Escobar and Democratic nominee for U.S. representative, "is the crisis created in Washington. These people aren't criminals. They're hardworking families contributing to this country."


On Monday, Sessions broadened the immigration crackdown to include more first-time crossers, asylum-seekers and parents who will be separated from their children to face prosecution. Children will be sent to juvenile shelters while their parents are sent to adult detention facilities.


"I have put in place a 'zero tolerance' policy for illegal entry on our Southwest border. If you cross this border unlawfully, then we will prosecute you. It's that simple," he said in San Diego. "If you are smuggling a child, then we will prosecute you and that child will be separated from you as required by law."


The Trump administration's message won't work, said the Rev. Ismael "Melo" Moreno, director of Radio Progreso in Honduras. Moreno witnessed the mass turnout Saturday and blamed the U.S. government for ignoring the roots of the migration problem, particularly his region of Central America. His countrymen, he said, are fleeing political and economic instability, crime and violence.


The latest policy of separating immigrant children from their parents, Moreno said, "is just one more impediment in the sadness and anguish of a population caught in a cycle of forced migration. This won't deter their determination to seek a better life."


Before the event Saturday, Border Patrol spokesman Ramiro Cordero said nine Central Americans had voluntarily turned themselves in at the border. At Annunciation House, a shelter for immigrants, more than 350 Central Americans seek refuge every week, said director Ruben Garcia.

Advocacy groups lambasted the latest Trump administration measures, calling them heartless and dehumanizing.


"Destroying the immigration system by destroying the lives of immigrants is illegal in terms of international laws, inhumane and goes against the very core of the values of the United States," said Marselha Goncalves Margerin, Amnesty International's advocacy director for the Americas, during a visit to El Paso.


Immigration advocates have said that separation of children from parents has been happening for months. In February, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit to challenge the practice. 

On Saturday, families ignored the politics and focused on the brief time with their loved ones. Each reunion lasted four minutes, playing in the earshot of an eclectic music selection ranging from live mariachis to Juan Gabriel and Ed Sheeran.  


"There are no words to describe this moment," said Guerrero Hernandez, who lives between Dallas — where she has about a dozen siblings — and the El Paso-Juarez area, where many more family members live. "Touching their faces, hugging them, feeling family warmth. It filled me with so much joy and pain."


Her brother, Humberto, turned his head toward the blue sky and tried hiding his tears from his sister. "We have to be strong," he mumbled He regained his composure and added with gratitude: "I want to thank the U.S. authorities, President Trump, for allowing us to reunite. Even if it's for just four minutes, it's a lifetime for us."

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.