
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

01/29/2018 07:15 AM EST

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj) 

Good Monday morning!


Story Continued Below

Just when you thought the tensions were easing a bit between Gov. Phil Murphy and Senate President Stephen Sweeney, the Building Trades — which couldn’t be more closely aligned with Sweeney — on Friday went after Murphy’s pick to lead the EDA. That’s Tim Sullivan, Connecticut’s deputy economic development commissioner. 

NJ Building Trades President Billy Mullen’s reason: He doesn’t trust the nutmegger on prevailing wage after reaching out to the Connecticut Building Trades.

“Apparently, Mr. Sullivan is not only opposed to prevailing wage expansion, but he has been actively meeting with the Connecticut Department of Labor seeking loopholes to get around the current Davis Bacon Laws in effect and the enforcement of those laws in his department … We do not need a Tim Sullivan here in New Jersey.”

See the letter here. I’m not going to pretend to know anything yet on Sullivan’s record in Connecticut, but, mmm… bacon. 

Labor is far from united on this one. I talked to Ray Pocino of The Laborers last night, who told me he thought Mullen’s opposition was “overreaction and I think it’s a conversation that should have been had with him and the governor before that reaction took place.”

Pocino said he’s been assured by Murphy that he’s behind prevailing wage laws. “I’m totally satisfied with Phil Murphy’s position on the EDA and what it’s been doing. He’s a prevailing wage guy, the governor, and he’s not going to go back on his word,” he said. 

WHERE’S MURPHY? 

QUOTE(S) OF THE DAY: Julie Roginsky: “Let's be very clear: you may not like Sen. Menendez's behavior, but if I had a dollar for every time a powerful elected official helped a friend, I'd be able to single-handedly fund a Senate election. Prosecutors pick and choose whom they want to prosecute, as former U.S. Attorney Chris Christie can write chapter and verse on.” Mike DuHaime: “Julie column rule No. 1: Never let a week go by without an attack on Christie even when the question has nothing to do with him and he is out of office.” Roginsky: “Come on, Mike ... I've stayed on message for the last eight years. Give me a month or so to recalibrate.” — More here

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — POLITICO MA’s Lauren Dezenski, former Hamilton Mayor Glen Gilmore

WHAT TRENTON MADE

SWEENEY: BOOST PALS’ PENSIONS, NOT TAXES — Sweeney's new (anti-tax) image, by POLITICO’s Ryan Hutchins: State Senate President Stephen Sweeney is turning into an anti-tax warrior. The South Jersey Democrat, once among the biggest champions of raising taxes on New Jersey’s wealthiest residents, now believes any new taxes are the antithesis to what the state needs. Striking a Reaganesque tone, Sweeney is calling for a wholesale re-evaluation of how government functions in New Jersey and has hit the ‘pause’ button on any effort to boost taxes at the state level. “I think we need to really blow the system up,” Sweeney said in a wide-ranging interview in which he began to reshape his image, casting himself as a leading advocate for lowering taxes across the state. ‘I think it doesn’t work any more in New Jersey. I think that our property taxes are out of control. We’ve got to look at them from our schools and we’ve got to look at how we do government.’ The Senate president’s hard line signals a seismic shift in Trenton, one that puts him in direct conflict with Gov. Phil Murphy and establishes clear new battle lines within the Democratic Party — now in full control of state government following the departure of Republican Chris Christie. Read the report

2002 2.0 — “Wounded Menendez gives Team Trump a chance in Jersey,” by The Star-Ledger’s Tom Moran: “Try to envision Sen. Robert Menendez trying to manage his daily calendar when he's juggling his second trial on corruption charges with his campaign for re-election. Will he march in parades? Or will he attend the trial every day to save his neck? Folks, this is ridiculous. And it's dangerous in the Trump era, when a single Senate seat can tip the balance of power. New Jersey voters haven't sent a Republican senator to Washington for half a century, and with Trump soiling the brand so badly, Democrats could win by picking a name out of the phone book. Their only chance to lose this seat is to do exactly what they are doing -- rallying around Menendez with a unanimity that virtually ensures he will win the primary race on June 5, provided he's not sent to prison first.” Read the report 

—There is a primary challenger to Menendez. Michael Starr Hopkins, a former attorney on the Clinton and Obama campaigns who now sometimes appears on TV as a pundit, officially announced Sunday. Here’s his online kickoff ad. 

—New Jersey Hispanic elected officials chide DOJ over Menendez motion Read the report

JUSTICE — Murphy transition report: Re-nominate sitting Supreme Court justices for tenure, by POLITICO's Matt Friedman: Former Republican Gov. Chris Christie caused a fracas when he refused to re-nominate two sitting state Supreme Court justices for tenure. Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy won’t follow that same path — at least if he listens to his transition committee. Murphy’s Law and Justice Transition Advisory Committee, in a report released Friday, recommended the governor “reaffirm the long-standing historical practices of prior New Jersey governors of re-nominating for tenure judges and justices appointed by predecessor governors as long as they are objectively deemed qualified.” Murphy, who took office Jan. 16, will get to decide whether to re-nominate three sitting justices for tenure, all of whom are Republican, after they serve their initial seven-year terms. Read the report

WE WENT MORE THAN A DECADE WITHOUT A SINGLE WOMAN FROM NJ IN CONGRESS — “Women are breaking ground in N.J. politics. Here's why,” by NJ Advance Media’s Taylor Tiamoyo Harris: “New Jersey's annual Women's March on N.J., held earlier this month in Morristown, served as a reminder that the push for equality continues. That includes equality among the Garden State's elected offices, where traditionally women have been underrepresented. Times are changing, as evidenced by the current Lt. Governor Sheila Oliver, the first African American and woman of color to serve in the position, and former Lt. Governor Kim Guadagno, the first woman to serve in the position. Both Oliver and Guadagno, a Democrat and Republican respectively, entered into politics on the local level, where more women are running for town councils and township committees, and winning.” 

BRAVE NEW WORLD — “Fewer deer. More trees. A utopian vision of Murphy's New Jersey emerges,” by The Record’s James Nash: “In Gov. Phil Murphy's New Jersey, children would spend less time preparing for tests, fewer people would commit crimes after getting out of prison, and fewer deer would chomp through the state's valuable crops. More trees would spring up in cities, employers that don't provide health insurance would pay more to subsidize care, and people out of work for long periods would receive additional assistance to get back into the workforce. That vision for the Garden State emerges in 14 reports prepared for Murphy's administration by transition committees appointed to assist the Democrat as he took office after eight years of Republican Chris Christie. More than 500 people sat on the committees. The 14 groups assigned to areas such as healthcare, education and urban growth worked for about six weeks between Murphy's election in November and the beginning of the year. Murphy was sworn in Jan. 16. The governor, who hand picked the committees, is under no obligation to implement or even accept the recommendations, which read like a wish-list for a utopian vision of New Jersey.” Read the report

—Murphy announces plans to rescind Christie gun-carry policy Read the report

—Murphy releases final reports of 14 transition committee Read the report

—“Murphy team urges governor to end your surprise medical bills, give all kids health care” Read the report

—“So… What about this? A collaborative governor in an alpha-dog state” Read the op-ed

PRAISE THE LORD AND PASS THE AMMUNITION — “Ocean County lawmaker Ronald Dancer wants bill to allow guns in churches,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Bob Jordan: “Assemblyman Ronald Dancer, R-Ocean, says he wants to allow houses of worship to have an armed person on site to protect attendees. A bill (A-1695) Dancer introduced without a co-sponsor would allow a church, mosque or synagogue to establish a security program by selecting a qualified person to carry a concealed handgun during worship and prayer services. ‘The horrific mass shooting at a Texas church last year is a grim reminder that no public place, including churches, synagogues and mosques, is safe from attack,’ Dancer said in a statement, referring to a mass shooting at the First Baptist Church in Sutherland Springs, Texas, in November that left 26 people dead and 20 others injured.” Read the report

BROWN OUT — “Murphy ready to oust Michele Brown” Read the report

—“Does New Jersey have the money to fix school funding?” Read the report

—“Should New Jersey lessen its expectations on sports betting?” Read the report

—“NJ signs on as part of multistate coalition to battle GOP tax-code revision” Read the report

CARTOON BREAK — “Bob Menendez: Round two,” by Drew Sheneman See the cartoon

THE TRUMP ERA

#WYNNING — “Steve Wynn, former top GOP finance chairman, has deep ties to Atlantic City,” by The Press of Atlantic City’s Lauren Carroll &amp; Vincent Jackson: “Steve Wynn, a casino mogul with historical connections to Atlantic City, resigned Saturday as finance chairman of the Republican National Committee amid allegations of sexual harassment and assault. Wynn has been a prolific Republican donor and led the RNC’s fundraising efforts during President Donald Trump’s first year, helping the committee rake in more than $130 million. Wynn, 76, played a big part in Atlantic City as a gaming market.” Read the report

WAY TO GO, NEW JERSEY FIRM — “State report touted mogul Steve Wynn’s ‘good character,” by The Boston Herald’s Jordan Graham: “Investigators for the Massachusetts Gaming Commission, including former state police and federal agents, produced a more-than-200-page report on the suitability of Wynn Resorts and Chief Executive Steve Wynn in 2013, and included his penchant for wine and fine art but found no issues with the casino magnate’s character … The Gaming Commission contracted New Jersey law and consulting firm Michael &amp; Carroll to lead the investigation. The company, according to a letter accompanying the report, has done thousands of background investigations on gaming-license applicants over 30 years.” Read the report

SO THERE’S THIS LITTLE THING CALLED THE GATEWAY PROJECT — “How to help a Jersey Republican hurt by Trump? Let him spread some pork,” by NJ Advance Media’s Jonathan D. Salant: “Republicans have a new idea on how to boost Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, considered the New Jersey lawmaker most at risk of losing re-election this fall partly because of the backlash against President Donald Trump. More than a decade after scandal temporarily cost them control of the House, Republicans are debating whether to resume allowing members of Congress to designate specific local projects for federal funding. The Washington term for it is earmarking. But you probably know it better as doling out money for pork barrel projects so lawmakers can woo the voters back home. That would put Frelinghuysen, the House Appropriations Committee chairman, in a stronger position than most to ensure a steady supply of pork to his district and his state.” Read the report

COLD AS ICE — Grewal questions ICE tactics after 2 were arrested outside schools, by POLITICO's Katherine Landergan: U.S. Immigration Customs and Enforcement agents may have violated their own rules regarding actions at "sensitive locations" when they arrested two Indonesian men who were dropping their children off at school, New Jersey Attorney General Gurbir Grewal said. “I am not aware of any exigent or unique circumstances here that would justify such a departure from ICE’s settled policy on sensitive locations,” Grewal wrote in a letter to DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen. “Undoubtedly, this creates a chilling environment for parents, who were simply ensuring that their children arrived to school safely.” On Friday, Gov. Phil Murphy said he has been communicating with the state’s congressional delegation, including Sens. Bob Menendez and Cory Booker, about the case. "We have to remind ourselves they were escaping religious persecution," Murphy said at an unrelated press conference in Trenton. "They were Christians who came from Indonesia. ... They're coming here because they're being basically marginalized and persecuted." Read the report

GOING MEDIEVAL — “ICE targets have taken sanctuary in N.J. church. Can ICE go in and get them?” by NJ Advance Media’s Ted Sherman: “Three Indonesians facing deportation who took refuge in a New Jersey church this past week are looking for a safe haven to shelter them from arrest by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Legal experts, though, say their haven may be illusory, offering little protection. ‘This Middle Ages notion of the church sanctuary knocker went out the window a long, long time ago,’ said former criminal prosecutor Dennis Kearney, who advises religious and non-profits on the propriety of housing and employing illegal aliens. Under medieval English law, the ornamental sanctuary knocker on a cathedral door supposedly afforded the right of asylum to those who touched it. But while churches and other houses of worship in the United States generally remain "sensitive locations" for law enforcement today, there is no right of sanctuary under U.S. law for those who may retreat inside. And that applies to people here legally or illegally.” Read the report

—“This N.J. congressman (Sires) is boycotting Trump's State of the Union” Read the report

—“Weber beats Malinowski for the Somerset County Democratic line” Read the report

LOCAL

FIRST THEY CAME FOR THE LEAF BLOWERS, AND I DID NOT SPEAK OUT BECAUSE I HAD NO LAWN — “Texting while walking could soon hurt your wallet in this N.J. town,” by NJ Advance Media’s Marisa Iati: “First came the leaf blower ban. Is a prohibition on texting in the roadway next on the list of uncommon ordinances to come to one Essex County township? It might be, according to a Maplewood committeewoman who raised the possibility of ticketing pedestrians who step into the street while looking at their phones. ‘There are already laws on the books for driving while being distracted by a mobile device, and it's becoming more and more apparent with younger people like Generation Z ... that they need to look up and make sure that they can cross safely,’ Committeewoman Nancy Adams said in a phone interview. Inspired by Honolulu's new law banning "distracted walking" in the roadway, Adams said she proposed the idea of ticketing pedestrians who look at their phones at the Jan. 16 committee meeting. The township's public safety committee, which includes first responders, is now slated to weigh in on the suggestion.” Read the report

NUMBNUTS 2018 — “Assemblyman from Trenton running for mayor,” by NJ Advance Media’s Kevin Shea: “New Jersey Assemblyman Reed Gusciora announced Friday he's running for mayor of Trenton, saying he's fought for the city repeatedly while a state legislator. ‘I believe I have a lot to offer Trenton as a leader and that my experience will help me create better outcomes for our citizens,’ the 15th district legislator said in a statement. Gusciora, a Democrat who has been in the state assembly since 1996, issued a statement declaring his candidacy about an hour after Trenton Mayor Eric Jackson publicly announced he would not seek a second term.” Read the report

—“In the shadow of New Jersey’s state capital, Trenton’s forgotten schools struggle to get better on their own” Read the report

“New Jersey lawmakers on Cuba trip for José Martí statue unveiling,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Bob Jordan: “Three state lawmakers are part of a New Jersey contingent on an unofficial trip to Cuba, where they plan to view ceremonies Sunday marking the 165th anniversary of José Martí’s birth. The group, which leaves Saturday for the three-night trip, includes Assemblyman Gordon Johnson and Sen. Loretta Weinberg, both D-Bergen; Assemblyman Joe Danielsen, D-Somerset; former Assembly Speaker Joe Roberts; and Somerset County Democratic Chairwoman Peg Schaffer. The itinerary also includes a visit to a synagogue and Jewish cultural center in Havana, said Johnson, who led a delegation of 10 New Jersey lawmakers on a visit to Cuba in 2016. That trip – like now, it was not a trip sanctioned by legislative leaders – was criticized by Cuban exiles in New Jersey who feared the visit could be perceived as supportive of the Castro government, which is accused of systematic human rights abuses, including arbitrary imprisonment and unfair trials.” Read the report

KEVIN SMITH WON’T BE HAPPY — “NJ marijuana legalization: Monmouth County says no to recreation weed,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Susanne Cervenka: “Monmouth County freeholders just said no to pot. The county governing body approved a resolution saying they are against any attempt by New Jersey to legalize recreational marijuana. Freeholder Director Tom Arnone announced the opposition Thursday afternoon, saying he could not support legal weed while also starting and promoting programs aimed at teaching the county's children about healthy eating and lifestyles.” Read the report

SHE DIDN’T RESPECT CARMAN’S AUTHORITY — “Ashley Bennett ran and won after an Atlantic County freeholder's Women's March joke; a year later she's hanging with Whoopi Goldberg,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Amy S. Rosenberg: “It’s been a year since Ashley Bennett stood in a light drizzle outside the Atlantic County building in Northfield, quietly disappointed that Freeholder John Carman had failed to apologize for mocking the Women’s March with a joke on Facebook about whether the women at the march would be home in time to cook dinner. The rest, truly, has become history. Bennett, 32, a psychiatric screener at a Cape May County hospital emergency room who grew up in Egg Harbor Township, decided to run for Carman’s Ward 3 freeholder seat, famously won election, and has become a celebrated symbol of the Run for Something movement that has empowered women and other first-time politicians like her to get themselves elected.” Read the report

TRAVEL BAN PROPOSED FOR MORRIS COUNTY RESIDENTS — “Mom suing Chatham schools for 'promoting' Islam in middle school,” by The Daily Record’s William Westhoven: “Chatham schools are 'promoting' Islam and use materials that "call to the children" to convert, according to a complaint filed by one student's mother. Libby Hilsenrath filed a complaint and request for jury trial with Judge Kevin McNulty in U.S. District Court in Newark. The complaint alleges her son was required to accept lessons and homework assignments in his seventh-grade World Cultures and Geography class that contained ‘religious teachings of Islam presented, not as beliefs, but as facts.’” Read the report

—“People in Mercer County are afraid to drink their tap water" Read the report

—“Sources: Emergency contract issued to oversee Trenton Water Works” Read the report

—“Gov. Murphy says Trenton is on a ‘short list’ of cities to help combat crime” Read the report

—“Bordentown police chief: Hate crime case sparks big changes and a 'new norm'” Read the report

—“Government shutdown averted in Paterson; Council votes to pay city bills through February” Read the report

—“Morris County investor takes a chance on Paterson drug den” Read the report

—“Bayonne mayoral derby has yet to post odds: Political Insider” Read the column

—“More scrutiny in Lakewood development | Di Ionno” Read the report

—“Former Ringwood mayor files records-related complaint against borough officials” Read the report

—“11-year-old shot inside apartment by kids playing with a gun: official” Read the report

—“Company postpones public presentation for new Liberty State Park marina” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

HUMAN TRAFFICKING — “Hundreds of illegal massage parlors fuel sex trade in N.J., report says,” by NJ Advance Media’s Erin Potenko: “New Jersey has hundreds of illegal massage businesses that could be harboring victims of human trafficking and fueling the sex trade, according to a new report. The Polaris Project, a nonprofit that advocates to end human trafficking, found 373 possible massage parlors that advertised sexual services in the state. It also documented nearly 3,000 cases of human trafficking connected to more than 9,000 massage parlors across the nation.” Read the report

NEW JERSEYANS NOT READY TO BE EXPOSED TO YELLING, CURSING — “Gordon Ramsay opening steakhouse in Atlantic City,” by The AP — “Gordon Ramsay will open a steakhouse this summer at Harrah's casino in Atlantic City. It is set to open Memorial Day weekend and will be the second Atlantic City restaurant for the celebrity chef, who opened a pub at Caesars casino in 2015.” Read the report

CRIME — “Safer than ever? NJ murder rate the lowest on record,” by NJ 101.5’s Michael Symons: “Murders in New Jersey plunged by the biggest amount in decades in 2017, with the murder rate apparently reaching its lowest level in more than a half-century of record keeping, preliminary data shows. Overall crime declined for the sixth straight year, according to 2017 data reported by local, county and state agencies to the New Jersey State Police through last week. However, the year-to-year drop was slower than it had been in recent years.” Read the report

—“Danish firm hopes A.C. wind project will get new look” Read the report 

—“SZA, The Grammys’ Most-Nominated Woman, Didn’t Win Anything” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC