;        
        .fc-pinned-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/WGRZ.png') calc(100% - 45px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
        .fc-dialog-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/WGRZ.png') calc(100% - 20px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
     



Buffalo Weather Summary: 79 degrees

The Wayne County Sheriff's Office cancelled an Amber Alert Tuesday morning for missing 14-month-old Owen Hidalgo-Calderon.


There was no immediate explanation for why the alert was canceled, as the search for the boy, who was last seen on May 16, enters its seventh day.


The Amber Alert was activated Friday, May 25 at 12:30 p.m. and cancelled as of 9 a.m. Tuesday morning.

"My hope is that he still is alive," said Wayne County Sheriff Barry Virts. "But we have to look to reality here that he is concealed somewhere here on the farm."


The search — which Virts said has covered 600 acres, thus far — is scheduled to resume Tuesday morning.


The body of Owen's mother, 18-year-old Selena Hidalgo-Calderon was recovered from a wooded area of the Joy Road farm on Wednesday. Her boyfriend, Alberto Ebavardo Gutierrez-Reyes, 25, is a suspect in the homicide investigation, Virts said, but thus far only has been charged with tampering with evidence after allegedly moving her body. He remains in custody.


According to a statement from Immigration and Customs Enforcement, "Alberto Ebavardo Gutierrez-Reyes" is an alias for Evarardo Donoteo-Reyes, a Mexican citizen in the United States illegally.


Donoteo-Reyes was previously removed from the U.S. in 2016 and 2017 and has a 2017 federal conviction for illegal entry, according to ICE. Virts said he had not spoken to ICE but knew they had a detainer on Donoteo-Reyes at the jail.


Though an Amber Alert remains active for Owen, thus far generating 47 calls, the sheriff said there is yet no evidence of an abduction.


"We need to go step by step, inch by inch," he said of the investigation, which has taken them to Attica, Wyoming County, along with Genesee, Livingston, Lewis, Onondaga and Cayuga counties, following leads and conducting interviews.


"We will bring justice," Virts said. "We are going to keep after this until we get the evidence and the information we need."


More than 200 searchers combed through wooded areas of the 350-acre Joy Road farm over the weekend. At one point, an underwater recovery team joined the search, heading toward a creek that runs near the farm. However, the team returned to the command post shortly after noon and did not appear to undertake a water search.

Virts said all waterways within a one-mile radius have been checked.


Anyone with information about Owen is asked to call the Wayne County 911 center.


Farmworker Selena Hidalgo-Calderon was from Guatemala and spoke little English. She had been in the United States since November 2016 and was in the process of being deported although her family had pending applications for asylum. 


Police believe she was killed on the farm, inside the home she shared with Donoteo-Reyes. An autopsy is being performed by the Monroe County Medical Examiner's Office to determine an official cause of death. Virts said there was no update as of Monday afternoon.


More: Police find body of mom Selena Hidalgo-Calderon; 1-year-old son still missing


More: Owen Hidalgo-Calderon: Search for missing Sodus toddler to continue Monday


Donoteo-Reyes, who was arrested on Thursday in Livingston County, admitted to police that he moved Hidalgo-Calderon's body from the home and buried it between two logs in a wooded area of the farm. He would not answer questions about Owen's whereabouts, and did not admit to killing the boy's mother, Virts said.


Virts said Donoteo-Reyes asked for an attorney and stopped talking to police. They have had no further contact, he said Monday.


Donoteo-Reyes has been charged with tampering with physical evidence, a Class E felony and remains incarcerated. He is scheduled for a preliminary hearing on Tuesday.


ICE lodged an immigration detainer against Donoteo-Reyes with the Wayne County Sheriff's Office. A detainer is a request that an individual be jailed for up to 48 hours longer than he or she would otherwise be held for the criminal case and sets in motion deportation proceedings.


“ICE is determined to seek out and locate illegal aliens in New York.” said Field Office Director Thomas Feeley. “This case sadly illustrates the real dangers to our communities.” 


Donoteo-Reyes is not Owen's father. The boy's dad lives in Guatemala.


Includes reporting by Victoria Freile, Meghan Finnerty, Will Cleveland, Sean Lahman and Lauren Peace