By

Francesca Chambers, White House Correspondent For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  13:07 EDT, 18 October 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  13:15 EDT, 18 October 2017







          25

View  comments

The Trump administration is seeking more space for the illegal immigrants it's been arresting as part of president's border crackdown.


Immigration Customs and Enforcement (ICE) put out requests for additional jail cells in Chicago, Detroit, St. Paul, Salt Lake City and Texas in recent weeks, USA Today reported.


ICE would prefer to have full use of the facilities but will considered shared space, a notice in the south Texas area said. A USA Today report says the administration needs some 4,000 beds.


The Trump administration is seeking more space for the illegal immigrants it's been arresting as part of president's border crackdown

Immigration Customs and Enforcement (ICE) put out requests for additional jail cells in Chicago, Detroit, St. Paul, Salt Lake City and Texas in recent weeks

Immigrant detainees eat lunch at the Adelanto Detention Facility in Adelanto, California. The facility, the largest and newest Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), detention center in California, houses an average of 1,100 immigrants in custody pending a decision in their immigration cases or awaiting deportation

The massive expansion in prisoner facilities follows a dramatic increase in ICE arrests since Trump took office.


Trump's immigration force arrested 97,482 people it thought to be in the country illegally between Jan. 22  and Sept. 9. That represents a 43 percent increase in arrests under Barack Obama the year prior, USA Today reported.


ICE more than doubled the number of illegal immigrants it arrested in the that period who did not have a criminal record. 


The Trump administration arrested 28,011 illegal immigrants who had no priors, the report said, a 179 percent increase over the same nine-month period in 2016.


At any given time, ICE has 31,000 to 41,000 illegal immigrants in its custody at any time, the report said. 


The agency has put in a request to Congress for additional funding. A requested appropriation of $1.2 billion in 2018 on top of what it was already receiving would help ICE expand the number of prisoners it's holding to 48,000.


An estimated 11 million illegal immigrants are residing in the country. Trump vowed to deport them all during his campaign for the White House.


He's directed his administration to focus on violent criminals, although ICE has warned numerous times that any illegal immigrant can be deported at any time for any reason.


It's not known how much the administration is willing to pay for the extra prison space it's requesting, but USA Today reports that the government awarded GEO Group a $457 million contract for a 1,000-bed center near Houston earlier this year.


A new request, posted online on Sept. 27, solicits a 1,000-bed facility for adult male and adult female detainees that is within 50 miles of Interstate 35.


'If utilizing multiple facilities, there may be no less than 200 beds per facility,' the Request for Information says. 'The preference is for facilities to be dedicated for ICE detainees exclusively, but shared facilities may be considered.'


Four of the areas that ICE is looking to expand its bandwidth in - Chicago, Detroit, St. Paul, Salt Lake City - are considered sanctuary cities, Jessica Vaughan,the director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration Studies, points out. South Texas is the point of entry for illegal immigrants violating the United States' border with Mexico. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group