
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

02/09/2018 07:14 AM EST

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj) 

Where were you during the Six Hours of Mangold?


Story Continued Below

Yesterday morning, Essex County Republican Chairman Al Barlas said that former Jets center Nick Mangold was considering running for Congress. Mangold, a Chatham resident, told Barlas that in a phone call after dropping his kids off at school.

By the end of the school day, the dream was dead. Mangold tweeted a statement acknowledging he was “possibly thinking about running for Congress” but that he was “not in a place where I can commit to that.”

Mangold, 34, seems well liked by fans. He’s got a good sense of humor judging by the photo of him sulking while going down the log flume after finding out he was cut from the Jets while vacationing with his family at Disney World. But, alas, it’s not to be.

In other congressional news, the Cook Political Report has moved the 2nd District seat being vacated by 23-year incumbent Republican Frank LoBiondo from “toss up” to “lean Democrat,” which about squares with the anemic GOP recruiting there. Democrats also put out a target list that includes every Republican in New Jersey, including Chris Smith. But in the end, it’s just a list. 

WHERE’S MURPHY? In Marlboro for a SALT town hall

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “If he wants something from us, he should just call us rather than call us out publicly.” — Senate President Stephen Sweeney in his first public shot at Gov. Murphy since the election

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — Assemblyman Jim Kennedy, Sierra Club’s Jeff Tittel, Mercury’s Raphael Chavez-Fernandez. Saturday for TAPIntoNewark’s Mark Bonamo, former Union County GOP Chairman Phil Morin. Sunday for NJ Advance Media’s Samantha Marcus, former Jersey City Council candidate Rebecca Symes

WHAT TRENTON MADE

SALT — Murphy urges lawmakers to pursue SALT workaround, by POLITICO’s Katherine Landergan: Gov. Phil Murphy on Thursday renewed his push for a workaround to the new federal tax law’s limit on a key property tax deduction, calling on the Legislature to send him a bill as quickly as possible. In a speech to mayors from across New Jersey, Murphy urged them to implement the workaround that will provide relief to the Republican Party’s “gut punch” to high-tax states like New Jersey, namely a $10,000 cap on the state and local tax deductions in H.R. 1 (115). The proposal, developed by Democratic Rep. Josh Gottheimer, would give local governments the ability to create new funds that would permit homeowners to pay their property taxes by making a charitable contribution. Residents would receive a credit to offset their property tax bill and then would be able to take a charitable deduction when they file their federal tax return. Read the report

AND BATTERY – “Top Democrat fires first public shot at Phil Murphy,” by NJ Advance Media’s Matt Arco: “State Senate President Stephen Sweeney had a message Thursday for Gov. Phil Murphy: Pick up the phone and call if you have something you want to say. The first public jab at the new Democratic governor by the state's second most-powerful Democrat came after Murphy urged lawmakers to send him legislation that would make an end run around the federal tax law passed by Republicans in Congress. “He didn't have to call on us,’ Sweeney told reporters after the governor's speech at a conference of mayors in Trenton. ‘We're already (working on) it,’he said. ‘If he wants something from us, he should just call us rather than call us out publicly.’” Read the report

SWEENEY IS FRED SAVAGE TO CHRISTIE'S JUDGE REINHOLD. OR VICE-VERSA — ”Stile: The New Jersey Senate president, a Democrat, channels his inner Chris Christie,” by The Record’s Charles Stile: ”Who needs Republican Chris Christie when you have Steve Sweeney roaming the halls as president of the Senate? That may be an unfair assessment, given that Sweeney, the Gloucester County Democrat has been helped roll back high-profile pieces of Christie's conservative agenda since fellow Democrat, Gov. Phil Murphy, took office three weeks ago. He supported restoring Planned Parenthood funding Christie cut in 2010, agreed to re-tighten hand gun permits that Christie loosened, and has made a $15-an-hour minimum wage a priority. Yet, there are times that Sweeney sounds as if he's undergone a Christie transplant. Since Murphy's election, Sweeney has gone from champion to the chief opponent of a tax hike for millionaires, which so happens to be a chief priority of Murphy. The millionaire's tax, Sweeney said, is now a measure of "last resort." Sweeney has also adopted a similar anti-tax rhetoric that Christie used to justify repeated vetoes of the millionaire tax hikes over the past eight years.” Read the report

IMMIGRATION — “Meet the controversial pastor fighting to protect N.J.'s undocumented immigrants,” by NJ Advance Media’s Ted Sherman: “Ground Zero in the nation's increasingly acrimonious debate over illegal immigration might be the Reformed Church of Highland Park. That's where Rev. Seth Kaper-Dale, the New Jersey church's blunt-speaking pastor, has declared his house of worship a sanctuary. The church last month opened its doors once again to protect three Indonesian Christians who hurriedly moved in after U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement arrested two other men while they were dropping their daughters off for school nearby … since the arrests, Kaper-Dale has held community events, repeatedly has spoken out against ICE, and continues to focus attention on the plight of immigrants facing deportation. ‘Over time I have learned about messaging. I know that our narrative is part of a larger narrative that is playing out,’ he said. ‘And I choose to carefully express things in ways that can connect to the larger, without losing the value of the particular.’” Read the report

“Senate committee advances 2 Murphy Cabinet nominees, holds up third,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “Share on Facebook Share on Twitter The state Senate Judiciary Committee moved to confirm two of Gov. Phil Murphy’s Cabinet nominees on Thursday, but held up the confirmation of Gary Lanigan for corrections commissioner because of ‘unresolved’ issues. ‘I do intend on putting him forward at the next scheduled Judiciary Committee hearing if his issues have been resolved,’ state Sen. Nicholas Scutari, the committee chairman, said... The committee unanimously (voted to confirm) Tahesha Way, a former Passaic County freeholder, as secretary of state, and Col. Jamal Beale as adjutant general — a position that puts him in charge of the New Jersey National Guard and the New Jersey Department of Military and Veterans Affairs.” Read the report

THE REASON — ”Phil Murphy's pick for state corrections commissioner abruptly put on hold,” by NJ Advance Media’s S.P. Sullivan: “Commissioner Gary Lanigan remains on the job and is expected to keep his post, but his formal re-nomination was tabled to avoid a potentially uncomfortable public hearing amid questions over an ongoing sexual abuse investigation at the state women's prison and other issues, NJ Advance Media has learned.” Read the report

HEAT — Coughlin endorses bill to increase energy assistance for families in need, by POLITICO’s Danielle Muoio: Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin on Thursday announced his support for a bill to increase energy assistance payments for families in need. The bill, NJ A3010 (18R), would ensure that families receiving benefits under the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program get a minimum of $21 a year for heating and cooling services. “As we consider the state’s future of the clean energy program, I think we must also consider increasing the heat-and-eat assistance program, as it’s referred to, by increasing payments to New Jersey families,” Coughlin said during a press conference in Trenton. “It’s not possible to talk about the clean energy program for us without considering the families who pay the bills.” Read the report 

A CLINTON IN THE ASSEMBLY — "Meet the newest — and youngest — N.J. lawmaker," by NJ Advance Media's Brent Johnson: "The newest member of the New Jersey Legislature is also the youngest -- and hails from a storied Bergen County political family. Clinton Calabrese, a 31-year-old Democrat and Cliffside Park resident who once served on the borough's school board, was sworn in Thursday to serve in the state Assembly. He was appointed to replace Marlene Caride, a Democrat who is new Gov. Phil Murphy's nominee to serve as commissioner of the state Department of Banking and Insurance.” Read the report

—Coughlin to sponsor Sweeney's salary legislation in Assembly,” Read the report

—“PennEast Files for Eminent Domain, Seeks Marshals to Guard Pipeline Workers,” by NJ Spotlight’s Jon Hurdle: Read the report 

—“Steve Lonegan picks up Sen. Rand Paul endorsement” Read the report

—“Lawmakers consider bill to limit keno-style lottery game” Read the report

—“WATCH: Drive-thru weed? See what N.J. might look like with legal weed” Watch the video

THE TRUMP ERA

SMALL GOVERNMENT CONSERVATIVE SAVED FROM PROSPECT OF WORKING IN PRIVATE SECTOR — “Former lawmaker who was rejected as Ex-Im bank chief to Join SEC,” by The Wall Street Journal’s Dave Michaels and Andrew Ackerman: “Scott Garrett, a former Republican lawmaker known for criticizing what he considered government overreach by Wall Street regulators, has landed a senior role at the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr. Garrett, 58 years old, plans to take a position advising SEC Chairman Jay Clayton, according to people familiar with the matter. The job would represent a second act for Mr. Garrett, whom U.S. senators rejected last year as a pick to lead the U.S. Export-Import Bank under the Trump administration. The hiring is a rare instance of a former lawmaker joining a federal agency in a staff role.” Read the report

LOCAL

LITTLE THOUGHT — “Ocean County freeholder calls weed more addictive than cocaine,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Erik Larsen: “Marijuana is more addictive than cocaine. That's what Ocean County Freeholder Director Gerry P. Little said Wednesday evening in support of the county government’s decision to oppose the legalization of pot for recreational use in New Jersey. You can listen to the audio of his speech above. Little noted that marijuana remains a Schedule 1 controlled substance under the U.S. Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Schedule 1 drugs, substances or chemicals are defined as drugs with no accepted medical use under federal law and a high potential for abuse, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration. The freeholder said that puts marijuana in the same federal classification as heroin, LSD, Ecstasy, Quaaludes and peyote – all Schedule 1 drugs. ‘As an example, cocaine is a ‘Schedule 2 drug,’ which is less addictive,’ Little said.” Read the report

—For a real look at marijuana dependency versus other drugs, I think this is a good article

PEOPLE GET VERY PASSIONATE ABOUT TRAFFIC AND PARKING — “The fight for the right to be a Muslim in America,” by The Guardian’s Andrew Rice: “Forty years ago, Mohammad Ali Chaudry, a Pakistani-born economist, made his home outside New York City. He came for an executive job at the telecoms company AT&amp;T, and ended up working there for decades. Like many immigrants to the US, Chaudry came to wholeheartedly believe – perhaps more fervently than his native-born neighbours – in the triumphal story that Americans tell about their nation: how it was always growing stronger through change, melding the many into one through the process of assimilation. Chaudry was a devout Muslim. But to him, it always seemed the things that made him different mattered less than the ways in which he had proved he was the same … That changed in 2011, when he found a new cause: building a mosque in Basking Ridge ... Soon after purchasing it, Chaudry held an open house to greet the neighbours. ‘There was not too much tension,’ he said. ‘It was kind of jovial.’ He put the letters “ISBR” on the mailbox in front of the house, to announce the Islamic Society’s arrival. Then someone smashed the mailbox … That was seven long years ago, before some townspeople formed a group calling for ‘responsible development’ in furious opposition to the mosque, before the 39 planning board hearings, before the mosque was rejected, before Chaudry filed a lawsuit alleging religious prejudice, before his lawyers uncovered racially charged emails among officials opposed to his plan, before the Obama administration accused the town of civil rights violations, before national rightwing activists took notice of the dispute and began smearing Chaudry as a terrorist sympathiser, and before Trump dragged anti-Muslim conspiracy theories from the disreputable fringes into the White House. Today, Chaudry knows his town – and America – better.” Read the report

WHAT VETO? COUNCIL VOTES TO LET VOTERS VOTE ON VOTING — “Hoboken council overrides Bhalla veto, voters will decide on runoff elections,” by The Hudson County View’s John Heinis: “At another lengthy meeting, the Hoboken City Council voted to override a veto by Mayor Ravi Bhalla, allowing the voters to decide on whether or not to reinstate runoff elections. The vast majority of the public speakers wanted to let the voters decide on whether or not the runoff should be reinstated in Hoboken. ‘It’s true that we have dealt with some level of election fraud in this city, but a lot of other things are also true. It’s true that now-Mayor Bhalla spent more money on his campaign than any local candidate has spent before, not his opposition’ said former Councilman Dave Mello … The measure was approved by a tally of 7-2, with Doyle and Councilwoman-at-Large Emily Jabbour voting no.” Read the report (h/t Hmag for the headline inspiration)

WELCOME TO PATERSON. 0 HOURS WITHOUT A CORRUPTION SCANDAL — “Paterson suspends risk manager Samir Goow in probe of medical bills,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “City school officials have imposed a freeze on payments and work for the district insurance consultant, Samir Goow, after learning that he is under investigation by Paterson municipal government. Besides suspending his contract, school officials also revoked Goow’s access to the district’s records, computers and buildings, according to spokeswoman Terry Corallo. Moreover, the district is conducting its own review of vendor payments overseen by Goow and has alerted its insurance companies that he does not currently represent Paterson Public Schools, Corallo said.” Read the report

—“Paterson cop getting $300k settlement in racism lawsuit” Read the report

NOBODY COULD HAVE SEEN THIS COMING — “Traffic ban in Leonia is bad for business, shop owners say,” by The Record’s Svetlana Shkolnikova: “The traffic ban on borough side streets during rush hour has reduced gridlock, but an unintended consequence is that business owners say they are being hurt by the new regulations, according the the mayor. Mayor Judah Zeigler and the Borough Council sent a letter Wednesday evening asking residents to spend money at borough shops to help shop keepers while the borough assesses the safe streets program, as the traffic ban is called. ‘Every Leonian can help by supporting Leonia businesses!’ the letter states. ‘While we continue to tweak the plan based on feedback from residents and merchants alike, we want to remind all of you of the importance of supporting our businesses by shopping locally.’” Read the report

—“Lakewood: Faith the focus of Sholom Rubashkin speech” Read the report

—“After allergic reaction, Carlstadt Public School bans classroom snacks” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

VISION0QUEST — “As pedestrian deaths spike in N.J., safety experts urge Murphy to try NYC program,” by NJ Advance Media’s Larry Higgs:  “After a spike in pedestrian deaths in 2017, safety advocates want Gov. Phil Murphy to begin a statewide ‘Vision Zero’ campaign, similar to one credited with reducing fatalities in New York City. As overall traffic fatalities increased in 2017, advocates questioned how effective current safety programs are. New Jersey uses a different national program, Toward Zero Deaths, which advocates contend isn't doing enough as Vision Zero could … New York Mayor Bill de Blasio credited Vision Zero for a 32 percent drop in pedestrian fatalities to just 101 people in 2017, the lowest number since the city started keeping records. Under Vision Zero, New York City officials have built bike and pedestrian infrastructure and used specialized enforcement, including stiffer penalties for drivers involved in a collision with a pedestrian or cyclist that results in death or serious injury.” Read the report

“Rutgers-Camden to honor Anita Hill with honorary degree,” by The Press of Atlantic City: “Anita Hill, a national figure leading the #TimesUp movement against sexual harassment and assault and a vocal advocate for women in STEM and other fields, will receive an honorary Doctor of Laws from Rutgers University–Camden during the Rutgers Law School commencement ceremony on Thursday, May 17, the Rutgers University Board of Governors announced this week. She also will deliver the keynote address for the Class of 2018 at that ceremony.” Read the report

—“Judge dismisses 13 tickets against NJ Weedman” Read the report

—“Amboy Bank raises minimum wage for its employees to $15” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC