
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

09/28/2017 07:03 AM EDT

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj) 

It looked like the pendulum was swinging the other way on corporate tax breaks in New Jersey. But then Amazon started making governments around the country compete to host its new headquarters and everything changed.


Story Continued Below

All four Democratic and Republican legislative leaders signed a letter supporting Gov. Christie’s proposal to increase New Jersey’s corporate tax breaks under the Grow New Jersey program — already drastically expanded under his tenure. It would double the base amount of tax credits a massive project like Amazon’s headquarters could receive to $10,000 per job, per year over 10 years. If Amazon fulfilled its 50,000 job promise, that would be $5 billion.

Kim Guadagno is all in on the $5 billion tax break. Phil Murphy, who has pledged to cut back on the tax breaks, is non-committal. But with the support of Christie and all four leaders, it’s possible this could be rushed through before Murphy or Guadagno take office. 

WHERE’S CHRISTIE? No public schedule

DAYS SINCE CHRISTIE LAST TOOK QUESTIONS FROM NJ PRESS CORPS: 6

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — Jersey City Cultural Affairs Director Christine Goodman, Pinkin Chief of Staff Adam Neary, Newark Schools’ Paul Nedeau 

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “Well, some of us called it See Mess, but that’s alright” — Former Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin referring to CMS, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services

WHAT TRENTON MADE

HARKINING BACK — “Harkin testifies at Menendez trial,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “In May, 2011, Sen. Robert Menendez asked fellow Democratic Sen. Tom Harkin to meet wth his friend, Dr. Salomon Melgen. Harkin didn’t hesitate. “Well, it’s senatorial courtesy. If a senator asks you to meet with someone, you usually meet with them,” Harkin said. That brief meeting, which Menendez and Harkin attended along with some staff, would last about 20 minutes. And it would also be the reason that Harkin, who retired in 2015 after 30 years representing Iowa in the Senate, would be called to Newark to testify in Menendez and Melgen’s corruption trial.” Read the report

PRISONS — “Why is the N.J. prison population shrinking? (It's not just about less crime...),” by NJ Advance Media’s Ted Sherman: “The big house is getting smaller. Fewer people are going to prison in New Jersey these days and the numbers continue to drop, according to an analysis of state Department of Corrections data over the past five years. Those incarcerated in New Jersey—including men and women in prison, juveniles in detention, and detainees still in halfway houses—dropped this year to 19,619, from 21,123 in 2013. That marked a decline of more than 15 percent.” Read the report

‘YOU COME AT THE KING, YOU BEST NOT MISS‘ — “NJEA's assault on Sweeney causes some to scratch their heads,” by POLITICO’s Linh Tat: “The New Jersey Education Association's scorched-earth strategy targeting Stephen Sweeney and some of his fellow Senate Democrats has left the state's political establishment — and some of the union's own members — wondering what, exactly, the union is trying to achieve. The NJEA is spending heavily to attack Sweeney — who most people expect to beat his Republican challenger — in order to send a message that the union shall not be crossed. ‘If it is their strategy, then they need to rethink their strategy,’ Sen. Joseph Vitale said in a recent interview … Vitale was one of 16 Senate Democrats who signed a letter that blasted the NJEA for endorsing Sweeney’s opponent, Republican Fran Grenier, a supporter of Gov. Chris Christie and President Donald Trump ... In the days immediately following, local branches of the NJEA have reportedly rescinded invitations to senators who signed the letter, who had previously been invited to attend NJEA-related events, or informed lawmakers that the union would no longer hand out campaign materials on their behalf.” Read the report here

THIS WOULD BE POCKET CHANGE FOR THE NJEA — “CWA notified feds following investigation into New Jersey chapter president,” by POLITICO’s Katherine Landergan: “The Communications Workers of America notified federal authorities after a June investigation linked a local New Jersey chapter president to the disappearance of hundreds of thousands of dollars from the union’s coffers. Lionel Leach, president of CWA Local 1039, stepped aside earlier this year amid an investigation into the missing funds, as first reported by InsiderNJ. But a September letter from the local's leadership to its members, obtained by POLITICO, sheds more light on the episode: An internal review found that Leach allegedly did not submit the proper paperwork for $235,000 worth of cash withdrawals, debit card charges and hotel and airline expenses. ‘I’m not guilty of any charges,’ Leach said in a brief interview, declining to answer additional questions about the investigation. ‘I’ve talked to my attorney and we both believe and know I am not guilty of any charges.’” Read the report

100 MASTROS — “Rising Gateway Tunnel Price Tag Could Cost Port Authority $800 Million," by WSJ's Paul Berger: “Rising estimates for the new Gateway rail tunnel under the Hudson River could cost the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey an additional $800 million, according to statements made by a trustee of the agency tasked with building Gateway. But spokespeople for New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo say costs remain preliminary and no decision has been made to increase Port Authority funding. The Port Authority has already committed $2.7 billion to cover debt service for the first phase of Gateway, which will improve reliability and double capacity on the two-track stretch of rail line between Newark, N.J., and New York City.” Read the report

CAN YOU HEAR ME NOW? — I was on WNYC’s All Things Considered to talk about my Fulop administration story yesterday in which the mayor’s top aides allegedly recorded themselves trying to rig a bid in favor of a company favored by the mayor’s administration. Fulop tweeted his response, which went a little further than his spokeswoman’s statements to me and even took a swipe at Dominick Pandolfo, who was one of two city employees deposed about the recording. “We took seriously, Bid was cancelled, reported 2 authorities, other depositions show different facts than article.” Here’s what Fulop isn’t saying: What authorities did you report it to? And the other depositions — where are they, and are they public? And why, if this recording was serious enough for you to alert authorities, did you keep these men in such high ranking positions for so long afterwards?

TWITTER EXCHANGE OF THE DAY: @StevenFulop: “Exciting. Phone bank up + running. 22 ppl 2nite + growing till Election Day! If u have time 2 help email us info@stevenfulop.com #teamfulop” @terrencemcd: “hope they all know how to hang up the phone properly” 

2017

RAISE THEM. RAISE THEM ALL! — “N.J. governor candidate Phil Murphy just said this about taxes,” by NJ Advance Media’s Brent Johnson: “Phil Murphy, the Democratic nominee to succeed Gov. Chris Christie as New Jersey's governor, said Wednesday night he wouldn't raise taxes beyond the $1.3 billion hike he has already proposed on the state's wealthy residents, corporations and legalized marijuana should that money not cover all of his goals. Murphy, a former U.S. ambassador to Germany and ex-Goldman Sachs banking executive, has said money from the tax increase will be prioritized for public-worker pensions, education and transportation. But speaking during a town hall forum co-hosted by NJ.com, Murphy said he hopes to institute new programs like universal pre-kindergarten and free community college tuition on top of that.” Read the report

—“WATCH: Phil Murphy Q&amp;A broadcast from NJ.com town hall” Read the report

—“Climate change experts assess NJ’s future” Read the report

—"Environmental Rankings Up for NJ Democrats, Down for Republicans” Read the report

THE TRUMP ERA

“How President Trump's tax plan affects New Jersey and what we still don't know,” by The Record’s Herb Jackson: “Working poor people could owe no income tax, filing a return could get much simpler, and there would even be a new credit for caring for elderly relatives under a tax "framework" proposed Wednesday by President Trump and Republican leaders in Congress. But a tax deduction that New Jersey uses almost more than any other state, the write-off for state income and local property taxes, would be eliminated. The plan cuts the top corporate tax rate dramatically and creates a new top rate for small businesses that is lower than the top rate for individuals. It also eliminates two taxes paid entirely by the rich.” Read the report

LATEST SMITH CHALLENGER WAS A ONE-YEAR-OLD SMITH TOOK OFFICE – “Democrat seeks to unseat Chris Smith in NJ,” by Observer’s Christian Hetrick: “Spurred by President Trump’s election last year, Democrats are lining up to challenge several longtime Republican congressmen in New Jersey, even in districts considered safe GOP territory. Joshua Welle is one of three Democrats seeking to unseat Republican Rep. Chris Smith, who has represented the 4th congressional district since 1981. Welle, a 37-year-old Navy veteran who said he was ‘a centrist at heart,’ is announcing a campaign for the seat. ‘I think I can win because of the people I’m meeting every day in the district who have woken up after Trump’s election,’ Welle told Observer on Tuesday. ‘We are going to see a wave in this district, assuming we have the right candidate.’” Read the report

—“These N.J. companies reveal which politicians get their cash. Why won't others?” Read the report

LOCAL

WELCOME TO PATERSON: 0 DAYS WITHOUT A CORRUPTION SCANDAL — “Paterson: Official in OT scandal among those on mayoral list,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “A candidate being considered for interim mayor took more than $15,000 in improper overtime when he was Paterson’s business administrator and ended up getting suspended for two months. After returning from that suspension in 2012, then-business administrator Charles Thomas began repaying the city a total of $15,376 for the improper overtime with biweekly deductions from his paychecks, according to public records. That $15,376 is separate from the $5,600 Thomas returned to the city for erroneous overtime he received in 2011 involving the historic floods that hit Paterson after Hurricane Irene, according to city records.” Read the report

SURELY EVERYONE ELSE IN EVERY OTHER TOWN WILL GET THIS LENIENCY AS WELL — “10 charged with fraud in Lakewood could avoid conviction,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Stacey Barchenger: “Ten Lakewood residents charged in a sweeping welfare fraud investigation have applied for a court program that could help them avoid criminal convictions. Eight of the 26 people charged earlier this year appeared in criminal court in Ocean County on Wednesday morning. Taking turns and with attorneys standing by, they appeared before Judge Linda G. Baxter in a packed, green-tinged basement courtroom. Six indicated through attorneys during Wednesday's brief court hearing that they would apply for pretrial intervention, an early resolution program that would avoid trials. They are: Tzvi and Estee Braun, Samuel and Esther Serhofer, and Yisroel and Rachel Merkin.” Read the report

AC IS DOPE — “Atlantic City’s tourism district has a needle problem. It can be fixed,” by Route 40’s Elinor Comlay: “Atlantic City’s tourism district is home to New Jersey’s biggest needle exchange. The Oasis Drop In Center on Tennessee Avenue gives out thousands more needles than are returned each week. The streets near hotels, casinos, restaurants and parks are strewn with orange caps and used needles. First responders say they are as afraid of accidental needle-sticks as of gunshots. And some parents won’t let their children use the city’s main public library, just a block from the needle exchange.” Read the report

MY COMPETITION HAS BEEN ELIMINATED. EMAIL ME FOR SHIRT PRICES — “Trenton school official resigns after allegedly selling knockoff T-shirts at work for profit, sources say” Read the report

—“Demolition of 101-year-old Camden High can begin, state says” Read the report

—“Garfield BOE: Past issues led to decision not to rehire superintendent” Read the report

—“N.J. Supreme Court won't hear Jersey City appeal of reval contract case” Read the report

—“Jackson zoning board member grabbed gun before child porn arrest, cops say” Read the report

—“Stalker ex-cop going to prison after helping gang bosses terrorize Shore town” Read the report

—“Middletown school district wants its state money back” Read the report here

EVERYTHING ELSE 

WELCOME TO THE LAND OF SPRAY TANS — “Golf tournament in N.J. to host 3 former U.S. presidents,” by NJ Advance Media’s Ted Sherman: “It'll be a tee-off like no other. Three former U.S. presidents are scheduled to open this year's Presidents Cup tournament at Liberty National Golf Club in Jersey City on Thursday, the PGA announced today. Presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton will be on the course at the first tee to mark the start of the matches, which are played every two years.” Read the report

THIS IS NOT SURPRISING — “South Jersey clergyman says his anti-hate messages got him hate,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Kevin Riordan: “Rev. Ryan Paetzold came to municipal court in Evesham Township Wednesday morning hoping to finally come face to face with the man who he alleges tried to intimidate him with threatening Online posts for taking ‘a stand against hate.’ The Audubon clergyman will have to wait for such an encounter. The hearing was postponed at the request of an attorney for the accused. Paetzold, 36, said he was the target of a brief but ominous series of Facebook postings by the self-professed supporter of white supremacy and wanted to hear the man’s response in court to his complaint. He said Tuesday that he filed the complaint with police in Evesham Township, where he lives, after the man, whom authorities later identified as Joseph Baird, 41, of the 2000 block of East Elkhart Street in Philadelphia, posted what the pastor described as a ‘call to arms’ for other white supremacists upset by his anti-white supremacy, pro-LGBT messages.” Read the report

MAGGOT BRAIN — “Wawa comes out swinging against man's maggot video claim,” by NJ Advance Media’s Kevin Shea: “Wawa says their internal investigation of a customer's video of what appears to be maggots crawling out of a cheesesteak he bought at the new Ewing store shows no evidence to support the video's claims. In a more complete statement about the incident, Wawa says: ‘Outside of this single, unauthenticated video, our robust internal investigation shows there is no evidence that substantiates the claims made in the video. In fact, we believe the circumstances described in the video are highly unlikely, if not impossible to occur in our store environment.’” Read the report

WE’RE ALL GOING TO DIE — “North Jersey region among 'most active' earthquake zones,” by The Record’s Matt Fagan: “Northern New Jersey, which straddles a significant ancient crack in the earth's crust known as the Ramapo Fault, recorded 16 earthquakes last year, an unusually high number for the area. It had been relatively quiet this year, until geologists recorded a 1.3 magnitude quake on Saturday afternoon in Morris Plains ... Earthquakes are generally less frequent and less intense in the northeast compared to the U.S. Pacific Coast, according to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. But due to geological differences between the regions, earthquakes of similar magnitude affect an area 10 times larger in the Northeast compared to the West Coast.” Read the report

—“I'm a leftist, not a Nazi, says N.J. professor at center of Hitler video controversy” Read the report

—“Feds order N.J. companies to stop selling skin-whitening injections, creams” Read the report

—“Fairleigh Dickinson University inaugurates eighth president” Read the report

WOMEN RULE NEWSLETTER – POLITICO’s Women Rule series, produced in partnership with founding partners Google and the Tory Burch Foundation, is a journalism series dedicated to exploring women's leadership in politics, policy and their communities. Stay up to speed on what’s happening in the Women Rule community with our monthly newsletter. This month’s edition features a podcast on America’s opioid epidemic with two leading women from the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy, a Q&amp;A with Kelly Ward, executive director of the National Democratic Redistricting Committee, plus job updates from community members making strides in their careers. A special thank you to the 2017 Women Rule presenting sponsor Chevron. Subscribe: here. 

 

--Want to make an impact? POLITICO New Jersey has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Garden State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how:jshapiro@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC