
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

06/19/2018 07:25 AM EDT

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

One of the hardest parts about covering New Jersey politics is trying to catch the bills lawmakers try to sneak by you in June and January. 


Story Continued Below

I think I caught one yesterday, when the Assembly Budget Committee was slated to take up a bill introduced just last week by Assemblyman John McKeon (D-Essex). (The committee is instead convening today.) 

The bill isn’t exactly easy to comprehend. But basically, so far as I can tell, it does this: In January, Christie signed a similarly-rushed bill that allowed some politicians — including former Camden Mayor Dana Redd, whose pensionable salary went from about $90,000 to $275,000 — to reenter the pension system after they were forced out after being elected to new offices. This all follows a 2007 law that forced newly elected officials into defined contribution plans instead.

At least two of those lawmakers, Assemblyman Ralph Caputo and state Sen. Jim Beach, are already receiving pensions for their previous elected offices. Under the law Christie signed in January, if they want to improve their pensions they’ll have to stop receiving payments, re-enroll and buy back time. Under the new bill, they won’t have to buy back any time, and once they retire they can request their pensions be adjusted to reflect the new, better formula — more years, in Beach’s case, and to reflect a legislative salary, in Caputo’s case. I have no idea how many local officials this could potentially apply to. 

Clearly this is what New Jerseyans are clamoring for. Read my full story here.

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — Vitale aide Steph Albanese

WHERE’S MURPHY? At the Trenton Transit Center at noon for a budget press conference, joined by NJ Transit Chair Diane Scaccetti and NJ Transit Executive Director Kevin Corbett.

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “Let’s all have a shell-a-bration.” — Gov. Phil Murphy to Princeton elementary school students, just before signing the bill to designate the bog turtle the New Jersey State Reptile

WHAT TRENTON MADE

BARCLAY OUT — Assemblyman from South Jersey charged with domestic violence, will resign seat, by POLITICO's Matt Friedman and Ryan Hutchins: A South Jersey lawmaker plans to resign after being arrested earlier this month on domestic violence charges, POLITICO New Jersey has confirmed. Assemblyman Arthur Barclay (D-Camden) was arrested June 7, according to New Jersey Globe, which obtained three pages from the police report. He was charged with simple assault, according to the police report. “It happened,” Barclay, who is vice chairman of the Assembly Law and Public Safety Committee, told the website. “I don’t want to talk about it. It is what it is. It happened. I just want to move forward." Read the report 

NEVER MIND ALL THOSE TIMES WE VOTED FOR THE MILLIONAIRES TAX — Lawmakers to Murphy: ‘We will not be bullied into doing the wrong thing’, by POLITICO's Ryan Hutchins and Katherine Landergan: Democratic legislative leaders said Monday they will charge ahead with their own state budget, brushing aside a promise by Gov. Phil Murphy to veto their proposal. In a rare joint press conference, Senate President Steve Sweeney and Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin said they believe they have developed a fair, balanced budget that funds more key programs than the governor’s $37.4 billion spending plan. The lawmakers said they were able to do so without raising taxes on millionaires or boosting the sales tax, as Murphy has proposed. Instead, their budget imposes a two-year surcharge on corporations, finds savings from audits and makes some other maneuvers. Their $36.2 billion budget plan would leave an ending fund balance of $757 million. Sweeney and Coughlin said they have a duty to move forward, even if Murphy isn’t on board. Read the report here.

—Murphy: I’ll veto budget lawmakers plan to pass this week, by POLITICO's Ryan Hutchins: In one of his most aggressive confrontations yet with fellow Democrats who control the Legislature, the governor told reporters in Trenton that he would not put his name to any spending plan that doesn’t include a sustainable new revenue stream. He said the plan described to him by lawmakers does not meet the definition, leaving the state with a $164 million deficit, though he had not yet seen the proposal that was announced later in the day. “I will not sign any budget based on numbers that I don’t believe are sound and substantial,” Murphy said. “I do not believe theirs are. I will not certify a budget based on gimmicks.” Read the report

—“Deja vu all over again: NJ Gov. Corzine and the 2006 government shutdown" Read the report

—“Raise the sales tax? The business tax? Dueling Democratic budgets bring N.J. closer to a shutdown” Read the report

—“Welcome to Trenton: Murphy, the adult in the room, is pelted with budget gimmicks | Moran” Read the column

— Legislative budget proposes increasing school aid by $347.5M Read the report

MURPHY’S LAW — “How Phil Murphy squandered a chance to sell his tax increases and budget plans,” by The Record’s Charles Stile: “Murphy has put together a bold, liberal vision that includes raising a slew of taxes that, by and large, inflict only a minor cost on middle-class residents. It's a message not many people have heard, because Murphy never launched the hard sell, the ‘inform and engage’ strategy deployed by former Gov. Jim Florio, who backed a massive tax increase and is now touting it in his new political memoir.” Read the column 

FROM THE EXPERT IN SHUTDOWN MESSAGING — “Source overhears Christie, on train, saying he’s helping Sweeney with budget,” by NJ Globe’s David Wildstein: “Chris Christie was working the phone from an Amtrak Acela train to Washington this afternoon, bashing Gov. Phil Murphy and saying that he’s helping Senate President Steve Sweeney with his messaging, according to a source who sat near the former governor and was able to hear his end of the conversation. Christie claims to be 'coordinating' with Sweeney and said that he told the senate president to call Murphy’s bluff on the veto. He thinks Democrats might have enough votes to override Murphy’s veto, and said he was calling some Republican state senators to ‘feel out if they would support a budget veto override’ without supporting any tax increase. That would have to be in a separate bill, the source said Christie was overheard saying. ‘The brazenness of discussing all this on the phone in an open train is wild,’ the source told the New Jersey Glove. According to the source, Christie opined that Murphy misread the gubernatorial election, say the new governor believed he had a mandate, but ‘in reality, after eight years of Republican rule and Trump in the White House, any Democrat would have won.’” Read the report

TURTLE POWER — “At long last, New Jersey has an official state reptile,” by POLITCO’s Matt Friedman: “Gov. Phil Murphy isn’t too bogged down by the budget process to help out the endangered bog turtle. Hours after holding a press conference at which he said he would veto the budget bill lawmakers are preparing to send him, the governor on Monday decided that rather than be a bog turtle bill shredder, he would cut the turtle some slack and sign a bill designating it as the official state reptile. ‘This is a totally cool moment for me,’ Murphy told an assembly of students at the Riverside Elementary School in Princeton. ‘I think we should, after this, let’s all have a shell-a-bration.’ It was enough to warm the heart of even the most cold-blooded creature.” Read the report

—“N.J. man arrested in Louisiana turtle bust” Read the report

TRAGEDY ON ROUTE 80 — Lawmakers mull school bus safety regulations after fatal Route 80 crash, by POLITICO’s Linh Tat: Three-point seat belts, better communication between agencies when a driver has had his or her license suspended, and an examination of whether senior citizens should be allowed to transport students were among several ideas raised during a legislative hearing Monday on improving school bus safety. The joint hearing by the Assembly and state Senate Transportation committees came a month after a fatal bus crash on Route 80 in Morris County that killed one teacher and one student from Paramus and injured dozens more. The driver, Hudy Muldrow Sr., had allegedly tried to cross three lanes of traffic to use a turnaround in the middle of the highway when a truck hit the bus. Read the report

I TAX THE RAINS DOWN IN ABSECON — "Does 'rain tax' have a chance of staunching state's stormwater runoff?" by NJ Spotlight’s Tom Johnson: “It’s been a system that has been used by most states to deal with an issue that has vexed policymakers in New Jersey for years — increased flooding and pollution fouling state waters with runoff from storms. But critics call it a rain tax, just another policy to grow government bureaucracy. Nevertheless, legislation to allow counties and towns to impose fees on parking lots and other impervious surfaces to fund stormwater management won approval from a key committee yesterday. The bill (S-1073) has been kicking around for years. Previously vetoed by former Gov. Chris Christie, it is viewed by proponents as a way of finally tackling what is projected as a $1 billion problem: fixing aging stormwater systems that exacerbate flooding and pollution across the state.” Read the report

PVSC ABOUT AS ACCOUNTABLE TO THE PUBLIC AS EVER — “Pay hikes planned for Passaic Valley Water Commission officials, Joey Torres' daughter,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “Five high-ranking officials at the Passaic Valley Water Commission are in position to get raises of $20,000 each at the agency's monthly meeting on Wednesday. The commission also is scheduled to vote on whether to give a $12,000 promotion to the daughter of Paterson's former mayor, Joey Torres. Clarissa Torres had submitted her resignation from her water commission job in March 2017, when her father was indicted on corruption charges. But she ended up staying on the agency’s payroll and is now on track to get a 17 percent salary hike with her appointment to an $83,449 job as provisional personnel technician. Her salary as assistant personnel technician was $71,499, according to commission records. Torres’ father had appointed three of the water commission members who will vote on her proposed increase, including his longtime political ally, Idida Rodriguez, the commission’s president. ‘We don’t respond to any questions before or until the meeting,’ said Jim Duprey, the commission’s business administrator. ‘We have nothing to say ahead of time.’” Read the report

—“Murphy's AG orders bias training for N.J. State Police troopers, state lawyers” Read the report

—“Long-delayed medical marijuana dispensary finally opens in N.J.'s most populated region” Read the report

—“N.J. Policy Perspective: 2 ways legislative leaders should target the wealthy” Read the op-ed

—“Anti-gun violence mural hung at Trenton shooting scene before shots were fired” Read the report

—“State audit of CRDA due out this summer” Read the report

—“New Jersey looks to remember Anthony Bourdain with 'official food trail'” Read the report

THE TRUMP ERA

CANDIDATE TRULY BELIEVES BLACKS WON EQUAL RIGHTS IN THE 1920S — “Congressional nominee’s views on race causing headaches for New Jersey GOP,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “Seth Grossman isn’t apologizing. Grossman, the surprise Republican nominee for Congress in New Jersey’s 2nd District, was caught on video during a GOP candidates forum this spring calling diversity ‘a bunch of crap and un-American.’ … This is the new reality New Jersey Republicans are facing in the era of President Donald Trump. Grossman, who has campaigned as an adherent to Trump, is running for the seat that’s been held for the past 24 years by moderate GOP Rep. Frank LoBiondo, one of a number of House Republicans retiring ahead of the midterm elections … ‘If the national Democrats try to paint me as a Nazi, KKK, white supremacist, I think that the truth of my character will overcome the money they spend to try to destroy me,” Grossman said in a phone interview … Though Grossman is unsure of the motivations of the person who asked the question — he thinks it was either a Democratic plant or someone aligned with one of his primary rivals — he called it an ‘ambush’ and ‘gotcha’ question. ‘The context was you had four white guys debating each other, and it was maybe my interpretation, but it seemed to be an accusatory tone: ’You guys, as the face of the Republican Party, what can you do to bring more diversity to the Republican party?’ … I found that to be an insulting question,’ Grossman said during a 40-minute phone conversation with POLITICO. ‘Maybe it was that. Maybe it was because i was hungry — it was an hour-and-a-half debate. But I responded the way I did.’ During the interview, Grossman elaborated on his views on race. He said he believes African-Americans in New Jersey won the civil rights struggle by the early 20th century, and that minority groups have been kept down by social programs put in place ostensibly to help them.” Read the report

WHY NOT GIVE A $1 BILLION LOAN TO A PROFITABLE DEVELOPMENT THAT DOESN’T NEED IT? — “Hudson Yards developer seeking same federal funds Gateway has struggled to access,” by POLITICO’s Dana Rubinstein: “While a politically fraught battle for funding continues to paralyze the Gateway project, an enormous real estate project on Manhattan's West Side is seeking more than $1 billion in financing from the same tranche of federal funds that Gateway has struggled to access. The Hudson Yards megaproject is pursuing a low-interest federal loan to build a platform over a chunk of the West Side rail yards, several sources told POLITICO. The platform will support millions of square feet of lucrative luxury apartments, office and retail space. Should the federal government grant its request for a loan, developer Related Companies stands to save millions, thanks to the loan’s low interest rate when compared with private market financing … The 18 million-square-foot Hudson Yards development … would be benefiting from the Railroad Rehabilitation &amp; Improvement Financing federal loan program, even as the transit project above which Hudson Yards is situated — the Gateway project — has had trouble accessing the same funds. Further, Hudson Yards is already considered a financial success for the developer, which financed its first platform over the rail yards without similar government subsidy at a time when its properties in the area were far less valuabl” Read the report

— “Trump’s shadow hovers over the U.S. Senate race,” by Carl Golden for InsiderNJ: “A Republican candidate for United States Senate from New Jersey confronts history (President Richard Nixon led the ticket when the state last elected a Republican), a unified Democratic party, a voter registration deficit of 900,000, and a state party struggling to climb out of its financial hole and regain viability. As if these were not obstacles enough, this year’s nominee, retired biopharmaceutical executive Bob Hugin, faces an extra burden imposed by the nagging of the Never Trumpers and the Ever Trumpers, elements in the party who seem to enjoy quarrelling in public over how Hugin should deal with the president. Those with a visceral dislike of Trump have transferred their anger to Hugin over his generous past support for the president while an equally vocal bloc has insisted that success is achievable only if he fully embraces the president and his policies. In addition to their built-in advantages, Democrats have no such distractions, even though their candidate, Sen. Robert Menendez, spent two months last year in a Federal courtroom.” Read the column

CAME, SAUDINOED, CONQUERED — “Bergen Sheriff snubs former attorney John McCann to back Democrat for Congress,” by The Record’s Richard Cowen: “Michael Saudino, the Bergen County sheriff, chose to throw his support behind a fellow Democrat in the 5th Congressional District rather than break ranks and back his former legal counsel and right-hand man, Republican John McCann. Saudino, a former Republican who switched parties before launching his reelection campaign in 2016, said Rep. Josh Gottheimer, a Democrat from Wyckoff, is a bipartisan voice who during his first 18 months representing the 5th Congressional District has been a strong backer of law enforcement and combating terrorism in Bergen County. ‘No one fights harder than Josh to bring back the grants and resources we need for equipment and training and for towns, like Paramus, to hire more officers,’ Saudino said. "And no one is tougher on terror than Josh; he's fighting to make sure all of us in law enforcement have the tools we need to combat ISIS-inspired lone-wolf terrorists and prevent attacks before they occur."” Read the report

I WANT TO DEFY THE LOGIC OF ALL TAX LAWS — “We're legally protecting property taxpayers from Trump, Jersey Democrats tell IRS,” by NJ Advance Media’s Jonathan D. Salant: “New Jersey's efforts to protect the federal deduction for property taxes are perfectly legal, the state's Democratic federal lawmakers told the Internal Revenue Service Monday … In a letter to Acting IRS Commissioner David Kautter, New Jersey Democrats said the charitable funds that municipalities will be able to set up as a way to get around the $10,000 cap in the Republican tax law are similar to tax-deductible accounts already set up in other states. The letter said the IRS action ‘raises serious suspicions of political targeting. The nation's tax laws must be applied fairly and equally, regardless of the state in which the taxpayers live.’” Read the report

YOU’RE STILL YOUNG, THAT’S YOUR FAULT, THERE’S SO MUCH YOU HAVE TO KNOW — “An arrest, a wrecked SUV and a medevac flight: A perilous 5 months for Gov. Murphy's son,” by NJ Advance Media’s Erin Banco and Claude Brodesser-Akner: “In a small, walnut-paneled district courthouse more than 200 miles from New Jersey, prosecutors earlier this month moved to dismiss a low-level complaint pending since last fall against the 20-year-old son of Gov. Phil Murphy. Joshua Murphy, a former student at Tufts University, had faced charges of underage drinking and disorderly conduct, according to court records. The governor's eldest son was arrested after an incident on Halloween night that seemingly spiraled out of control after police said he screamed an obscenity at a campus cop while dressed in costume and walking with two young women, a Budweiser cup in hand, according to a police report. The incident on the Tufts campus, according to police, ended with Josh Murphy on the ground, in handcuffs. Alcohol-fueled encounters with police and underage drinking are hardly a unique transgression, especially for college students. But for Murphy, who actively campaigned for his father, appearing on his behalf on college campuses and in television commercials with his family, it was just one in a series of episodes that could be distracting for any parent -- much less the high-powered governor of the nation's most densely populated state.” Read the report

—“Malinowski hounds lance over immigration stance and congressman counters” Read the report

IMMIGRATION POLL — The advocacy group Equity Forward polled several districts on the Trump administration policy of separating migrant children from their parents at the border, including New Jersey’s 7th. The poll of 400 likely voters by the Democratic outfit Global Strategy Group found 61 percent oppose the Trump administration policy. 72 percent are “very” or “somewhat concerned about it. The group provided the whole poll, which you can read here. Other interesting numbers: Trump’s approval rating in the district is 49 percent positive and 48 percent negative. Lance is viewed 44 percent favorable to 30 percent unfavorable. 

—“Gov. Murphy: My son's life should not be scrutinized by the media” Read the report

—Stile: “Trenton shooting puts Phil Murphy's gun law agenda in spotlight” Read the column

—“Murphy: Star-Ledger turned ‘my son’s youth into click bait’” Read the report

—“How often are mass shootings in public places in New Jersey?” Read the report

—“Booker: Republican inaction on immigration ‘outrageous’, ‘unacceptable’” Read the report

LOCAL

TRENTON MASS SHOOTING — “Trenton grieves after a shooting at event that was ‘a beacon’,” by The New York Times’ Nick Corasaniti and Annie Correal: “Trenton is a capital city of more than 84,000 people that can often feel like two urban areas rolled into one. On State Street, beyond the State House with its golden dome, sit clean brick buildings that house deep-pocketed lobbying firms and a cafe where state employees in business suits were having lunch at outdoor tables on Monday afternoon. Yet a short drive in nearly any direction reveals boarded-up houses, sagging roofs, vacant lots and cracked roads. Signs pledging to buy homes in any condition for cash hang from the utility poles. In this bleak landscape, Art All Night has been a bright spot — an annual 24-hour art show featuring the paintings of children alongside works by the city’s growing artists’ community. A point of local pride, it has also been the centerpiece of an effort to revitalize downtown and repurpose its warehouses as art galleries, studios and event spaces. That light was dimmed over the weekend when the festival became the site of a mass shooting early Sunday — leaving one dead and around two dozen injured — in what the authorities described as a showdown between rival gangs. ‘It was our worst nightmare,’ said Lauren Otis, the executive director of Artworks Trenton, the nonprofit that produces the even”  Read the report

—“Art festival shooter worried about life after prison: ‘I accomplished nothing’” Read the report

—Parker: “Silence contributes to Trenton’s apathy and violence” Read the column

—Kelly: “Can down-on-its-luck Trenton recover from a mass shooting?” Read the column

—“Murphy vows support for Trenton after shooting at all-night arts festival” Read the report

STILL, NOBODY BELIEVES THIS — “‘I wasn’t in a great place’: 20 months after Fulop dropped out of gubernatorial race, he details why — and how he’s rebuilt his brand,” by ROI-NJ’s Tom Bergeron: “Fulop said he came to the realization that there wasn’t a path to victory for him. A realization, he said, that came when he realized the other supposed front-runner, state Senate President Steve Sweeney, also wasn’t going to run. (Sweeney dropped out of the race eight days later.) ‘Ultimately, people ask me why I made the decision not to run,’ he said. ‘There were all these crazy theories about it. I was going to be called as a witness to Bridgegate; didn’t happen. There were health issues, there was a scandal. None of that stuff materialized now that we look back a year and a half later. It was really just a simple calculation, and nothing more than that.’” Read the report 

PATERSON — “Luxury housing for Paterson? Developer Charles Florio is going to give it a try,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “Developer Charles Florio is proposing to build 250 units of luxury housing in Paterson — a $45 million project that would include an indoor swimming pool and fitness center as well as a rooftop pool, doorman service and valet parking. Florio, Paterson’s most prominent and controversial developer, wants to put a 10-story building on a vacant lot near the corner of Fair and Straight streets, just blocks from an area plagued by drug addicts and the dealers who supply them. ‘People say I’m crazy for wanting to put something like this in Paterson. I say, ‘Why not Paterson?’’ said Florio. ‘I see opportunity where nobody else does.’ Political leaders and community activists who are often critical of developers’ actions in Paterson said they welcome Florio’s proposal.’” Read the report

—“In Palisades Park, digital parking meters a chance at a camera windfall” Read the column

—“Ocean County teen's duct-tape tuxedo may nab him a scholarship” Read the report

—“Disgraced ex-jail official loses second bid to get full pension” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

POLICE SHOOTING — “Security guard tells cops suspect is wanted for killing. Minutes later, a woman is dead,” by NJ Advance Media’s Matt Gray: “A Marshalls employee who confronted suspected shoplifters trying to flee the Deptford Township store June 9 told a dispatcher that one of them was wanted on a warrant for manslaughter. The incident ended with a township police officer shooting into a moving SUV, killing the driver as she allegedly tried to run him down with her vehicle. The phone call is part of a redacted set of audio files released by Gloucester County on Monday afternoon in response to an Open Public Records Act requests. The phone call answers the lingering question of how police learned one of the suspects was possibly a killer, but it doesn't explain where the store employee got this information. No records have been revealed to show that any of the three were wanted on a warrant for manslaughter or homicide. The trio were known to Marshalls' personnel from previous thefts, according to prosecutors.” Read the report

I’M MOVING TO PENNSYLVANIA SOON, SO NJ WILL COOL DOWN — “N.J. is one of the fastest warming states in the U.S. Here's what that means,” by NJ Advance Media’s Carla Astudillo and Michael Sol Warren: “These are just some of the things that climate change may cause. But most conversations about the health of the planet and its changing climate focus on the global scale. So what exactly does climate change mean for New Jersey? A new analysis released Monday by the Associated Press breaks down how temperatures have risen around the U.S. over the past century. The numbers show that New Jersey is among the fastest warming states in the country.” Read the report

—“Off-duty corrections officer rescues unconscious woman from burning car” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC