Trump was president in 2014 and 2016?!

WHOOPS! Liberals and former President Barack Obama officials stormed to Twitter to expose how immigrant children in detention facilities sleep in cages and on the floors under President Donald Trump.

One problem. These photos come from stories published in 2014 and 2016…when Obama was president.



AZCentral.com published the article “First peek: Immigrant children flood detention center” on June 18, 2014. It says it was updated on December 9, 2016.

Both dates are when Obama was president (emphasis mine):

On Wednesday morning, bowing to pressure from politicians, the CBP allowed journalists to tour this warehouse of humanity.

The tour dispelled rumors of ill treatment. The CBP agents in the building seem to be genuinely compassionate in their interactions with the children. The facility is clean and air-conditioned.

But in essence, it is a juvenile prison camp.

The children, mostly of high-school and junior-high-school age, are housed behind 18-foot-high chain-link fences topped with razor wire.

They are segregated by age and gender: There is one area for those 12 and under. There are areas for boys and girls ages 13 to 15, and still more for boys and girls ages 16 and 17.

Yet, people like Obama’s former speechwriter Jon Favreau, Women’s March leader Linda Sarsour, fake black activist Shaun King, and reporters from CNN tweeted it out like it’s happening now.

Amazing pic.twitter.com/rMX3E38LS3

— Stephen Miller (@redsteeze) May 27, 2018



Hello @antonio4ca Why did you delete this tweet? Is it because this was 2014 and you are no longer outraged because who this all happened under? Are you no longer speechless? Help explain, thanks. pic.twitter.com/Qe8Pr9Zac1

— Stephen Miller (@redsteeze) May 28, 2018



.@Hadas_Gold, “gave impression” is a funny way of saying “I got caught lying.” pic.twitter.com/VDqZZrYGSU

— Ryan Saavedra ???????? (@RealSaavedra) May 28, 2018



In fairness to @jonfavs, he was very engaged when that immigration article was published on June 18th 2014 and thereafter. pic.twitter.com/Qlqi3q6pLU

— Jimmy (@JimmyPrinceton) May 28, 2018



pic.twitter.com/BboXkEgm3g

— Stephen Miller (@redsteeze) May 28, 2018



The activists also posted an article from April 29, 2016, that showed the ICE facility Karnes County Residential Center showing off its specialized transport buses, which include baby car seats.

Thing is, they have these buses to meet safety requirements. They use these buses to take kids and parents on field trips, medical appointments, court, etc. The buses don’t even have bars on the windows or screens:

Due to the unique transportation criteria, KCRC officials worked very closely with GTI Vice President Ed Stubbs and Corporate Fleet Manager Paul Gossard, to outfit and configure the bus cabins to meet ICE requirements and to be compliant with the terms of this unique contract. Both buses are outfitted with standard commercial grade cushioned seating. Each seat has a convertible child safety seat and is equipped with a DVD system with four drop down screens to provide entertainment to the children with onboard movies during transport missions.

At every loading, children are assisted into the safety seat systems either by a nurse, a teacher, or case manager, and secured into the harness system. Once this is done, the GTI drivers check each child to ensure correct application and fit to the harness system. The GTI drivers have all received specialized training and are certified child restraint seat installers. All other passengers not required to be in a safety seat, are also checked for seat belt systems being latched and secure.

.@MariaESalinas you lost this but it was found pic.twitter.com/laDo1QKCG9

— Legal Insurrection (@LegInsurrection) May 28, 2018



CNN contributor:



Harpar’s Bazaar digital editor:



Former Obama analyst:



NBC reporter:



This manufactured outrage has become tiresome.

Well, at least they all got caught trashing obama!

No surprises.. 

BTW for anyone that can find, copy and paste a pic’s URL
try this… https://tineye.com/

John Fav’reau – for when you want FAKE News direct from Obama’s rump.

Some people are plumb dumb.

Liberals depend on that to advance their agenda

And they are usually the most arrogant.

This is significantly dumb…It’s the Mt Everest of Dumb…

In fact, this climbing the Mt Everest of Dumb…and when you’ve reached the peak…setting up a ladder, climbing to the top of that ladder so your dumb can be… “Just a little bit higher”!!!! 🙂

They count on the SJW crowd not having enough brain cells to rub together to get outraged over something from the past…. as always, and don’t give a crap that it was under Duh One, even if called on it. After all, it still has to be happening under Trump so now its bad, bad, bad. bad. Get it?

The same taint applies to the media’s staged wringing of hands over the so called “Libya Effect,” when discussing the possibility of a NORK deal. Not a one of them showed concern about such matters when Obama, Clinton and Powers doublecrossed Gaddafi. Worthy of note? Obama and Co’s direct role in creating the Libya Scenario have been airbrushed from the historical  picture.

History retconned by leftists.

Miller is referencing JournoList 2.0

The original was an online chat group of journalists who coordinated their message so that competing narratives wouldn’t drown each other out.

Plus, if every major news org is putting out the same story, it must be true. Else why would so many reporters independently arrive at the same conclusion, right? Right?

And these jackasses have the audacity to whine about how we no longer trust them. 

The coordinated airing of this pic only proves that JournoList 2.0 is back up and running. In super secret mode this time.

And not a single journalist has the integrity to out their little Propaganda Push Club.

Same as none of them have given us the list of “journalists” who took bribes from Fusion GPS.

Touche.

https://directorblue.blogspot.com/2010/07/journolist-all-107-members-with-their.html?m=1

Proven traitorList members?

https://directorblue.blogspot.com/2018/05/spygate-medias-conspiracy-against.html?m=1

Msm treason and collision against free Americans.

Tell me what is supposed to happen to children whose parents are arrested, say for robbing banks or driving drunk.  In some countries the children go to prison with their mothers; is that what these people want?

Sadly, we know exactly what they want. They want anyone who comes across the border to not only be released, but to instantly be given US citizenship with full voting rights.  I wish i were joking, but you know I’m not.

The last election really scared them. They were positive the racially divisive caravan had permanently installed  the Democrats in perpetual power, in a STASI like federal government that was on the brink of actually outlawing the Constitution itself.

Report from the 2018 Mobile World Conference.  Be afraid. Be very Deep State Afraid.

https://www.trunews.com/stream/trunews-monday-may-28-2018

This mistake also makes me wonder just how long they have been getting away with it. Because they got busted due to complacency.

Here’s a example. The first time a guy cheats on his wife he is super careful about it. He drops by the gym on the way back home to shower off his lovers perfume. Double checks his shirt collar for lipstick marks. Runs the car thru the local carwash to vacuum up any stray hairs.

But that takes a lot of energy and effort. Let’s call it an expenditure of Level 7. 

He does this a few times and realizes his wife’s scrutiny level is only 3. Sure, he’s been out late a few nights, is acting distant, but she not at all suspicious.

So the guy runs the numbers and asks himself “why am I wasting all this time energy and money maintaining a Level 7 Deception the when her Scrutiny Level is only 3? I can dial it down to 4 and still get away with it. So he makes less of an effort to cover his tracks, he gets complacent. And then she comes home 15 mins early and catches him in their bed with his mistress.

That’s where we are at now. And the media wants us to believe the was the first time?  The first time but they were so comfortable with it they only relied on a 15 min buffer as insurance from getting busted? 

Sure okay. You two just sit there, I going to get this shotgun I just bought and get your opinion on the wood grain. Hang tight sweetie, you too Maria. I’ll be right back.

Decades and decades……..

Husband: Honey….you’re home early???

Wife: Yes, I thought we….Why is there lipstick on your cheek and hickeys on your neck…why is your shirt unbuttoned and your pants on backwards? Why are you wearing woman’s panties on your head and holding a opened condom wrapper…. and who is that naked woman in our bed???

Husband: Well…I don’t have to take this!! If you don’t trust me I guess I’ll just leave!!!!!

So… honey…. come on in. The more the merrier!

(He’s already dead; what’s he got to lose?)

We need the photo of Favreau grabbing the breast of Hillary’s cardboard cutout! https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2008/12/favreaus-sexist-photo-is-no-laughing-matter

You gotta wonder if he’s finally boiled his hands to get the stink off.

Maria Salinas is outraged at the baby seats on the bus.

Side bet she is just peachy with babies in plastic bags labelled “Bio-Hazard: Medical Waste”

MEMO

SUBJ: Request for Immigrant Support

Thank you for selecting our line of sympathetic props. 

Unfortunately, we are unable to fill your order of Stand On Our Backs ™ as all of our child models are still allocated for the Broward County gun grab.

We appreciate your patience.

Marxist Model Mayhem

I don’t believe this was a mistake. They know that most of their LIV supporters will continue to believe that it’s Trump’s fault. Even if you tell them it’s from the Obama era, they’ll say that’s just Fox News lies.

There is this website that produces easily refutable Democratic propaganda Memes. (I’ll not give them any publicity, but it begins “Occupyde*****ts) imagine my absolute joy in smacking my Prog family members who reposted the latest meme from them regarding the horrible treat of migrant children under Trump. Thanks to the hard work by conservative sites who exposed this fraud.  It’s been a good day.

I remember the story AND the pics from 2014…But, 2014 is Ancient History for some people! 

If you want a chuckle read some of the twitter comments from those have realized their mistake…”Yeah, the pics are from 2014 and yes, Obama was in charge….BUT….Trump….ahhh…!!!”  

My favorite so far has been a guy who said, “I didn’t read the news back in 2014…but if I had known about this, I would’ve been mad…but we can’t lose track of the fact that Trump is in charge now!!!!”
He describes himself as, a Artist, Poet, Philosopher and Puppy Parent with informed opinions…???? (yes…he really did)

These lying lies from these lying liars are rationalized because  Trump is literally Hitler, so ‘this is not who we are’ outrage is fake, but accurate, and therefore justified by leftists by any means necessary.

I despise these leftists…

The real outrage is that the so-called parents of these illegal alien kids used them as pawns, placing them in the hands of vicious drug cartels and coyotes to get them illegally across the border.

The kids that were caught by the U.S. government were the lucky ones.  They were in a safe, air-conditioned building where they were being fed and cared for, courtesy of U.S. taxpayers.  The unlucky kids were the ones being raped by cartel members, or used as drug mules, or left to fend for themselves in the hot desert.

But of course, the left is not outraged by the real evil-doers in this situation, but at Trump, who had nothing to do with these kids being used and abused in this manner.

Yep.

This is an example of how liberals vet ‘evidence’ of injustice or anything else, for that matter. If it meets their agenda’s criteria, by golly, it’s true.

Unfortunately the same thing happens on our side too.   Just look at the fake reports today of “Tommy Robinson” being attacked in prison today.

Depends on how one defines ‘our side’, I suppose. I have little  idea who ‘Tommy Robison’ is and I don’t really care. 

Conservatives, being human, are capable of any logical fallacy, of course, but tend to be better at screening and vetting than shoot-from-the-hip leftists. I suspect it’s because conservatives tend to place intellectual rigorousness above emotional reactions, while so many leftists react impulsively to emotional sensory input – like photos of caged children. 

Given an overwhelmingly liberal US media that holds up every instance of conservative whoopsies, it seems like liberal whoopsies like this 2014 photo being held out as evidence of Trump administration injustice to children occur far more often.

When do laws against fraud supersede the 1st amendment?

Always.  Provably, objectively false statements of fact are not protected.

But remember that while all frauds are lies, not all lies are fraud.  The crime of fraud has (if I recall correctly) five elements, and (again if I recall correctly) at most one of them seems to be satisfied by this story.

Pallywood, Part Deux?

Clearly this is indicative of the depth of their reporting skills and background checking.  Or lack thereof…..

Personally, I doubt there’s any grand conspiracy behind using this photo deceptively. I think some liberal saw it, it triggered his/her Trump hatred, confirming his/her anti-Trump bias, and he/she impulsively reacted without checking if the photo was recent or even US/Mexico border kids. 

I’m a retired psychologist. We have these simplistic little quasi-math formulae:

Where E is emotion and I is intellect:

I/E = Sanity (Intellect over emotion)
E/I = Insanity (Emotion over intellect)

Liberals/leftists = E/I

From Baracula’s regime.

My experience on how this works: 

I don’t normally look at Facebook but it was a long weekend and I was sure some of the photos from the weekend festivities would turn up on fb. 

Checked the feed and BOOM five or six people are sharing the 2014 and 2016 photos and they’re getting hundreds of angry reactions and comments along with dozens of shares. Looked at the comments and noted a couple of folks were pointing out that the photos were old and we’re from Obama’s term. Still the majority of comments after the correction were; “you’re always defending that a@@hole, bigot, racist, sexist, orange clown” or close to that. What amazes me is how without any concrete (behavior) evidence a guy born and raised in NYC who has been friends with many minority celebrities,  has hired women to lead multi-million dollar projects, was awarded twice by the NYC NAACP chapter is NOW a bigot and everyone simply accepts it as gospel. 

SJW’s / Liberals are a unique group. They’re also part of the reason I rarely use FB anymore and I’ve had an account since the time you needed a .edu email address to join.

Odd that nobody points out that the bus is equipped the way it is because of rules written by leftist bureaucrats.



Ron Coleman

