Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Max Jaeger


		
		
		
		
	


									July 3, 2018 | 10:54pm
											| Updated July 3, 2018 | 11:09pm
												

Immigrant women separated from their kids and detained on the Texas border say they were forced to stand in the baking sun for hours while Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen toured their detention facility — all so Nielsen wouldn’t hear their tales of woe, according to a report.

Nielsen on Friday visited the Port Isabel Detention Center in Los Fresnos, which houses parents separated from their kids under President Trump’s “zero tolerance” policy on illegal border crossing.

But before she made her rounds, dozens of detainees were rounded up, marched outside and held in a field for two hours as temperatures soared into the 90s, four women among them told The Intercept.

Two of the women had been separated from their teenage sons, and a third was divided from her 6-year-old boy.

They wanted to remain inside to talk to Nielsen, “but the guard said we had to, that it was an order because some important officials were coming,” one woman told the outlet.

While in the yard, the women saw about 10 people wearing street clothes — including one with blond, shoulder-length hair similar to Nielsen’s — enter the facility and leave about two hours later.

They shouted “help us” in Spanish at the person they believed to be Nielsen, but the women said they were too far away to be heard.


Two women said they believe they were sent outside so they would be hidden.

ICE confirmed to The Intercept that Nielsen was at the facility Friday, but said the women went out for “recreation.”

“After coordinating with U.S. Secret Service special agents supporting DHS Secretary Kristjen Nielsen’s June 29 visit to the Port Isabel Detention Center in Los Fresnos, Texas, ICE officers briefly moved detainees from one of the dorms to the soccer field for recreation,” ICE Central and South Texas spokeswoman Nina Pruneda told The Intercept.

“About 62 ICE detainees were involved; Secretary Nielsen spoke to various detainees while she toured the facility.”


			Read Next
		


			
				Hamas used fake dating apps to gain intel on Israeli soldi...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Hamas used fake dating apps to gain intel on Israeli soldi...			
		

Share Selection

76,969

53,374

53,336

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters