


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Once in the custody of Customs and Border Protection, adults who entered the U.S. illegally are handed a flier on the "next steps for families."

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Once in the custody of Customs and Border Protection, adults who will be prosecuted for the misdemeanor charge of illegal entry into the U.S. are handed a flier that details the "next steps for families."
    Beatriz Alvarado/Caller-Times

Two young girls watch a World Cup soccer match on a television from their holding area at the detention center.
(Photo: Ross D. Franklin\AP)

More adults who enter the U.S. illegally, including those who surrender themselves to immigration authorities seeking asylum, are now being prosecuted for the misdemeanor offense through what is known as the new "zero tolerance" policy. 


Adults prosecuted for entering the country are separated from their children because children cannot be jailed with their parents.


More: Here's what you need to know about the 'zero tolerance' policy separating migrant families


More: Immigrant children: Here's what's happening with kids at the border, policywise


More: Trump signs executive order to end immigrant family separations: What we know


Once in the custody of Customs and Border Protection, adults are  handed a flier that details the "next steps for families." 


Once in the custody of Customs and Border Protection, adults are being handed a flyer that details the "next steps for families." (Photo: Screenshot/Department of Homeland Security)

It's unclear how many detained immigrants have used the hotline listed on the flier to seek information about the whereabouts of their children. Officials with Customs and Border Protection have not released further details such as statistics related to the hotline.


It's also unclear how long children typically remain separated from their parents, said Rio Grande Valley Border patrol sector Chief Manuel Padilla. 


"There's not a set standard of how long a child will remain (under the custody) of Health and Human Services," Padilla said Sunday during a news conference at the Customs and Border Protection processing center in McAllen. 


.@CBPSouthTexas’ Manuel Padilla can not specify how long the temporary separation of families can last. pic.twitter.com/I4zIKgHPAT

Here's a breakdown of how families can be reunified, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security: 


This is a developing story. Check back for updates.


Beatriz Alvarado (@CallerBetty) | Twitter


More: These are the Texas shelters where immigrant children separated from parents can end up


More: Separation of immigrant families draws lawmakers, advocates to the border on Father's Day


More: Immigrant children separated from parents: What's the Christian thing to do?


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 


 


 
