
                                                            Politico

Shia Kapos' must-read rundown of political news in the Land of Lincoln

Get the Illinois Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

05/02/2018 07:29 AM EDT

By Natasha Korecki (nkorecki@politico.com ; @natashakorecki) and Kristen East (keast@politico.com ; @kristenicoleast) 

Good Wednesday morning, Illinois. 


Story Continued Below

THE BUZZ: And he’s in. 

Paul Vallas, former Chicago public schools CEO, will formally announce he’s running for mayor today at a late morning news conference. 

Vallas appears ready for the fight, armed with stats from his Daley administration days and heading up schools in Chicago and around the country. Yet he’s bracing for the inevitable attacks from Mayor Rahm Emanuel’s money machine. I happened to run into Vallas last night in Greektown. 

Vallas dined with a group that included former House Speaker (and minority leader) Lee Daniels, who served for two years from 95-97. Daniels is the only person to share the speaker title with Mike Madigan since 1983. 

Here’s an advance piece on Vallas from the Chicago Tribune’s Bill Ruthhart: “Vallas will become the seventh challenger to officially enter the race. Some Emanuel insiders consider Vallas the most credible threat to date, but question whether he’ll have the money and campaign organization to get his message out in a crowded field. Vallas’ advantages are clear: He has a relatively strong political brand, an intricate understanding of City Hall’s inner workings and a penchant to engage on specific issues that could expose other challengers’ lesser grasp of the job’s details. Vallas’ challenges are also clear: It’s been 16 years since his run for governor and CPS tenure. He tends not to deliver a concise, easy-to-understand message. And he acknowledges he will spend little, if any, money on TV commercials, leaving plenty of room for Emanuel and his allies to define him with attack ads.” 

And this is quite the kicker: “In 2015 when soon-to-be-indicted Barbara Byrd-Bennett left as CPS CEO amid a kickback scandal, Vallas said he called the administration to offer his services to help stabilize the district … ‘I was told that I did not pass the loyalty test. And, of course, I proceeded to tell everyone I know about that, because it really pissed me off,’ Vallas said. ‘I knew what that was: It’s not about being loyal to the cause or the mission, it’s about being loyal to the individual. It’s all about politics first and everything else takes a back seat. I didn’t forget that.’” Story here

For more background on Vallas-Emanuel clashes, read Fran Spielman’s January interview with Vallas: here

VETERANS HOME NEWS

— “Rauner: $230M Quincy residence hall key to remedy for Legionnaires’” by AP’s John O’Connor: “Gov. Bruce Rauner’s administration on Tuesday recommended starting fresh at the Quincy veterans’ home beleaguered by Legionnaires’ disease, calling for a state-of-the-art facility on the 130-year-old campus costing $190 million to $230 million. The highly anticipated statement, the result of meetings of two task forces convened by the Republican governor in January, reflects what would be one of the more aggressive capital-construction programs for the state in years. It also has become a political necessity for Rauner, a first-term governor facing re-election in November and thumped repeatedly in recent months by criticism over the persistence of the pneumonia-like malady. It has claimed the lives of 13 frail residents at the home since 2015 and resulted in four more cases in February. “Even though we’ve done everything that the federal experts have told us to do in terms of … managing the water, with the complexity of the piping and the density of the biofilm, we haven’t been able to eliminate 100 percent” of the problem, Rauner said earlier Tuesday, previewing the report for reporters. “We’ll have a new modern facility that has completely new plumbing.” Story here 

— “Email: Top Rauner aide suggested blaming Duckworth for Legionnaires’ deaths,” by WBEZ’s Dave McKinney and Tony Arnold: “The day after WBEZ first reported on the stories of grieving families with loved ones who died from Legionnaires’ disease at the Quincy veterans’ home, a top aide in Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner’s office had an idea: Could they tie the outbreaks to the previous administration? … The governor’s deputy chief of staff, Darlene Senger, floated a novel — if highly politicized — idea to shift blame for the deaths of the elderly Illinois Veterans Home residents. ‘We can maybe tie this back to Duckworth,’ Senger wrote in an email obtained through an open-records request. Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Duckworth, a disabled Iraq War veteran, ran the state agency that oversees the Quincy home under former Governors Pat Quinn and Rod Blagojevich … For her part, Duckworth dismissed the sentiment of the email as baldly political. “I’m shocked that anybody would be focused on political gain when you should be focused on veterans’ health. Bottom line,” Duckworth said in an interview. “This is the frustration that I have. Why are we wasting time on this kind of stuff instead of troubleshooting and what do we need to do to prevent another outbreak?” Story here 

Read the emails here.

Noting: In December, Capitol Fax first reported that Senger had sent the email making the Duckworth suggestion. This is the first time the document has materialized.

MADIGAN CALLED OUT FOR PLAYING POLITICS WITH HARASSMENT PANEL

Speaker Mike Madigan may have been elected party chairman again, but his #MeToo troubles haven’t gone away. Consider this report by the Sun-Times that shows a Dem party member was yanked from a sexual harassment panel shortly after a state lawmaker flagged a conflict. 

— “Yarbrough ousted from Madigan’s harassment panel to ensure political ‘firewall,’” by Sun-Times’ Tina Sfondeles: “A state senator called House Speaker Mike Madigan on Tuesday with ‘serious concerns’ about whether a panel he created to combat sexual harassment could remain independent with the addition of Democratic Cook County Clerk nominee Karen Yarbrough — who is also the vice chairman of the Democratic Party of Illinois. And in less than an hour, Yarbrough stepped down … [Melinda] Bush said she called Madigan Tuesday morning to discuss Yarbrough’s appointment. ‘We had serious concerns that someone that’s vice chair of the party would be part of the panel.’ … Alaina Hampton, whose accusations against Kevin Quinn, the brother of Ald. Marty Quinn, led to Kevin Quinn’s firing from Madigan’s political organization ... said Yarbrough has ‘a lot of ties to Marty Quinn and the speaker.’’I think everyone is kind of questioning the independence of the panel already,’ Hampton said. Hampton called the creation of the panel ‘a tactic being used to continuously sweep sexual harassment under the rug.’” Story here

Hampton just asked the state watchdog to investigate her sexual harassment allegations against members within the Madigan political apparatus.

Welcome to the POLITICO Illinois Playbook! Please send tips, events, announcements to nkorecki@politico.com or @natashakorecki SUBSCRIBE to Illinois Playbook For more Illinois news visit: http://www.politico.com/news/illinois 

MCCANN FILES SUIT - He just announced he’s running as a third party candidate for governor and now state Sen. Sam McCann has filed a lawsuit, with the help of Local 150, against the Illinois Republican Party, Senate Minority Leader Bill Brady and others. The lawsuit charges that he was inappropriately booted from the Republican Senate caucus after he announced his candidacy as a third party candidate for governor. Brady and others have said hey, if McCann is running as a third party candidate then he doesn’t belong in the GOP caucus. And they cut off his resources. 

The News-Gazette explains the political conundrum: “That political circumstance — and the hard feelings it generated — have now led to another controversy. McCann’s unhappy colleagues decided to take him at, if not his word, his action that he’s abandoned them. So they’ve abandoned him. State Sen. Bill Brady contends that McCann resigned from the GOP Senate caucus. Consequently, the GOP is no longer providing services to McCann that it provides to members of the GOP caucus. That includes assistance in writing legislation, communications with constituents, keeping track of bills as they wind their ways through the legislative process and providing photographers to take pictures of visitors to the legislator’s office.”

The filings: The court filings, lay out allegations in detail. No Girl Scout photos! “On April 26, 2018, Plaintiff McCann attempted to secure the use of a taxpayer funded, minority caucus staff photographer—in advance—for an event with a local Girl Scouts troop. The photographer stated to Plaintiff McCann that he was instructed not to take any requests from Plaintiff McCann—“no exceptions.” 

Here’s a link to the lawsuit McCann vs. Brady, et al  They appeared to have been hastily filed because this version was riddled with incorrect references. 

TRUMP-CHICAGO CONNECTION — “Dems seek subpoena of Chicago bank over Manafort loans,” by Bloomberg: “Two Democratic lawmakers are pushing for the House Oversight Committee to issue a subpoena to force the Federal Savings Bank in Chicago to turn over documents related to its loans to former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort. The lawmakers, Representatives Elijah Cummings and Stephen Lynch, said the bank responded to an April 12 request for documents with a one-page letter maintaining that ‘news speculation is false.’” Story here 

STATE

— “Solitary confinement of juveniles on the rise in Cook County,” by Chicago Reporter’s Jonah Newman: “Research shows prolonged solitary confinement can lead to depression, anxiety, and psychosis, and children are particularly vulnerable to these negative reactions because their brains are still developing, according to the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Mental health professionals, advocates, and even many detention center administrators say the practice should be sharply curbed, if not eliminated. Instead, staff at the Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, one of the largest juvenile jails in the country, regularly confine kids for hours at a time, the Reporter has found. Youth in the jail say it’s not uncommon for staff to threaten them with solitary for bad behavior.” Story here 

CHICAGO

— “Cinco de Mayo parade canceled amid dispute between alderman, community group,” by RedEye’s Lauren Chval: “Chicago’s Cinco de Mayo parade in Little Village has been canceled just days before stepping off, the event’s organizer and an alderman say. The free, family-centric event celebrating the Mexican Army’s victory at the Battle of Puebla was set to start at noon Sunday, at Cermak Road and Damen Avenue. A companion festival planned for Douglas Park has also been canceled.” Story here 

— “Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg sends $14 million to CPS for ‘personalized learning,’” by Chicago Tribune’s Heidi Stevens: “On Tuesday, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative — Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and his wife, physician Priscilla Chan’s, philanthropic organization — announced a $14 million grant to CPS and LEAP Innovations to bring personalized learning programs into more Chicago schools. CPS and LEAP, a nonprofit organization that works with schools to implement personalized learning, estimate the grant will bring personalized learning into roughly 100 more schools.” Story here 

— “Five female paramedics sue, alleging pervasive sexual harassment at Chicago Fire Department,” by Chicago Tribune’s Annie Sweeney and Jason Meisner: “The 57-page suit alleges the city has failed to deter a long-standing, pervasive culture of sexual harassment throughout the department’s firehouses and facilities, allowing men accused of wrongdoing to remain on the job while their accusers were often put on medical leave. The conditions have been exacerbated by the city’s failure to provide even basic equalities for women, from adequate bathrooms to separate sleeping quarters, the suit alleged.” Story here 

— “111 students report ‘flu-like illness’ after Andrew HS prom at Shedd Aquarium,” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Luke Wilusz: “More than 100 students from a southwest suburban Tinley Park high school have gotten sick after attending the school’s prom Friday night at the Shedd Aquarium. Victor J. Andrew High School in Tinley Park has received reports 111 of the 400 students who attended the prom falling ill with ‘flu-like symptoms’ over the weekend, according to a statement from Principal Bob Nolting that was sent out to parents Monday and district officials.” Story here 

— “The ‘people’s lawyers’ v. the POTUS,” by Chicago Daily Law Bulletin’s David Thomas: “By the end of 2017, Democratic attorneys general in 22 states and three U.S. territories had jointly sued the Trump administration 35 times, a record that has some academics and former attorneys general worried that a state office with nonpartisan interests is becoming a polarizing force. … Illinois Attorney General Lisa M. Madigan and other attorneys general have filed amici curiae briefs in other lawsuits, submitted comments on federal regulations and written many letters to federal agency heads and members of Congress.” Story here 

AROUND THE COLLARS

— “Maine West ending American Indian mascot at games and assemblies,” by The Daily Herald’s Christopher Hacker: “Administrators at Maine West High School said Monday that the Des Plaines school is ending its decades-old tradition of having a person dressed as an American Indian dance at school assemblies and athletic events. The mascot had drawn the ire of some American Indians after photos and video of a student dressed in the buckskin costume and feathered headdress appeared on social media. After the controversy that followed, Principal Audrey Haugan announced the mascot would be retired.” Story here 

DELEGATION

— “Chicago’s Quigley says there’s a lotta there there in Trump-Russia probe,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Greg Hinz: “Despite efforts by some to suggest there's no there there, substantial evidence exists of a ‘conspiracy’ that involved allies of President Donald Trump if not necessarily Trump himself. That's the word from the Chicagoan on the House Intelligence Committee, Democrat Mike Quigley, as the probe by special counsel Robert Mueller enters a critical phase, one in which the net around the Trump White House is drawing tighter even as talk persists that Mueller soon may be fired … ‘The Watergate investigation lasted a year. This is much more complicated,” Quigley said. Though average voters on occasion “understandably check out’ after months of charges and countercharges, in fact Mueller ‘is on somewhat of a race for time. . . .The only thing that’s keeping it going is public pressure.” Story here 

— “The baby boom in Congress,” by Jennifer Haberkorn for POLITICO Magazine: “The 229-year history of the United States Congress is the history of the nation’s most prominent and enduring boys’ club, a bastion of grandfathers and — in Paul Ryan’s phrase — weekend dads. Young mothers, weekend or otherwise, in Congress are like a good night’s sleep for new parents: highly unusual and yet more and more common with the passage of time. Only 10 women in history have given birth while serving in Congress: one in the 1970s, three in the 1990s, and six in the past 11 years.” Story here 

MEDIA

Last night at the BGA’s annual awards dinner Pentagon Papers whistleblower Daniel Ellsberg gave a mesmerizing talk (with questions from Andy Shaw) about the risks he took in leaking the Vietnam war-era documents. Ellsberg said he had not seen a similar leak of that magnitude until Chelsea Manning. Ellsberg opined on denuclearization, the true definition of treason and the risks/rewards of talks between North and South Korea. We’re told the BGA will publish the conversation in a podcast in upcoming days. It’s compelling. We’ll link it here once it’s up. 

Congratulations to the winners of the Better Government Association’s Driehaus Foundation awards for investigative reporting. 

The winners: 

1st place “The Tax Divide” by Jason Grotto, Sandhya Kambhampati, and Ray Long (ProPublica &amp; The Chicago Tribune)

2nd place: “Doomed by Delay” by Patricia Callahan (The Chicago Tribune)

3rd Place: “Code of Silence” by Phil Rogers, Marion Brooks, Katy Smyser, Courtney Copenhagen, and Richard Moy (NBC5 Chicago)

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ...New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ...Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX 

 Want to make an impact? POLITICO Illinois has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Land of Lincoln. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: [jshapiro@politico.com] jshapiro@politico.com. 



                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew


                                            By Edward-Isaac Dovere


                                            By POLITICO Magazine

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC