Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police say the drug bust hopefully disruption in the drug business in the city.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Jose Guel Jr., 26, was charged with two counts of trafficking in drugs, two counts of possession of drugs, and two counts of having weapons under disability
(Photo: Butler County Jail)

A Hamilton father and son, described by police as “major players,” were arrested on drug charges Saturday following a multi-agency investigation.


Hamilton Police spokesperson Sgt. Brian Robinson said the arrests were the culmination a multi-agency investigation.


Jose Alfredo Guel Sr., 51, and Jose Alfredo Guel Jr., 26, were each arrested on two charges of trafficking in drugs and two charges of possession of drugs.


Jose Guel Sr., 51, was charged with two counts of trafficking in drugs and two counts of possession of drugs. (Photo: Provided by Butler County Jail)

Guel Jr. was also charged with having weapons while under disability. He was arrested and convicted on drug charges in Butler County in 2011.


The men were taken into custody after a search warrant was served early Jan. 27, at two addresses in the 1700 block of Grand Blvd. in Hamilton. One was where the father and son lived and the other the house next door.


Police said one house was primarily where they lived and the other one primarily where they were keeping the drugs.


Both the father and the son are being held on state drug charges, but Hamilton Police Chief Craig Bucheit said at a news conference Monday that law enforcement is working with the assistant U.S. attorney in Cincinnati in order to discuss federal charges against them.


After the search warrant was issued, law enforcement confiscated a large amount of more than 2.5 kilos of heroin, more than 2.5 kilos of cocaine, more than 10 pounds and marijuana, and two guns. Police also confiscated about $67,000 in cash and four vehicles.


“The drugs came from Mexico to Ohio to be distributed in Butler County,” Robinson said, adding that they had a street value estimated at $500,000. There were two other arrests for drug-related offenses. 


Fancy Felicia McCarthy, 21, and Alexander Guadalupe Ramirez, 28, are each facing a charge of possession of drugs. Records for three people arrested on immigration offenses as a result of the investigation were not available.


Police said the investigation is an example of the collaborative effort by law enforcement to get drugs and criminals off the streets.


“If you are a drug dealer in this county you need to realize that every agency is working together to put you in jail,” Fairfield Police Chief Mike Dickey said at the news conference.


﻿Agencies involved included police departments from Fairfield, Hamilton, Middletown and Fairfield Township, and the Butler Undercover Regional Narcotics Taskforce, as well as the ATF, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Ohio Bureau of Criminal Records.


 



 
