By

Tiffany Carter For Mailonline






  Published:
  10:42 EDT, 16 February 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  13:22 EDT, 16 February 2018







           2

View  comments

Barcelona is a stunning city with an abundance of historical, cultural, architectural and culinary delights. If that's not enough, east of the old city you’ll find the waterfront with about five kilometres of mostly artificial beaches, ideal for a dip in the Mediterranean or an afternoon lounging in the sun. Locals call them grimy, pricey and overcrowded, yet Barcelona has been named one of the best beach cities in the world. Here are a few of our favourites.


Barceloneta beach with the stunning W Hotel in the background

Sant Sebastià


Sant Sebastià, which is located in the Ciutat Vella district, is one of the oldest beaches in Barcelona. Its proximity to the historic centre and the Barceloneta metro station makes it the most popular beach in the city, and it’s excellent for either lazing about and people watching or socialising and meeting people from all over the world in one of its beach bars. The stretch in front of the Club Natació Atlètic-Barceloneta is an unofficial nude beach, and the club itself offers indoor and outdoor swimming pools and a spa that can be accessed with a day ticket.


Metro: Barceloneta


Barceloneta


Barceloneta is one of the largest and most traditional beaches in the city, and together with Sant Sebastià, it's one of the best loved and oldest. You’ll find it packed every day, all summer long with locals and tourists, as well as ambulant vendors offering beers for one euro, sarongs, temporary tattoos, and, among other things, massages. The boardwalk is a great place for a morning run, and the seasonal beachside bars are perfect for an afternoon cocktail.


Metro: Barceloneta


Barceloneta Beach in Barcelona with colorful sky at sunrise

Somorrostro


Somorrostro beach stretches from Carrer de Marina to Hospital del Mar and was formerly occupied by a slum inhabited by 15,000 people living in 2,000 shanties. Today it is one of the most emblematic beaches in the city. It's especially suited to those with limited mobility, offering reserved parking areas, adapted public transport, visual and tactile signage and information, adapted toilets, wooden walkways to the water and adapted showers with seats. This beach neighbours a number of the city’s hottest clubs for electronic music, and the nearby Complex Esportiu Municipal Marítim is home to the first thalassotherapy centre in Catalonia with seawater swimming pools.


Metro: Barceloneta


Nova Icària


This beach, halfway along the waterfront, is one of the city’s quietest, and it has one of the widest ranges of leisure amenities. It’s very popular with families, great for long, lazy days on the sand on your own, and, if you’re into your sports, there's also a playground with a ping pong table and two volleyball courts. Nova Icària is also the closest beach to the Olympic harbour and directly next to the nightlife district. The numerous bars and restaurants along the seaside promenade make it a great place to head after a day of sunbathing.


Metro: Barceloneta


Bogatell


Bogatell is a well-frequented beach running along a long, tall stone promenade – ideal for jogging, skating and biking. This beach is a great choice for other recreational activities as well: there are two ping pong tables, a football pitch and a volleyball court, and behind the beach are a basketball court and a skateboard area with half-pipes. The chiringuitos on Bogatell play hip music and impromptu dance parties can spring up. Just inland from the beach is the Cementiri del Poblenou, created in 1773 and home to 'The Kiss of Death', a marble sculpture of a winged skeleton kissing a young man’s forehead.


Metro: Ciutadella | Vila Olímpica


Bogatell is a well-frequented beach, so you'll often find large crowds there

Mar Bella


The small Mar Bella beach, located in the Sant Martí district, was one of the beaches to emerge from the urban redevelopment of the waterfront for the 1992 Summer Olympics. It boasts the only official designated nudist area in the city and is very gay friendly. There is a nautical centre with water sports facilities at the western end of the beach, and windsurfing, sailing and kayaking equipment is available for rent. There's also a children’s playground, a volleyball court and a ping pong table, and it shares the skate park and basketball court with Bogatell beach.


Metro: Poblenou or Ciutadella | Vila Olímpica


Nova Mar Bella


Like Mar Bella, this beach dates back to the 1992 urban redevelopment for the Summer Olympics and is mostly used by local residents. It's one of the quietest, cleanest beaches in the city, especially popular with women and young people, and ideal for families or relaxing on your own.


Metro: Poblenou or Ciutadella | Vila Olímpica


Llevant


This is the last of Barcelona’s newly created beaches and was completed in 2006. Uniquely, it’s the best beach for dog owners over the summer. In general, dogs – except for guide dogs – are barred from all Barcelona beaches during bathing season. Llevant, however, has a dedicated area set aside for dog owners and their pets, meaning they can join in on the fun.


Metro: El Maresme | Fòrum


Fòrum Bathing Area


Set against the photovoltaic pergola of the Fòrum, this seawater bathing area is not your typical beach; there's no sand and you enter the water directly from steps and ladders affixed to the concrete platforms. The area is home to a colony of sea urchins so you will want to watch your feet. The breakwater protecting the swimming area forms an artificial island called Pangea, and the Parc dels Esculls is a series of artificial reefs created to promote biodiversity and observe marine life. It's the perfect choice for activities such as water skiing, scuba diving and sailing a catamaran, and equipment is available for rental.


Metro: El Maresme | Fòrum


 


    
      
      Trying again over cocktails! Trump gabs with world leaders while Melania makes nice with Merkel after her husband's morning attack on the German leader
    
  

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group