Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

A total of 32 hours passed between when Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s plane landed in Memphis and when he was assassinated by James Earl Ray.


        By Marc Perrusquia
    

Dorothy Cotton is up early in her cozy Atlanta apartment, getting ready. She slips on a pink skirt and a matching jacket and a chic, knit hat. It's a big day, a huge day really, and she wants to look her best. She's flying to Memphis with her boss, her confidante, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.


Dorothy Cotton speaks in Ithaca in 2014.(Photo: SIMON WHEELER / Staff Photo)


For Cotton, 37, the early-morning anticipation of April 3, 1968, is just part of living in the swirl of America's most recognized civil rights leader. The man people love. The man people hate. King is under such crushing pressure of late, though, Cotton knows there hasn't been a more pivotal day for him or his cause.


At least not since that day.


It was a little more than three years ago that she flew with King and other close aides to Norway to accept the Nobel Peace Prize. They were over the Atlantic, at night above the clouds, when King's mother, Alberta, tapped her on the shoulder.


“Dorothy, look out the window!”


There was the sun, rising gloriously in the east. Mrs. King began to sing.


“Oh Day!” she piped. “Yonder come day.” She was a church organist and a gifted singer, and when she broke into this old call-and-response spiritual others joined in. Mrs. King would call out, “Oh Day!” and they responded, “Yonder come day.” Such joy. Soon, it seemed the whole plane was up in the aisle singing:


Day done broke
Into my soul
Yonder come day 1


The mood now couldn't be more different.



    Dorothy Cotton sings freedom songs including "Yonder Come Day' and recalls the 1964 flight with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to Oslo for the Nobel Peace Prize.
    Jeff McAdory/The Commercial Appeal

King is headed to Memphis as a man in crisis, the focus of intense criticism. A week earlier he'd led a demonstration through Downtown Memphis that ended horribly. A riot erupted near the rear of the march. Windows were shattered, stores looted. Police responded with Mace and clubs. In the ensuing melee, officers shot and killed 16-year-old Larry Payne, saying he had a knife. His mother, inconsolable, countered he'd been murdered, shot with his hands in the air. Scores of others were injured.


Now, at 39, King fears all he's built — his reputation, his legacy — is on the line.


RELATED: In Atlanta and Montgomery, King's churches bear their legacies proudly


“I can't walk away from Memphis,” he confided to his close aide, Andrew Young. To salvage his reputation as the nonviolent leader of the civil rights movement, King knew he had to return to lead a peaceful march. Yet, his own staff, his closest friends, fought him over that prospect.


“Every time y'all come up with a crazy idea I'm behind you. Y'all have left me out there by myself!” King shouted as he stormed out of his church office in Atlanta. “I feel so alone!”


His friends have never seen him like this. He's depressed. He isn't sleeping. He's drinking heavily. He's under attack by the national media, by white leaders in Memphis, even by many of his colleagues in the movement. And there is that old, constant pressure from the FBI.



    Andrew Young, now 80, talks about Martin Luther King Jr.'s disappointment with his allies refusing to aid him in his return to Memphis.
    Jeff McAdory/The Commercial Appeal

Headquarters “is most interested in the activities, both official and personal, of King while in Memphis,” Clifford Halter, the FBI's by-the-book Memphis supervisor, wrote in a memo after the riot. Headquarters “requested that we get everything possible on King and that we stay on him until he leaves Memphis.”


Still, King presses forward.


“Now that I want you to come to Memphis to help me, everyone is too busy!” King thundered to his staff. He called the roll, demanding they defend their positions. Andy! Dorothy! Hosea! It was only after he walked out that they softened.


“He reminded me of Jesus,” a guilt-racked Jesse Jackson would say years later. It's almost like King hoped they could talk him out of it. “Let this cup pass.”


Now, the debate is over; they're headed to Memphis.


Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Ralph Abernathy and Bernard Lee leave the Memphis airport following their arrival from Atlanta on Wednesday, April 3, 1968. (Courtesy Special Collections/University of Memphis Libraries)

It's cloudy and cool as King boards a blue and white Eastern Airlines jet with his inner circle: his best friend, Ralph Abernathy; personal aide, Bernard Lee; Young, his top adviser; and Cotton, the lady in pink, the only woman on his executive staff.


Just as it seems tensions in King's group couldn't get higher, a bomb threat forces the plane to halt on the tarmac. As everyone is evacuated, an excited Cotton stumbles on King's foot. Lee hurries off before them. The bomb search finds nothing, and now the old Dr. King — “Doc” — comes out. He smiles broadly. Time Magazine characterized him as nearly humorless, but his friends know better. He is playful, a jokester. And he loves to tease.


“Bernard!” King goads Lee. “You're supposed to be my bodyguard!”


After an hour, they are finally off, dissecting the South, passing high over Montgomery and Birmingham and Selma — the very arc of the movement that broke Jim Crow and made King an international figure — and on to Memphis, where Flight 381 rolls to a stop at Gate 17 just after 10:30 a.m.



	        	
	        		Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. arrives at the Memphis airport with aides (from left) Andrew Young, Ralph Abernathy and Bernard Lee on Wednesday, April 3, 1968.
	        	
	        	
	        		(Photo: By William Leaptrott, Courtesy Special Collections/University of Memphis Libraries)


In less than 32 hours King will be dead, shot through the jaw a minute after six, as the April 4 sun is about to set.


As soon as he's off the plane in Memphis the news media descend.


Dr. King! Dr. King!


10:40 a.m. Wednesday, April 3, 1968 - Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. speaks to the press after his arrival at the Memphis airport. Behind him (at right) is aide, Ralph Abernathy. (By William Leaptrott, Courtesy Special Collections/University of Memphis Libraries) (Photo: William Leaptrott / MPS)


He is asked about the riot last week and an anticipated court injunction by the city of Memphis to block another march. Will he obey it?


“I'll have to cross that bridge when we come to it,” King intones in his rich baritone as Abernathy, Cotton and the others look on.


“I don't know exactly what we will do in that case. We have our legal advisers with us. And then, of course, we have our conscience to deal with.”


In the news pack are at least two FBI informants. One with a camera; another with a notepad.


RELATED: How Black Lives Matter moved civil rights into the 21st century


A central concern involves a group of disenchanted, angry, black youths in Memphis whom many blame for the violence last week. Have his aides reached out to them? Can he control them?


“They have talked to these groups,” King says, “and these groups have committed themselves to cooperating, and committed themselves to following the guidelines of nonviolence.”


King's presence in Memphis — today, a week ago, and during an earlier appearance in March when he gave a rousing speech to thousands of supporters — involves the city's striking garbage workers. The city's 1,300-man sanitation force walked off the job in a wildcat strike two months earlier after two workers were crushed to death in a malfunctioning packer. It's the latest in a series of indignities. The employees, almost all black, work under brutal conditions. They hoist heavy tubs for as little as $1.60 an hour, are covered in filth and have little or no protection from the weather.


Distressed by their plight, King makes Memphis the first stop in his “Poor People's Campaign,” a massive march on Washington he plans for later in the spring in which impoverished families will camp and disrupt the seat of government until serious relief measures are taken. Yet many believe King forfeited the moral high ground when violence erupted in his ranks. Many others are afraid.


Eyeing the airport news conference from the perimeter are six Memphis police officers — two of them black undercover detectives in plainclothes and four white detectives. Their presence touches nerves. Tarlease Mathews, a local activist who's been asked to chauffeur King around Memphis, doesn't hide her resentment.


“We didn't ask for any police protection,” she snaps at an officer.


As King and his entourage leave the airport's lobby and assemble under the towering portico outside, the police follow. Now, Mathews has had it.


“I'm going to get you!” she yells, jabbing a finger at detective Ed Redditt, who's shadowed activists since the strike began seven weeks earlier.



	        	
	        		James Earl Ray is seen in a May 1968 passport photo.
	        	
	        	
	        		(Photo: Shelby County Register of Deeds/The Commercial Appeal files)


Down in Mississippi, a white Ford Mustang rolls along the winding highway through the red clay hills.


James Earl Ray grips the steering wheel and turns his plans over in his head. A year ago, he was an inmate doing 20 years for armed robbery in Missouri. He made a daring escape, hiding in a corrections truck and bolting out the back door after it left the prison. He's been on the run ever since. Montreal. Los Angeles. Mexico. A couple weeks ago he moved to Atlanta, renting a room in a cheap boarding house.


Last week, he bought a rifle.


“I'm going to hunt deer in Wisconsin,” he told the clerk at the Aeromarine Supply Co. in Birmingham, Ala., giving his name as Harvey Lowmeyer. It is a beautiful gun, a pump-action Remington Gamemaster with a polished, walnut stock, a .30-06 gauge with a seven-power Redfield scope.


11:45 a.m. Wednesday, April 3, 1968 - Fire and Police Director Frank Holloman (left),  Mayor Henry Loeb (center) and unidentified man head to the Federal Building. Federal Judge Bailey Brown, at the request of Loeb and other city officials, issued a temporary order restraining Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. or any of his followers from leading a march in Memphis.(Photo: Fred Payne, Courtesy Special Collections/University of Memphis Libraries)


Ray doesn't look much like an outdoorsman. Pasty and thin, with cold, blue eyes and greased-back hair, the 40-year-old drifter could be mistaken for an undertaker or a vacuum cleaner salesman in his dark suit and tie. He has a wad of $20 bills in his pocket and some amphetamines to keep him alert, driving him forward.


Forward to Memphis.


This could be any old day for Mathews, a struggling local beautician. She is driving through Memphis in her gray and black Buick Electra, a boat-like sedan known as a Deuce and a Quarter for its 225-inch length, more than 18 feet.


Any old day — except today riding next to her in the front seat is Martin Luther King Jr. Abernathy, Young and Lee are in the back seat, and Cotton is in a Lincoln behind them.


Mathews looks into the rearview mirror and tenses up again.


Despite her admonitions to Redditt at the airport, the police follow.


Meticulously, they log King's day:


11:20 a.m. — Arrives at the Lorraine Motel, a two-story motor court inn in Downtown's gloomy warehouse district that opened years earlier at the height of segregation as the Lorraine Hotel and caters to black people. King and Abernathy check into Room 306 along the second-floor balcony. Cotton is next door in Room 307. Young and Lee are downstairs.


12:05 p.m. — Leaves for a meeting at Rev. James Lawson's Centenary United Methodist Church in South Memphis. There, a large gathering of pastors and supporters discuss the anticipated march next week as word trickles in that the city has convinced a judge to issue an injunction.


2:15 p.m. — The meeting breaks up and Mathews drives King back to the Lorraine.


The police have a duty to be watching, to keep law and order, but their mission is murky. Some officers were assigned for security, to protect King. But Redditt and his partner, Willie Richmond, have more specific orders — to keep an eye on King's movements.


“The reason for the surveillance being ordered was because Dr. King was a controversial figure” and because he'd “been meeting with local black militants,” a police report said.


Though few know it, Redditt and Richmond are only the tip of a much larger operation.


With assistance from the local FBI office the previous fall, the Memphis Police Department set up an intelligence unit, sometimes called a Red Squad, whose job is to monitor “Reds,” or Communists, radicals, militants and others deemed dangerous by the government. Working closely with the FBI's William H. Lawrence, the agent in charge of domestic security in Memphis, MPD is assembling files on hundreds of people, some street thugs and criminals but many others law-abiding citizens whose political views simply veer left of mainstream Memphis.



    Rev. James Lawson discusses his phone call inviting Martin Luther King Jr. to Memphis, the meeting at his church on April 3 and plans to go forward with a march with or without the court injunction in place.
    Jeff McAdory/The Commercial Appeal

It's a great injustice to Mathews, an attractive woman who favors glittery earrings, permed hair and stylish coats, and could be mistaken for a pastor's wife or a tea club socialite, yet at heart is a fiery activist.


In a way, she is the Rosa Parks of Memphis.


Back in 1958, when she was 25, Mathews dared to venture onto the grounds of the Memphis Zoo on a Sunday, a day reserved for white residents. Like Parks, who refused to give up her bus seat to a white man in that seminal confrontation in Montgomery, Ala., which helped spark the civil rights movement in 1955, Mathews stood her ground. When police escorted her out, she followed up with a federal lawsuit that led to the city taking down the infamous “Thursday Only” signs that allowed black residents to visit one day a week at the zoo and nearby Brooks Art Gallery. City parks, golf courses and swimming pools were integrated, too.


Since the sanitation strike broke, her activism is taking an increasingly militant tone.


Much of it is traditional movement fare — she gives free haircuts to garbage men at her Orange Mound shop and, as a singer, leads rallies in rousing versions of “I Shall Not Be Moved,” “We Shall Overcome” and “Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me Around” — but police are alarmed by her conduct. She forges a public bond with her pastor, Ezekiel Bell, who is making volatile statements that include a reference to burning down the city, and confides she is a fan of Malcolm X, the assassinated black nationalist. And what she sees in King today she likes. 2


“We are going to march even if we can't get the injunction overturned,” King told Lawson and the others that afternoon back at the church.


As she drops King and his entourage off at the Lorraine, a detective watches from the curb and another eyes them from a peephole in a firehouse across the street.


It is 2:25 p.m.


On a lonely stretch of road near Corinth, Miss., 70 miles southeast of Memphis, Ray pulls his Mustang onto the shoulder and gets out. He opens the trunk and pulls his new rifle from a box.


He takes aim and, as he would later tell his lawyers, test-fires the gun into the quiet of the Mississippi countryside. It roars like the pounding ocean. Ray feels its kick; its trigger action.


1:00-3:00 a.m. Thursday, April 4, 1968 - Martin Luther King's entourage retires to the Lorraine Hotel. This postcard shows a typical room.(Photo: Courtesy family of Walter L. Bailey)


After several rounds he is off again, rolling toward Memphis. 3


Hanging around the Lorraine for days now is a group of young men, several sporting smoke-black sunglasses and big “Afro” hairstyles.


A homegrown black power group, it calls itself the Invaders, and the men are King’s primary focus this afternoon.


Many in Memphis blame these men for the violence that erupted during last week’s march, and King believes he must pacify them or risk another disaster.


“Get your guns!’’ Invaders leader John B. Smith had told a cheering crowd of sanitation workers and supporters a few weeks earlier. “You can’t pray your way out.’’


King arranged a lunch with them and as he heads into the Lorraine’s diner, newsman Ernest Withers takes note. An affable, slightly pudgy freelance photographer for The Chicago Defender and other black newspapers, Withers makes some money on the side as a tipster for the FBI. He tells his handler, agent Lawrence, the news: Dr. King, Ralph Abernathy and Dorothy Cotton are eating lunch with Charles Cabbage, the tall, dynamic Carver High School graduate who’s been spouting violence along with his Invaders co-leader John Smith. Also at the lunch is Edwina Harrell, the group’s secretary.



    John Burl Smith, co-founder of the Invaders, discusses the violence at the march in support of the sanitation workers and meeting with Martin Luther King Jr.
    Jeff McAdory/The Commercial Appeal

The FBI has good reason to be watching the Invaders. Inner-city unrest erupted in 1967 in earth-scorching riots in Detroit and Newark, and authorities are on high alert for even rumors of disturbance. But when it comes to King, things get complicated.


Call it hate, call it obsession, but FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover is very focused on King. In public, he calls him the nation’s “most notorious liar’’ and “one of the lowest characters in America’’ and, in private, much worse. He’s had King under investigation for years. First, he tried to prove he was a Communist, a traitor to his country. That morphed into an obsession with the Baptist preacher’s personal life, his indiscretions, his women. Hoover’s agents tapped King’s phones — and bugged his hotel rooms. 4


Now, in Memphis, the FBI has a new inquiry: tracking meetings between King, his staff and the Invaders. To ensure a peaceful march, King sent an advance team — Jesse Jackson, Hosea Williams, James Bevel and others — who’ve been meeting for days with the young militants trying to get them to commit to nonviolence. Word dribbling back to the FBI is the militants are demanding status in the movement — and money — and King seems to be weakening.


But his lunch with the Invaders is aborted when a tall, white man in a dark suit pulls into the courtyard and parks.


Outside the Lorraine Motel Wednesday, April 3, 1968, U.S. Marshal Cato Ellis served Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. with a temporary restraining order from a federal judge, barring them from leading another march in Memphis without court approval.(Photo: Barney Sellers / The Commercial)


It is warm, 75 degrees, and grave-faced U.S. Marshal Cato Ellis meets King in the courtyard and hands him a temporary restraining order just issued by U.S. District Judge Bailey Brown.


Not only do authorities fear more civil disorder, police have received a number of threats against King and they're concerned for him, too, the city's lawyers told Brown.


Now King diverts his attention from the Invaders and deals with this.


A group of attorneys retained to fight the injunction has been looking for King this afternoon and finds him just as Ellis is leaving. The attorneys are led by Lucius Burch, a solidly built, bald lawyer who flies himself to work every day from Collierville in a single-engine plane and who is prominent in legal circles and local liberal causes.


As it pushes past 3 p.m., King and the lawyers climb the Lorraine's outdoor cement steps and walk along the balcony's metal railing to Room 307 — Cotton's room — and discuss the developments. First on the agenda is a hearing set for tomorrow morning. The room is packed. Six attorneys sit on one bed; King and his aides on the opposite twin bed. He tells the lawyers there are two groups with an interest in disrupting a peaceful march: The Ku Klux Klan and black power militants.


“Flip a coin,” he says.


Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (at right on balcony) followed by his aides Ralph Abernathy, Jesse Jackson, Hosea Williams and two unidentified men at the Lorraine Motel Wednesday afternoon, April 3, 1968.(Photo: Tom Barber/Mem Press-Scimitar, The Commercial Appeal)


When Burch presses King on the importance of a second march, he doesn't hesitate.


“My whole future depends on it,” he says.


After an hour the meeting breaks up and King turns his attention again to his primary task — reining in the Invaders. Some of his Southern Christian Leadership Conference staffers have been meeting with the militants while King was busy with the attorneys and now he joins them.


“We need you on our side,” he tells them. It's another cramped meeting — Cabbage, Smith, Harrell and several other youths are spilled around the room — and it grinds into the late afternoon. The young men complain the black leadership in Memphis doesn't respect them; won't give them a meaningful role. King offers to make them parade marshals in the Memphis march and let them help with security in the planned Poor People's march on Washington.


He also offers to help them secure grant money through a national church organization for social programs they plan. Though the public views them as thugs, they express aspirations for serious work: community organizing, job creation and teaching black-awareness courses.


Still, scuttlebutt from the Lorraine is the Invaders are making huge demands — cars and thousands of dollars — and that they are getting awfully cozy with some of King's staff.


Rev. Ralph Abernathy led Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Rev. James M. Lawson Jr. and others into Room 307 at the Lorraine Motel to discuss a restraining order barring another march in Memphis.(Photo: Barney Sellers, The Commercial Appeal)


“They are trying to drop a pigeon on ... the SCLC,” Withers tells Lawrence.


It's getting dark now and a squall is moving in from Arkansas. There is rain and thunder and heavy wind. King is to speak at a mass rally tonight, but he is exhausted. He has laryngitis. So he sends Abernathy to address the gathering at cavernous Mason Temple, headquarters of the international Church of God in Christ. Despite the weather, there are thousands of people. And they are calling for King. With Jesse Jackson at his side, Abernathy walks down a hallway past church patriarch C.H. Mason's tomb to a phone and calls King.


“Martin, all the television networks are lined up waiting for you,” Abernathy says. “The people who are here want you, not me.” 5


King is on his back on his bed trying hard to unwind. But as he listens to his old friend describe the crowd — the spirit — he doesn't hesitate.


“OK. I'll come.”


Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. makes his last public appearance at the Mason Temple in Memphis on April 3, 1968. The next day King was assassinated on his motel balcony.(Photo: Charles Kelly / AP)


The balcony is empty, for the weather, but the main floor is packed. Raindrops rattle on the roof as Abernathy introduces King. It's a meandering, nearly half-hour affair. Then King takes the pulpit.


He builds slowly. He talks about the sanitation strike. The plight of the workers. The need to come together; to protest, to boycott businesses that enable these conditions.


RELATED: As racism resurges, many look to the pulpit King left behind


“We aren't going to let any injunction turn us around!” King tells the cheering crowd. “We are going on!”


He talks about his life — and his near-death experiences. The bomb threat on the flight. The time a mentally ill woman stabbed him in the chest with a letter opener at a book signing.


Young has seen this before. King has lived with the threat of death for years. His front porch was bombed in Montgomery in 1956. His hotel in Birmingham in 1963. Even now, the Klan and racist businessmen have bounties on his head. “I have no problem with death,” King once said of the time sheriff's deputies removed him in chains from jail and drove him for hours into the uncertainty of the Georgia night.


“It’s the events leading up to death that you have to prepare yourself for.”


"It’s the events leading up to death that you have to prepare yourself for."


King often talked of death during stressful episodes, and Young hears that same tension in his boss' voice now.


“Well, I don't know what will happen now,” King tells the crowd. “We've got some difficult days ahead. But it really doesn't matter with me now. Because I've been to the mountaintop. I don't mind. Like anybody, I'd like to live a long life. Longevity has its place. But I'm not concerned about that now.”


King's eyes shine as he speaks. He shifts his weight from foot to foot, swaying to his own hypnotic cadence. His voice is soft. Subdued. Then louder. He's building to a shout.



    Dr. Martin Luther King delivered his "Mountaintop" speech at Mason Temple, on April 3, 1968, the night before his assassination.
    Associated Press

“I just want to do God's will. And he's allowed me to go up to the mountain. And I've looked over, and I've s-e-e-n the promised land,” he says, stretching “seen” in his best preacher's voice to punctuate his vision.


“I may not get there with you. But I want you to know tonight that we as a people will get to the promised land. So I'm happy tonight. I'm not worried about anything. I'm not fearing ANY man. Mine E-Y-E-S have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord!”


The audience is on its feet. King turns from the pulpit and walks to his colleagues. They embrace him with hugs and slaps on the shoulder as he collapses in his seat.


It's 10:30 p.m.



    Rev. Samuel Billy Kyles talks about Dr. Martin Luther King's "Mountaintop" speech at Mason Temple.
    Jeff McAdory/The Commercial Appeal

 



	        	
	        		James Earl Ray arrived in Memphis in a white Mustang, seen a week after the assassination in Atlanta while he was on the run.
	        	
	        	
	        		(Photo: Shelby County Archives)


Across town, Memphis has a new visitor. And he’s up late, too.


At the New Rebel Motor Hotel, just over the Mississippi line in Memphis' Whitehaven section, James Earl Ray, the guest in Room 34, stirs.


He arrived earlier tonight, at 7:15, registering as Eric S. Galt. He slammed shut his room door around 10 and no one has seen him since. The night clerk notices Ray's room lights on at midnight and again in the wee hours of this new day, Thursday, April 4. Parked outside the room is Ray's white Mustang with red-and-white Alabama tags and the Remington rifle in the trunk.


A misting rain falls as King and his companions pull into the Lorraine courtyard some time after 1 a.m. King is excited. Parked in front of room 207 is a light blue Cadillac convertible with Kentucky tags. His brother A.D. is here.


Rev. A.D. Williams King has been pastor the past three years at Zion Baptist Church in Louisville, where Dr. King's travels have taken him with greater frequency of late. It was there, last May, he grew close to one of A.D.'s female acquaintances. They are lovers. And she is here tonight.


Georgia M. Davis is the newly elected state senator from Louisville's west end — the first black senator in Kentucky history. Her journey to the Lorraine tonight winds through six states and one of history's worst-kept secrets. Just last month, as a rookie senator, she convinced the Kentucky Legislature to pass a landmark fair housing bill. When the session ended she and a friend went on vacation, driving to Fort Walton Beach, Fla., where they were sitting in a two-bed kitchenette overlooking the gulf when the news came on the TV about the riot in Memphis. She called Dr. King.


“Senator, why don't you come to Memphis to help me,” he told her.


And so she and her friend, Lucretia Ward, joined by A.D. King, who flew in from Louisville for a couple days on the beach, climbed into Ward's Cadillac convertible the morning of April 3 and drove all day through the Florida panhandle, up Alabama and Mississippi and finally to Memphis.


RELATED: These 12 must-see civil rights sites in the South enlighten, inspire


“Where is the senator?” King asks as he sees Ward in the open door. It's his pet name for her. Senator. His interest in her career runs deep. King participated in protests the previous May in Louisville in a failed push for a city open-housing ordinance, an effort that gave rise to Davis' later bill in the Senate. During a tight Democratic primary race, King dispatched staffers into the Louisville projects to boost support for Davis.


It's a curious relationship. She is 44 — five years older than King — short, and light-skinned. She is quick-witted, with soft, dark eyes and a disarming, ready smile. And she is direct about her intentions.


“He was not in love with me and I was not in love with him,” she would say years later in her old age. “It was just one of those things that happened.”6


Inside Room 207 the group orders coffee and chats into the night. King talks about the riot, the militants, the challenge ahead. It's around 4 when Davis gets up to leave. As she walks under the lighted balcony to her room King follows. Inside Room 201 he throws open his arms. “Senator, our time together is so short.”


It's nearing 5 a.m. as Davis watches King through her picture window walking through the dark up the Lorraine's concrete steps.


Morning breaks chilly and windy with a gray, cloudy sky hanging across Memphis.


Maid Sadie McKay is doing her rounds at the New Rebel motel, stripping down the beds of departed guests and changing linens. Around 9 she knocks on the door of Room 34.


“Yes,” Ray answers from within. McKay retreats.


“I'll come back later,” she says.


It's 9:30 in the courtroom of Judge Bailey Brown. A graduate of Harvard Law School appointed to the bench by President John F. Kennedy, he is the former law partner of King's attorney, Lucius Burch. But those liberal credentials mean little. Bailey grumbled from the bench in 1963 that some black defendants hide behind civil rights claims to obscure their crimes. And just last year, in the aftermath of wide inner-city unrest, he publicly supported legislation to impose federal criminal penalties against rioters. He's hard to read.


The city's first witness is Frank C. Holloman, a dour ex-FBI agent now heading MPD. He tells the court about last week's riot, describing the looting, the busted store windows, youths with three-foot wooden sticks and others who attacked police with bottles and bricks. He reports statements attributed to King at the rally last night at Mason Temple, that he intends to march with or without an injunction. And, he adds, King has met with local militants.


"I am convinced that Dr. Martin Luther King, his leaders or any others cannot control a massive march of this kind in the city or elsewhere, Holloman says. 


Back at the Lorraine, King faces more turmoil within his group. Dorothy Cotton is upset. She had waited up for him last night with a snack tray he requested. But as the night wore on, King didn't show up. He didn't call. “I'm not going to wait anymore,” Cotton told herself. “I'm going to sleep.”


“I am convinced that Dr. Martin Luther King, his leaders or any others cannot control a massive march of this kind in the city or elsewhere”


Now, she is angry. She is leaving, going back to Atlanta. King hears this and calls her to his room.


“Dorothy,” he tells her. “You can get a later plane.”


“I really need to get this plane,” she insists.


As King's director of education, Cotton heads the SCLC's Citizen Education Program, a five-day workshop in nonviolent strategy and empowerment. It is essential in King's campaigns to help assure peaceful protests. Cotton had planned to hold workshops here in anticipation of securing an orderly march through Downtown Memphis, but now she tells King she must prepare for an already scheduled workshop next week in Atlanta.


“Dorothy,” King says again. “Get a later plane.”


“I'm not getting a later plane. I'm going.”


At 1:05 p.m. Brown gavels his courtroom back into session. The defense's key witness, Rev. James Lawson, takes the stand.


In his white clerical collar and dark jacket, the bespectacled, professorial Pennsylvania native discusses the importance of the mass march and the nature of nonviolence, known to many in the movement as “soul force.”


“Soul force is the weaponry of the spirit,” Lawson tells the court in his clipped, Northern accent. Most black people are poor and can't afford advertising, he explains: The mass march is the only format to get their message across.


RELATED: Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. remembered: Events scheduled during April MLK50 anniversary


In contrast to Holloman, Lawson, who has known King for years and who witnessed last night's “Mountaintop Speech,” offers praise for the civil rights leader.


“Martin Luther King is … as far as I'm concerned, the primary prophet in the United States and in my judgment, at least, the major voice of hope,” he says.


At the Lorraine, King is trying to unwind. He and Abernathy eat lunch, fried catfish piled high on a single platter, with iced tea. They talk about the march. They agree they must move forward, injunction or no injunction, to restore the integrity of the nonviolent movement. Meeting with staff members, they worry again about the Invaders, about another outbreak of violence.


King goes downstairs to Room 201 where he spends time with his brother A.D., Davis and others. He is pensive. As others chat, he lies on his back on a bed. He joins in now and then, but mostly just stares at the ceiling. He brightens when A.D. calls their mother. The two brothers laugh, tease and reminisce on the phone.


LEFT: The view from the common bathroom on the second floor of Bessie Brewer's boarding house shows the Lorraine Motel just 207 feet away. James Earl Ray checked the bathroom before renting a room. This photo was shot the day after the assassination. (AP Photo)

RIGHT: A view of the Lorraine Motel from the common bathroom on the second floor of Bessie Brewer's boarding house. James Earl Ray checked the bathroom before renting a room. This photo was shot the day after the assassination. (By Robert Williams/The Commercial Appeal)

One block west of the Lorraine in a seedy rooming house at 422-1/2 South Main, a new guest checks in.


This is James Earl Ray's kind of place — a second-story flophouse overtop a row of rundown, street-level shops. The walls are grimy and the air stale. Bessie Brewer, the proprietor, notices an odd sneer on Ray's face as pays $8.50 for a week's rent. This morning he was Eric Galt; this afternoon he registers as John Willard.


She shows him a room with a window facing west, away from the Lorraine, and he rejects it. But when she shows him Room 5B, with a window looking out the back of the rooming house onto the Lorraine Motel, he says, “That's fine.”


A news reporter stands in the room rented by the assassin who shot Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in Memphis on April 5, 1968. The civil rights leader was standing on the balcony of the Lorraine Motel when he was killed by a rifle bullet the day before. James Earl Ray pleaded guilty to the killing and was sentenced to 99 years in prison. He died in prison in 1998.(Photo: AP)


It is just after 3 p.m.


In court, Andrew Young takes the stand. SCLC's youthful-looking executive vice president says King had no involvement in planning last week's march.


In fact, there was no serious organization at all. That won't happen this time, he says.


“We would not march unless the conditions to maintain a peaceful march had been established,” he testifies. That includes the SCLC field staff training parade marshals, supervising them.


Now, Brown directly examines Young to satisfy himself.


“To what extent do you think Dr. King is laying his reputation on the line?” the judge asks. What if violence breaks out again?


“I would say that Dr. King, very much like Gandhi, whom he tries to follow … would consider it a repudiation of his philosophy and his whole way of life,” Young answers. “I think that he has so firmly accepted the philosophy of nonviolence and accepted this as his personal mission in life — well, I don't know when I have ever seen him as discouraged and depressed as a few days ago after last (week's) march.”


As court adjourns, Brown calls the lawyers back to his chambers. “I'm going to allow the march,” he tells them. It will be the following Monday under tight restrictions.


It’s nearing 4 p.m. when Ray drives his white Mustang a few blocks north on Main to York Arms Company, a sporting goods store.


Inside, he asks salesman Ralph Carpenter for a pair of binoculars. When Carpenter displays a couple models, one for $90 and another for $200, Ray balks.


“That's a little too expensive.”


Carpenter offers another pair, a Japanese-made Bushnell set. “That's $41.55, tax included,” he says. Reluctantly, Ray reaches into his pocket and pays. “Thank you and come back again,” Carpenter calls as Ray turns. He mutters something indecipherable over his shoulder and walks out.


Young strides into the Lorraine’s room 201 with the good news. But before he can begin, King is up. He is in a playful mood.


“Where have you been?” he teases. “You're always running off doing something without me knowing.” King swings a pillow at Young. Then Abernathy. They are pummeling Young. As the horseplay subsides, Young explains what happened in court. There will be a march Monday.


King and the others disperse. They head to their rooms to freshen up. They've been invited to Rev. Samuel Billy Kyles' house for a soul food dinner.


“And it makes me a little bit sad to know that his last words to me were, ‘Get a later plane.'”


Upstairs, King talks again with his staff. Hosea Williams, a large, affable aide who earned a Purple Heart fighting in World War II and who holds two chemistry degrees, suggests King put Invaders leader Cabbage on staff. His boss bristles.


“Hosea, no one should be on our payroll that accepts violence as a means of social change,” King snaps. For days now, the SCLC has been paying for two rooms at the Lorraine for the Invaders. Now, they are sent packing.


In Atlanta, Dorothy Cotton's flight has landed. She is exhausted. She heads home to her apartment and lies down for a nap.


“He probably was going to apologize,” she would say years later, her eyes wet, recalling her last conversation that morning with King.


"And it makes me a little bit sad to know that his last words to me were, ‘Get a later plane.'"


Officer Willie Richmond peers through binoculars from the fire station. He sees Kyles knock on King's door at Room 306.


Carefully, the detective logs the time: 5:50 p.m.


“We don't want it to be like that preacher's house we went to in Atlanta,” King teases Kyles about the dinner he's hosting. “We had a hambone and there wasn't no meat on it.” King's spirits are high. As Abernathy dotes before the mirror King chortles. “It must be some pretty ladies there tonight.”


King follows Kyles out onto the balcony. Members of his staff are mingling in the courtyard below. Andrew Young is horsing with James Orange. Just five-feet-eight, Young shadowboxes Orange, 6-3 and nearly 300 pounds.


“Don't hurt him, Andy!” King calls down.


LEFT: Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. stepped through the door of Room 306 at the Lorraine Motel on Thursday, April 4, 1968, and spoke with associates in the courtyard below before he was shot. This photo was taken the day after the assassination. (Courtesy Special Collections/University of Memphis Libraries)
RIGHT: James Earl Ray entered the rooming house bathroom, as seen in this photo shot the day after King's assassination, and stepped into the bathtub for a better view. (Robert Williams/The Commercial Appeal)

Richmond isn't the only one watching with binoculars. A half-block to the north, so is Ray. His room window looks over an alleyway perpendicular to the street, and to see the Lorraine he must lean out slightly. As he does he sees King on the balcony.


“Jesse!” King sees his young aide down in the courtyard. Despite their recent fighting in Atlanta, he has invited Jackson to dinner. “You don't even have on a shirt and tie.”


Ray hurries down the hallway with a long bundle wrapped in a bedspread. He enters the common bathroom and latches the door. Inside the bundle is the rifle.


It's commonly used to hunt deer, but it could bring down a bear. Ray steps into the bathtub and throws open the window. The view is unobstructed.


King's face fills almost the entire field of the rifle's seven-power Redfield scope.


“Dinner requires an appetite,” Jackson shouts up at King, “not a shirt and tie.”



    Andrew Young discusses the scene on April 4 in the moments before and after the shot rang out that killed Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
    Jeff McAdory/The Commercial Appeal

Amid the banter, King sees musician Ben Branch. Branch, too, is to be at Kyles' house tonight. King requests he play his favorite song, “Take My Hand, Precious Lord.”


“I want you to play it real pretty,” he says.


Down in Room 201, Davis is primping in front of her mirror. She's only had potato chips and soda today and she is hungry. Her door is partly open and she hears King bantering. “I wish he'd come on,” she tells herself. “I'm hungry. I wish he'd just shut up and come on.”


“You don't have anything to say about when you die. And you don't have anything to say about why you die. Or how you die. But you gonna die. Your only choice is what you die for.”


Years later, when he'd reached 80 and his hair had grayed, Young would furrow his brow and reflect on this moment, forever frozen in time, and something King once told him:


"You don't have anything to say about when you die. And you don't have anything to say about why you die. Or how you die. But you gonna die. Your only choice is what you die for."


The sun is about to set. From the parking lot, Solomon Jones, King's chauffeur tonight, calls up to the balcony. “Dr. King, it's getting cool. You better get a coat.”


It's 6:01 p.m.



    Martin Luther King’s life changed America. Here’s how his death changed it, as seen through the life of a young woman who was at the Lorraine Motel when he was shot 50 years ago.
    Michael Schwab/USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee

Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was born in Atlanta on Jan. 15, 1929. At the time of his death in Memphis he was 39 years and 80 days old. He left behind his wife, Coretta, and four children and an enduring American legacy. On Nov. 2, 1983, President Ronald Reagan signed a bill creating a Martin Luther King Jr. national holiday.


His assassination remains imbued in controversy. In 1979, following a two-year, $6 million investigation, the U.S. House of Representatives concluded that confessed assassin James Earl Ray shot King, but he likely did so as part of a conspiracy. Congressional investigators were unable to pinpoint the conspiracy, but theorized it could have involved a $50,000 bounty placed on King's life by a group of racist St. Louis businessmen. Ray died in prison in 1998 at age 70 maintaining his innocence.


“It didn't matter who pulled the trigger,” King's close adviser, Andrew Young, now 81, said in January. “We were not going to get caught up in who killed Martin Luther King, but what killed him.”


King's many books and speeches, including his 1963 “I Have a Dream” speech, are the subject matter in schools and universities worldwide. But some recall him most fondly for a simple phrase he actually borrowed but repeated many times: “The arc of the moral universe is long but it bends toward justice.”



	        	
	        		The Memphis Commercial Appeal's coverage of the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King JR.
	        	
	        	
	        		(Photo: The Commercial Appeal)


 


    
        © 2018
    
    
        commercialappeal.com, All rights reserved.
    


Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A total of 32 hours passed between when Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s plane landed in Memphis and when he was assassinated by James Earl Ray.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.