On Saturday, June 23, Aeiramique Blake chained herself to four other members of Generation Justice, blocking the roadway for Otay Mesa Detention Center in south San Diego. About 150 protesters who opposed the separation of migrant children from their parents, marched behind them, preventing guards and employees from leaving the detention center facilities.


“We wanted to make a point of what it’s like to be a prisoner and unable to be with your family,” Blake tells Teen Vogue.


The protest was organized in response to the Trump administration’s zero-tolerance immigration policy, which Attorney General Jeff Sessions spoke about in a speech near Otay Mesa Detention Facility on May 7th. This new policy was met with fierce opposition from many San Diego residents, including members of Generation Justice.


Since its inception in 2016, the San Diego-based Generation Justice has worked to improve school disciplinary practices for all students from elementary school to college. It's members have also actively participated in fighting for criminal justice reform and civil rights issues beyond campuses and through various means, including civil disobedience. When Blake learned about the plight of migrant families, she called on a network whose members include local residents, students, and youth trained in restorative justice practice, activism, and leadership development.


According to Blake, the June 23rd act of civil disobedience had many moving parts. The activists were chained together for over seven hours, and people brought water, food, blankets, tents and sleeping bags to support the endeavor. When it became clear the activists would be arrested, Blair Overstreet, the chapter head of Showing Up for Racial Justice (SURJ), an organization dedicated to dismantling structural racism and white supremacy, began fundraising for bail funds. In a few hours, they had raised over $9,000. Other volunteers arranged to pay for bail and pick up those who were released from jail the next day. Lawyers and legal observers came to document the event.


Jeane Wong was one of the people who heard about the protest on social media and arrived at the scene to record the arrest. “I stayed on the outside of the police yellow tape to film the incident,” Wong tells Teen Vogue. “One of the officers walked towards me and moved the yellow tape behind me so that I was now inside of their line. Then a group of officers and sheriffs asked me to move behind that line.”


Wong told Teen Vogue she was concerned for the protestors’s safety. “I felt it could go bad. I didn't feel comfortable moving further back and not being able to witness,” she said of the way police instructed her to move. When she refused to move because her view was obstructed by several officers, she was arrested, too. She did, however, successfully film the arrest


By  9:30 PM, six people, including 17-year-old Nora Pedraza, were arrested. “I can’t describe the feeling of seeing more than three dozen officers, suited up, and ready to move in on [half] a dozen peaceful protesters,” Nora tells Teen Vogue. “At first, I was scared and I couldn’t help letting tears run down my face but [I got] past scared because this wasn’t about me. This was for every child that got ripped from their [parents’] arms.”


Nora was released to her legal guardian that evening and did not spend the night in jail; she tells Teen Vogue a policewoman drove her home. The five remaining protesters were released on bail the next day. (Teen Vogue has reached out to San Diego County Sheriff’s Office for comment.)


On June 26th, U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw in San Diego barred separation in most instances and ordered reunification of separated families. As a result of the ruling, children over 5 must be reunited with their families within 30 days; the government has 14 days to reunite  children under 5 with their families.


And while Blake is pleased with the decision, she warns civilians to remain vigilant. She also feels civil disobedience is an essential means of disrupting the status quo and affecting real change. “I believe sometimes you have to break laws to change laws. It sends a message that we have the power and ability to rise up against the unjust and corrupt inhumane laws,” she explained. “[We] put our bodies and hearts on the line for others, showing that we are truly committed to real change and justice.”


Want more from Teen Vogue? Check this out: A Migrant Mom Spoke Out After Being Reunited With Her 7-Year-Old Daughter


© 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and  Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement  (updated 5/25/18). Teen Vogue  may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. Your California Privacy Rights.  The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 


CNWN Collection