


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The 42nd president campaigned in Paramus for Democratic nominee for governor Phil Murphy

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Sights and sounds from Bill Clinton supporting Phil Murphy and Sheila Oliver in Paramus, Tuesday, October 24, 2017.
    Kevin R. Wexler/NorthJersey.com

Sheila Oliver, Bill Clinton and Phil Murphy are shown during a rally in Paramus, Tuesday, October 24, 2017.
(Photo: Wexler, Kevin, Kevin R. Wexler/NorthJersey.com)

Former President Bill Clinton chastised Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno on Tuesday night for airing an ad against Democratic candidate for governor Phil Murphy, calling it “wrong” and part of a broader tactic ahead of next month’s election to get her Republican base “foaming at the mouth until they need a rabies shot.”


Appearing at the Local 164 union hall in Paramus with Murphy, Clinton urged voters not to fall for what he called a strategy of stirring fears in an attempt to drive the party faithful to the polls in what is expected to be a low-turnout contest.


Clinton did not name Guadagno or her running mate, Woodcliff Lake Mayor Carlos Rendo, but he alluded to the television advertisement that portrays Murphy as someone who would be sympathetic to dangerous illegal immigrants and "have the backs of deranged murderers." Murphy has said he would support making New Jersey a sanctuary state for undocumented immigrants, but that criminals should be prosecuted. 


“To accuse him of what I’ve seen in some of these ads, to scare the living daylights out of people and trying to get their vote based on something that is flat-out false,” Clinton said, “is wrong.”


READ MORE: Guadagno's immigration attack ad links Murphy to convicted killer


GOVERNOR RACE: Everything you need to know about the candidates for governor


Clinton said the ad might seem “wackadoodle” to people. And even though he thinks it’s wrong, he told the crowd that “it’s really smart” because “this is a strategy.”


That strategy, he said, is to count on low turnout and attempt to frighten the party base into voting. Explaining it from the perspective of the candidate, Clinton said, “I can get 90 percent of them to vote and [if] only 15 percent of everybody else votes, I can still win. Go home and do the math. It works." 


While such a strategy may earn votes, Clinton said that "it’s not good for you. It’s not good for your children." 


Kim Guadagno, Republican candidate for governor, leaves the stage for the 2017 gubernatorial debate against Democratic candidate Phil Murphy after being led to the wrong side of the stage before the start at NJPAC on Oct. 10. (Photo: Amy Newman/NorthJersey.com)

Guadagno is trailing Murphy by double digits in public polling with two weeks left until the election. While lowering property taxes is her top goal, she has begun focusing more intensely in the last two weeks on immigration and Murphy's liberal stance on undocumented immigrants. 


Guadagno had no public campaign schedule, but on Twitter she took Murphy to task once again for his promise to make New Jersey a sanctuary state for undocumented immigrants, citing an Immigrations and Customs Enforcement roundup of three dozen illegal immigrants who had been charged with crimes and released from the Middlesex County jail.


Guadagno posted a news article about the roundup and wrote that "Phil Murphy's plan for a sanctuary state is too dangerous for NJ. Just look at what's happening in Middlesex County." 


Phil Murphy’s plan for a sanctuary state is too dangerous for NJ. Just look at what’s happening in Middlesex County: https://t.co/SNFdso2OzT

Responding Tuesday night to Clinton's criticism, Guadagno campaign spokesman Ricky Diaz pointed to the Middlesex County sweep.   


"We see the effect of what a sanctuary-state policy would mean for New Jersey in Middlesex County, where 36 violent criminals were released back onto the streets even though they had ICE detainers out for them," Diaz said. "Bill Clinton would have never proposed what Phil Murphy is proposing with a sanctuary state today. It would endanger law enforcement and prevent local governments from cooperating with immigration." 


During the event in Paramus, Clinton seemed to back Murphy's proposal. A sanctuary city or state is loosely defined, but generally means that those locations would decide how much or how little, if at all, to cooperate with federal authorities on immigration enforcement. 


Clinton said the idea that cities should give the responsible immigrants a chance to "come out of the shadows, to work with law enforcement and with community leaders to embrace a better way of life for all, has broad support in the law enforcement community." 


Murphy did not mention the ad in his brief comments on Tuesday night, but he did allude to Guadagno's campaign's tactics. 


"They’re throwing mud at us, rocks at us, they’re making stuff up, they’re changing the subject," Murphy said. 


Former President Barack Obama campaigns for Phil Murphy, the Democratic nominee for governor, and running mate Assemblywoman Sheila Oliver in Newark on Thursday. (Photo: Viorel Florescu/northjersey.com)

Clinton's appearance caps a star-filled two weeks for Murphy, a former finance chairman of the Democratic National Committee and U.S. ambassador to Germany.


He rolled out a steady roster of big names, including former President Barack Obama, former Vice Presidents Al Gore and Joe Biden and former Secretary of State John Kerry. On Sunday at a private event in Harrison, Clinton's wife and the 2016 Democratic nominee for president, Hillary Clinton, appeared with Murphy. 


 
