Americans have long rejected a national ID, but many U.S. state governments are quietly developing national ID systems in a variety of forms. One is the uniform identity card system envisioned by the REAL ID Act. That federal law, passed in 2005, seeks to subject state drivers’ licensing to federal data collection and information-sharing standards that will facilitate identification and tracking.

State promotion of the E-Verify background check system, which is intended to control the employment of illegal immigrants, is another path to a national ID. Successful implementation of E-Verify will require a national ID, and some states are already sharing driver data with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security so that it can be used in federally administered worker background checks.

Less well known are several other programs poised to produce the same results as a national ID without the requirement of an identity card or other formalities. These developments position states and the federal government to make once-ordinary behavior like driving on city streets and strolling the sidewalks of American towns into recordkeeping events for an overly attentive state. They compose what might be called the new national ID.

This paper summarizes the stances of each of the 50 states on various ID systems, including REAL ID, E-Verify, facial recognition, and license-plate scanning. Together, those technologies—along with other initiatives orchestrated at the federal level—are the leading edge of a national identification and tracking infrastructure.

Officials and citizens in every American state should review their states’ identification, data collection, and data retention policies. The privacy and liberty of all Americans are threatened by such increasingly widespread surveillance systems.

Continue to full version 

The past few years have seen growing awareness and concern about
U.S. government surveillance of the American people. Unfolding
revelations about the National Security Agency’s collection of data
about Americans via access to their basic communications channels
have awakened many people to the increasingly real risk that the
government might get — or already have — outsized
ability to identify and track the populace. With that comes
outsized power to influence and control.

Federal surveillance of private communications infrastructure is
only one avenue along which government can monitor the private
lives of citizens. Another is direct identification and tracking,
such as would be possible under a national identity system. Since
2005, the federal REAL ID Act has encouraged states to combine
their driver-licensing programs into a unified national ID system
run by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS). Some states
also require their businesses and government agencies to use
E-Verify, also run by DHS, to examine the immigration bona fides of
all newly hired workers. Full implementation of the E-Verify
program would ultimately require a national ID system, and it
continues to weave together databases of identifying information
about all Americans. The threat of formal national ID systems is
relatively well known, raising the question of whether the United
States should have such a system.

Less well known are the many other government programs that
would result in the comprehensive tracking of Americans without the
use of an identity card or other formalities. State and local
governments are deploying technologies such as facial recognition
and license plate tracking that can observe and record the
locations and movements of distinctly identified people, collecting
and storing information about their comings and goings. Such
programs position governments to make once-ordinary behavior like
driving on city streets and strolling the sidewalks of American
towns into recordkeeping events for an overly attentive state.
Systems that gather identifying information about people, along
with metadata revealing their movements and activities, together
comprise what might be called the new national ID. These programs
are on a trajectory to produce surveillance and tracking that is
just as consequential and worrisome as the federal government’s
surveillance and formal national ID programs.

A national identity system works against the interests of free
people and a free society in several ways. One is by undercutting
individuals’ privacy. A widely used identification system makes the
collection of identity information easier and less expensive, so
that governmental and corporate bodies collect more records of
people’s actions and movements. Whether directly or by inference,
that recordkeeping exposes more to data holders about people’s
relationships, business activities, political leanings, social
life, sexuality, and more. A national ID system undercuts the
important background privacy protection of practical obscurity: the
difficulty of learning about people when records are not created or
when data are difficult to access or interpret.

Privacy is not just a feeling of seclusion or information
control. It is also a protection for personal power. National ID
systems help shift power from individuals to institutions. While
providing some genuine benefits and protections, extensive
databases of information also render people more susceptible to the
influence or control of data holders. By learning where people have
been, what they buy, with whom they associate, what their assets
are, and where they can be found, for example, data holders acquire
greater power. Businesses have greater ability to influence people
using targeted and tailored marketing, for example. More important
and worrisome, comprehensive databases of personally identifiable
information give governmental authorities greater ability to
exercise dominion over people and their property. People’s
activities are easier for the government to monitor. Their
commercial dealings are clearer to authorities. Their
transgressions are easier for government agents to discover. People
and their assets are easier to find and commandeer. These abilities
give government greater power to control.

One might be inclined to think that U.S. state programs cannot
create a national ID system. They can. A national ID system has
three elements:

The first element of a national ID is that it is used for
identification. This concept is simple, but there are some more
complex subtleties. An identification card or system shows that a
physical person now under observation is the same as someone who
has been identified previously. A national identifier such
as the Social Security number is not a full-fledged identification
system. The Social Security number correlates names to numbers
without making a biometric tie between the number and a physical
person. In contrast, the new national ID systems either identify
people or things very closely associated with people. They
distinctly identify individuals directly from their license plates,
which easily correlate with records about people in other
databases, or through the contours of their faces. From the
observation of people at certain times and places, strong
inferences can be made about their lives and livelihoods, their
predilections and politics.

As to the second element, national uniformity, the question is
not whether one government runs the system, but whether the system
runs nationally. Different jurisdictions across the country may
procure facial recognition systems from different companies. If the
systems use the same algorithms to distinctly identify people, they
are nationally interoperable.

The third hallmark of a national ID is that its possession or
use is either practically or legally required. An identity card
that everyone must carry is obviously a national ID card. A card or
system that is one of many options for proving identity or other
information is not a national ID if people can decline to use it
and still easily access goods, services, or infrastructure. This
option is the case with credit cards, other payment cards, checks,
and cash — among which there are many choices. If law or
regulation makes it very difficult to avoid carrying a card or
using the system, the card or system is in the national ID
category.

The new national ID programs intersect subtly with this prong of
the national ID definition. In the new national ID, nobody
necessarily presses a card into anyone’s hands. Nobody creates a
system of incentives that encourage people to adopt the system.
Rather, the system adopts the people. Camera networks in DMV
offices and on the streets of towns and cities capture identifying
information and collect it in databases for later use. Simply going
about one’s daily business subjects the individual to participation
in the identity system. The only way a person can avoid it is by
obscuring one’s face and license plate, which is at least
impractical and often illegal.

Recognizing the threat to liberty, Americans have consistently
rejected national identity systems that take the form of a card
people might have to carry and produce in response to demands for
“papers, please.” Soviet-style papers and passbooks may be things
of the past, but the cameras and other sensors springing up in
cities and towns all over the country may be the vanguard of the
far more intrusive new national ID.

Americans should ask what their state and local governments are
doing with high-tech tracking, as well as whether safety and
security claims used to justify tracking technology outweigh the
privacy, liberty, and dollar costs of these systems. Some states
have taken steps to control collection, retention, and sharing of
the data about innocent Americans they collect while operating
high-tech safety and security systems. These policies should be
strengthened in the states where they exist and adopted in the
states where they do not.

The pages that follow examine briefly the stances of each of the
50 states toward the well-recognized national ID systems and the
technologies that make up the new national ID. It is only a
snapshot, and many policies are currently under debate and rapidly
changing.

All states collect data about their residents so they can
license drivers. State databases contain photographs and vital
information about drivers, such as age, birthdate, Social Security
number, physical descriptors, home address, and so on. Far too many
states are beginning to comply with the federal REAL ID Act, which
will require them to share this information across a nationwide
network.1 In effect,
adopting REAL ID will create a unified, nationwide database of
drivers’ information.

To facilitate this sharing, REAL ID-compliant states are
expected to adopt uniform standards for collection and storage of
driver information and display of driver data on the license in a
standard machine readable zone. That oblique language in the REAL
ID law refers to the barcodes now seen on many licenses. But in the
future, it could be any technology, including radio frequency
identification. Until recently, several states consistently
rejected the adoption of REAL ID standards, thwarting proponents’
goals in the near term.2
But every state is now complying in some degree with the DHS’s REAL
ID mandates.

A parallel development is E-Verify, the national employment
verification system. E-Verify’s design and goals are simple. It is
meant to allow employers to run the name and Social Security number
of new hires through a system run jointly by the Social Security
Administration and DHS, receiving confirmation or nonconfirmation
of the employee’s work eligibility. Essentially, E-Verify is meant
to let an employer know if the employee is in the United States
legally and if said employee is able to work legally, with the goal
of turning off the “jobs magnet” and ending the employment of
unauthorized workers in the country.

E-Verify does not deliver the easy immigration-control results
it promises.3 The
program is inaccurate, frequently returning false results on
American citizens/permanent residents and unauthorized workers
alike. The system requires the former to prove their legal status,
while the latter are erroneously judged to be
work-authorized.4
E-Verify is a threat to basic liberties, as it may trap ordinary
Americans in a Kafkaesque predicament where their employment and
livelihood are denied unless they prove to federal bureaucrats that
they are who they say they are — without the benefit of the
state-issued driver’s license or ID that nearly everyone relies
on.5

E-Verify and REAL ID originated separately, but they will not
remain separate programs. An addition to the E-Verify program
called RIDE (Records and Information from Department of Motor
Vehicles for E-Verify) shares driver data with the E-Verify system
to check the authenticity of drivers’ licenses issued by states
that opt in.6 With the
continued push for REAL ID by DHS and for E-Verify in conservative
political circles, it is not difficult to imagine E-Verify and REAL
ID becoming fully integrated so that government offices and
businesses alike can be required by law to check the validity of
every American’s state-issued, DHS-approved REAL ID. The day would
not be far off when a national ID is required for picking up
prescriptions, purchasing guns and ammunition, paying by credit
card, booking air travel, and reserving hotel stays, to name just a
few types of transactions the federal government might
regulate.

E-Verify and REAL ID both make use of photographs to identify
people. The REAL ID law called only for a digital photograph and
mandatory facial image capture, but many departments of motor
vehicles (DMVs) are adopting facial recognition software in tandem
with their moves to comply with REAL ID. Facial recognition
software analyzes the features of a person’s face from a
photograph, turning the facial image into a unique signature. As
the technology develops, government agents will be able to run a
photograph taken from a security camera, cell phone camera, or
other source against a national database to see if there is a match
with a base photograph already in the system (such as a standard
DMV photo).7 In a large
jurisdiction like California or Texas, the DMV and law enforcement
would have access to millions of photographs; with REAL ID
information-sharing in place nationwide, even a small-town sheriff
in rural Georgia or Vermont could have access to a database of
hundreds of millions of Americans’ images. And, of course, facial
recognition systems could automatically scan all faces seen in a
public area to look for wanted persons, incidentally gathering and
keeping information about innocent persons in the area, too. Such
facial recognition systems are like “papers, please” without the
“please.”

Similarly, an increasing number of jurisdictions are making use
of license plate readers (LPRs).8 These devices —
typically mounted on police cars or integrated into traffic cameras
— recognize and read license plates on passing cars, allowing
law enforcement to observe the movements of all cars. Automobile
license plate records are in government hands, of course, and cars
are often driven by one or two people exclusively. Especially in
cities with a web of cameras, license plate readers can
unblinkingly pinpoint drivers’ movements minute by minute, hour by
hour, and day by day. Even in towns that have one license plate
reader on the road into town and the road going out, the technology
can record which nights a given resident comes home from work on
time and which nights he or she doesn’t.

Finally, several states have signed memoranda of understanding
(MOUs) with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to provide
facial scans from state repositories so that states can participate
in the so-called Next Generation Identification (NGI) initiative.
The NGI’s ostensible goal is to expand the capabilities of the
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS), the
Bureau’s national fingerprint check system, by integrating
additional biometrics such as facial imaging, palm prints, and iris
scans.9

States already provide fingerprint information to the FBI, and
states that sign MOUs will provide the additional biometrics if
— and when — they become capable. The IAFIS serves a
purpose as part of legitimate law-enforcement activities, and the
NGI is designed ostensibly to expand those capabilities; however,
the nature of these technologies and the expanding new frontiers of
biometrics raise serious questions about potential threats to the
liberties of law-abiding Americans. This is because many of these
technologies enable automated tracking of individuals and because
they can be used to do so without any suspicion on the part of the
individuals being tracked.

Together, these systems — REAL ID, E-Verify, RIDE, facial
recognition, license plate readers, and the nascent NGI — are
the leading edge of identification and tracking infrastructure that
would significantly expand government power over citizens and
residents. Assembled one piece at a time by states separately
complying with federal dictates or seeking minor security gains,
the endpoint of these efforts is a single system for tracking and
control: the new national ID.

Officials and citizens in every American state should review
their states’ policies with care. Figure 1 summarizes each state’s
status at the time of this paper’s publication with respect to
formal national ID systems and the new national ID. The ID symbol
in each column indicates that the state supports that part of the
new national ID project. The X indicates it does not.

State policies with respect to REAL ID are subject to rapid
change because of recent, aggressive DHS efforts to goad the states
into implementation. Since passage of the statutory compliance
deadline in 2008 without a single state participating in the
national ID program, DHS has instituted a long series of improvised
deadlines. Through the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), DHS threatens travelers from noncompliant states with
refusal of their IDs when they arrive at airports. This threat puts
compliance pressure on DHS’s target states, but it also pressures
the agency itself, as members of Congress approach the department
and its leadership with questions and criticism.

DHS’s brinkmanship typically results in some forward movement
among some target states, while others hold out. The agency then
succumbs to political pressure and creates a new deadline 12 to 18
months in the future. The process appears likely to repeat itself
indefinitely. Enforcement of REAL ID that turns away people en
masse at airports will almost certainly never occur.

The state of Nebraska is doing everything on the new national ID
checklist. Maine was doing none of them until it recently
capitulated to DHS pressure for REAL ID compliance. Oregon has
nation-leading protections for the data it collects. Below, each
state’s national ID and privacy practices are briefly summarized
and discussed.

Figure 1: State-by-State Participation in REAL
ID, E-Verify, and RIDE; Use of Facial Recognition and License Plate
Readers; States That Have Signed NGI MOUs

Alabama has a rather poor reputation on privacy issues and data
protection, historically. The state has a complicated, and even
tragic, history with the surveillance of civil rights activists and
opponents of segregation during the 20th century. While Jim Crow is
formally dead and buried, the state could do more to steel itself
against tracking systems that could be used wrongfully in an
uncertain future.

Since 2014, Alabama’s Criminal Justice Information Center
(ACJIC) has owned and operated at least seven mobile license plate
readers. Local police forces also make use of LPR technology,
including the Jefferson County Sheriff’s Office and the Auburn
Police Department. The involvement of the ACJIC, an adjunct of the
state police that provides data to and networks with local law
enforcement, allows for the sharing of captured information between
multiple agencies, thereby creating multiple risks to Alabamans’
privacy.10

In addition to being compliant with the federal REAL ID Act and
all that entails for driver’s license standards and information
collection, Alabama’s law-enforcement agencies have begun a
little-noticed test program of facial recognition software.11 Calhoun and Madison Counties
have both implemented test facial recognition systems in their
county jails. Analyzing 40,000 data points on an inmate’s face and
using 3D snapshots, the technology matches the target’s image
against a preexisting image in a database.

The technology is used by corrections officers in the booking
and release processes to protect “officer safety” and to ensure
that the incoming or outgoing inmates are who they are supposed to
be. While some might not be as concerned about the liberties of
criminals, Calhoun County Sheriff Larry Amerson’s long-term goals
should give everyone pause. The sheriff calls for making his county
a hub through which all counties will link and share their own
facial recognition databases — thus creating a statewide
network. Nor does he wish to limit the program to jails and
corrections: in the long term, the sheriff wishes to make the
system mobile and use it as part of traffic stops and other police
actions.12

Combined with the state’s full-throated embrace of both REAL ID
and E-Verify, as well as its notoriously difficult
records-disclosure provisions, facial recognition presents an
expanding threat to Alabamans’ liberties. Conversely, the state has
robust statutory protections against surveillance and information
collection in places where there is an expectation of privacy (at
home, in a public restroom, in a locker room, and so on).13 Surveillance is permissible
in public areas, however, and could involve facial recognition in
the future.

The “Last Frontier” has developed a reputation for tough,
pioneer, live-and-let-live libertarianism, and rightly so. Alaska
has some of the strongest privacy protections in the nation, and it
is one of only 10 states to include an explicit guarantee of
privacy in its current state constitution. Article 1, Section 22,
of the Alaska constitution bluntly states, “The right of the people
to privacy is recognized and shall not be infringed. The
legislature shall implement this action.”14

Cases before the Alaska Supreme Court have expanded upon the
right to privacy. Its 1972 decision in Breese v. Smith
found that “at the core of this concept [of liberty] is the notion
of total personal immunity from governmental control: the right ‘to
be let alone.’”15
Roberts v. State (1969) noted that the state
constitution’s protections on privacy were greater than those of
the federal Constitution, and that the court was not “bound in
expounding” privacy by the decisions of the “United States Supreme
Court, past or future, which expound identical or closely similar
provisions of the United States Constitution.”16 Ravin v. State
(1975) held that the privacy section protected the right of
individuals to possess a small amount of marijuana for personal
consumption in their abode.17

Statute law contains further protections. There are protections
against license plate capture, for example, as well as against
maintaining DNA in the state’s DNA database if charges against the
data subject are dropped, dismissed, or expunged.18 Although the state does not
have a statutory prohibition on facial recognition software,
fingerprint and iris scans, or other biometric databases,
successive sessions of the state legislature since 2010 have seen
the introduction of bills to that effect.19 These efforts have yet to pay
off; currently, the state DMV uses a facial recognition system as
part of its licensing regimen.20 With the passage of
legislation in May 2017 to make Alaska compliant with DHS’s current
requirements under the REAL ID Act, the privacy of Alaska drivers
is receding.21

Like Alaska, Arizona’s state constitution contains a privacy
provision. Article 2, Section 8, reads, “No person shall be
disturbed in his private affairs, or his home invaded, without
authority of law.”22
However, Arizona’s record on privacy is far weaker than Alaska’s.
Arizona has been REAL ID compliant since March 2016, offering as a
default voluntarily compliant licenses and IDs; Arizona is also a
participant in the RIDE program. Arizonans who wish for
noncompliant licenses and IDs must specifically request
them.23Arizona also has
in place 2007’s Legal Workers Act, which mandates
statewide use of E-Verify on new hires by all employers in the
state.24 Despite several
challenges to the constitutionality of the law, it has been upheld
by the federal courts.25

With regard to other elements of the new national ID, Arizona
does not currently make use of a facial-recognition system, either
by the state DMV or the various state police agencies. State police
do use a license-plate-capture system (separate from the federal
Drug Enforcement Agency’s system that operates along the
border),26 and the state
code includes a so-called stop-and-identify provision. Under
Arizona law, police can detain individuals and demand that they
provide their names. Refusal can lead to arrest.27

Arkansas has a mixed record when it comes to privacy and the new
national ID systems, like several other states in the South.
Although the state has developed through case law some protections
on activity in the privacy of one’s home28 and the right to protect
some of one’s information from both private entities and
government, it has also refused to allow the removal of DNA from
the state DNA database following an exoneration, for
example.29

Statute law is mixed, as well. For example, the state
bans30 private entities
from operating license-plate-capture technology, while allowing
state law enforcement to use the technology.31 An ongoing civil suit from
two large producers and operators of the technology asserts a
violation of the companies’ First Amendment rights by the state;
the state, in turn, asserts that it is protecting the privacy of
citizens — while operating a system of its own.32

Arkansas is compliant with the DHS’s current REAL ID
requirements. The Arkansas DMV maintains a facial recognition
database for licensing purposes. But this database is not just for
licensing: it is also accessed by the Arkansas Crime Information
Center (an arm of the state police).33 A routine traffic stop could
see a driver’s license plate scan and the driver’s face run through
a database for something as minor as speeding.

As by far the most populous state in the union, California is
often a test-bed for ideas that will, in time, spread to other
states. California is often at the forefront of policy debates. And
when it comes to privacy and identification, the Golden State is a
leader, in ways both good and bad.

Article 1, Section 1, of the California constitution — its
Declaration of Rights — has guaranteed, since a 1972
revision, an inalienable right to “pursuing and obtaining safety,
happiness, and privacy.”34 The state Supreme Court has
used the privacy clause to strike down restrictions on abortion,
undercover police stings in schools, and discriminatory zoning
laws, and also to protect financial information during the course
of civil suits.35 As in
Alaska, the state courts have found an explicit guarantee of
privacy under the state constitution greater than that in the
federal Constitution.36

California’s contemporary privacy record is mixed. The state has
recently moved to become compliant with REAL ID (it will spend at
least $220 million and hire 715 bureaucrats to do so)37 but a 2011 state law
prohibits municipalities from implementing Arizona-style E-Verify
mandates.38 California
does not use a facial recognition system for law enforcement, and
the state does not have a stop-and-identify law, which would
require a stopped person to state his or her name and address and
to explain his or her current activities. These are all strong
positives.

The state does, however, make heavy use of license-plate-capture
technology. California was one of the earliest adopters of the
technology, with some Southern California jurisdictions operating
first-generation systems in the early 2000s.39 The three largest police
forces in Los Angeles County — the Los Angeles Police
Department, the Long Beach Police Department, and the county
sheriff’s office — have more than 400 capture devices either
in use or in the midst of the procurement process, creating a huge
node on the new national ID system in the state’s most populous
county.

Colorado has a somewhat strong libertarian image, albeit one
with more than a few blemishes. In addition to being at the
forefront of the marijuana legalization movement, the state has
largely rejected a broad E-Verify mandate. Colorado does mandate
the use of the federal verification program or its state-run,
Colorado-equivalent (the Department Program) for state contractors,
a policy largely in line with the federal government’s requirements
for federal contractors. Private employers are free to use or not
use the systems, but they are not mandated either way.

Colorado’s DMV and police do not use facial recognition
technology, although there has been some discussion of doing so by
the DMV.40 Several
jurisdictions in the state — including Denver, Boulder, and
Colorado Springs — make use of license-plate-capture systems,
and several counties and municipalities have applied to DHS for
program grants.41 A
slight silver lining is that Denver’s police store captured
information for only 21 days, so long as it is not deemed pertinent
to an ongoing investigation.

Colorado also uses a stop-and-identify law, and its record on
other privacy and ID issues is spotty, at best. The state has been
considered compliant with DHS REAL ID requirements since 2012. Its
first gold-star licenses — marked as such to indicate that
identity documents are compliant — were issued in
2011.42 Colorado has
more work to do when it comes to protecting residents’ privacy from
the new (and old) national ID systems.

Connecticut has a less-than-stellar record because of its
compliance with federal programs that trample privacy. Connecticut
was one of the early adopters of the federal REAL ID program, and
it remains one of the only states in New England to be considered
fully compliant by DHS. In hand with REAL ID, the state uses facial
recognition software as part of its licensing process, thus
maintaining a database of driver images that can be accessed by
police with a warrant.

Additionally, the Nutmeg State uses license-plate-capture
systems in several jurisdictions. The state police make use of the
technology as well. A Connecticut U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (ACLU) Freedom of Information request found that, from
2009 to 2012, 10 towns alone in the central part of the state
captured more than six million scans of plates.43 Unlike state police, who must
dump nonpertinent plate scans after 90 days, local jurisdictions
operate under no such limits. In a small town like Newington
(population approximately 30,000), the police can hold onto their
612,000 plate captures indefinitely.44 That threatens the liberties
of the town’s inhabitants, all state residents, and Connecticut’s
visitors.

Like Connecticut, Delaware scores rather low when it comes to
the protection of citizens’ privacy and high when it comes to
creating new, pervasive forms of identification. The First State
has been an enthusiastic adopter of the federal REAL ID Act and all
the new standards that the law entails. With a driving population
as small as Delaware’s, that state stands a good chance of shortly
having the largest percentage of drivers with REAL ID licenses
— and all their associated information stored by the state
DMV. This process includes the use of facial recognition software
and other biometric markers.45 All these methods come in
handy when a citizen is pulled over as part of a routine traffic
stop or is stopped by police under the state’s stop-and-identify
law.46

Delaware’s status as one of the smallest states and as a state
with a relatively high population density has the effect of
concentrating problems. The Delaware turnpike (the state’s major
and unavoidable thoroughfare) alone has 162 publicly acknowledged
cameras along its 13.68 miles, or roughly 12 cameras per mile. This
placement goes hand in hand with the state police force’s heavy use
of license plate capture. If you’re in Delaware and driving,
chances are good that law enforcement can easily figure out who you
are and where you are.

Like Alaska, Arizona, and California, Florida’s constitution
contains explicit guarantees of privacy. Article 1, Section 12,
prohibits unlawful searches and seizures and “the unreasonable
interception of private communications,” unless conducted in line
with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment to the federal
Constitution and rulings of the federal Supreme Court.47 Section 23 provides that
“every natural person has the right to be let alone and free from
governmental intrusion into the person’s private life except as
otherwise provided herein.”48

The sentiments are noble, but Florida’s loyalty to them is
mixed. On REAL ID, the state is fully compliant, with the federal
law’s requirements literally written into the state code.49 State agencies operating
under the direct auspices of the governor (the majority of the
state’s executive branch) are required to make use of E-Verify, as
are government contractors; other public agencies not under the
governor’s direct authority are strongly encouraged to do
so.50 Additionally,
Florida is one of the first states to have signed on to the federal
government’s E-Verify RIDE program, which shares state data with
the federal government so that employers can view driver’s license
and ID photos during the verification process.51

The Florida DMV uses facial recognition software as part of the
driver-licensing process. Law-enforcement agencies ranging from the
state police and the Department of Corrections to the Miami-Dade
County Sheriff and rural police forces also use the
software.52 A traffic
stop by a state trooper in rural Florida or a stop of a pedestrian
under the state’s stop-and-identify law might end up with a
citizen’s image run through the database. The extent of Florida’s
embrace of the technology is unsurprising, given the state’s role
as a charter member of the Facial Identification Scientific Working
Group (FISWG), an arm of the FBI’s oddly named Biometric Center of
Excellence (BCE).53 In
2014, the last year for which clear numbers are readily available,
the BCE received at least $44 million in funding from the FBI’s
nearly $9 billion budget.54

License plate capture runs rampant in Florida, too.
Jurisdictions large and small use the technology to collect license
plate numbers, locations, and times without reference to any
criminal suspicions. Boca Raton’s three cameras (two mobile and one
fixed) alone recorded more than a million plate captures from
August 2010 to August 2013.55

Private companies in Florida operate similar systems, often for
tracking down drivers who have failed to pay their car loans or
payments.56 The ability
of private parties to observe and record information is not as
concerning as the same activity carried out by public entities, but
the public policy that requires display of license plates could be
revisited in light of technology to track them.57 Floridians need to be wary,
though, of privately collected data being turned over or sold to
government for use in law enforcement and less legitimate coercive
activities.

Like its neighbor to the south, the Peach State has a
complicated relationship with its citizens’ right to privacy and
freedom from overly intrusive ID technology. Georgia has a
stop-and-identify law on the books, and it is a REAL ID-compliant
state, with facial recognition added in. Facial recognition is not
just limited to the DMV; certain state law-enforcement agencies
also use the technology. The state Department of Corrections was an
early and enthusiastic adopter, implementing a system for inmate
intake and release as early as 2004.58 State law allows state and
local police to access the DMV’s databases as part of an ongoing
investigation, handing law enforcement a ready-made
database.59

On E-Verify and license plate capture, Georgia also falls short
of the high standard for privacy practices set by some other
states. Georgia is one of the few states to mandate that all
employers, both public and private, use federal employment
verification for all new hires, ensuring that many — and,
eventually, all — Georgians are verified for work
authorization by the federal government.60 On the issue of license plate
capture, the state police and large metropolitan forces (including
Atlanta’s, the largest in the state) have used capture technology
for several years.61 A
recent case before the state Supreme Court upheld the
constitutionality of using information from a capture as probable
cause for a traffic stop and the arrest of a passenger for a crime
unrelated to driving.62

Hawaii is one of a handful of states to explicitly enshrine a
right to privacy in its constitution. Article 1, Section 6, of the
Hawaii constitution states: “The right of the people to privacy is
recognized and shall not be infringed without the showing of a
compelling state interest. The legislature shall take affirmative
steps to implement this right.” Section 7 additionally enshrines
the language of the federal Fourth Amendment’s protections against
search and seizure, but it does not link the content of those
protections to either the federal Constitution or the federal
Supreme Court (unlike Florida’s similar clause).63

Hawaii, however, has a terrible record on citizens’ privacy and
ID rights. After first rejecting compliance with REAL ID, the state
backpedaled and implemented the federal standards, meeting the
DHS’s material compliance checklist in 2013. Hand in hand with REAL
ID, the state has fully embraced law enforcement’s use of facial
recognition technology.

Worse, the state has signed an MOU with the FBI, agreeing to
assist the Bureau’s effort to build the NGI biometrics database by
sharing Hawaii’s facial recognition database.64 The MOU states that full
implementation of the program will “permit photo submissions
independent of arrests” and “permit bulk submission of photos being
maintained at state and federal repositories.” The FBI has also
stated that it wants to use its facial recognition system to
“identify unknown persons of interest from images” and “identify
subjects in public datasets.”65

In short, the FBI wants to build a national ID database, and
Hawaii is doing its part. The Electronic Frontier Foundation has
filed a freedom of information suit in federal court in San
Francisco, California, to get more information on just what the FBI
and willing states are up to with this initiative.66 Hawaii’s participation in
NGI, along with the state’s use of other anti-privacy, next
generation ID tools such as license plate capture,67 should give citizens of the
Aloha State pause.

Like several other states in the Mountain West, Idaho has a
robust tradition of civil libertarianism and opposition to
intrusive programs. Idaho checks a number of boxes, though, when it
comes to threats to privacy from identification systems. The state
originally rejected compliance with REAL ID (statutorily banning
compliance in 2007) and neither the state DMV nor law enforcement
makes use of facial recognition software.68 But in March 2016,
legislation to comply with REAL ID was passed and signed by Gov. C.
L. “Butch” Otter.69 A
handful of jurisdictions in the state make use of license plate
capture, although it is not widespread statewide.70

A 2009 executive order from Governor Otter mandates that the
state government ensure that new hires are work-authorized and
requires similar verification for employees of state
contractors.71 The state
— along with Florida, Iowa, Mississippi, Nebraska, North
Dakota, and Wisconsin — has also joined the federal E-Verify
RIDE program.72

Illinois has a mixed track record on privacy and ID issues. The
state constitution contains a guarantee of remedy under the law for
violations of privacy, as well as a guard against unreasonable
search and seizure.73
Illinois was noncompliant with the federal REAL ID Act until
recently adopting legislation to create a two-tiered, federally
compliant ID system.74

On E-Verify, Illinois has taken arguably the strongest stance
against the verification program. A 2007 law, the Right to Privacy
in the Workplace Act, prohibited the use of E-Verify in the state
unless and until the federal government increased the speed,
security, and accuracy of the slow-moving, cumbersome
system.75 Unfortunately,
that provision was struck down by a federal court in 2009. But
other protections in the 2007 law survive, ensuring that the
E-Verify program remains strictly voluntary in the state. Employers
who choose to use E-Verify must make clear to employees all of
their legal rights to privacy, nondiscrimination, and
appeal.76

Illinois does make use of facial recognition software as part of
its licensing process. The state was one of the first adopters of
the technology back in 1997.77 Several police forces,
including the Chicago Police Department — the largest
municipal force in the state — use the technology as
well.78 The state’s
branch of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) cites the risk
to civil liberties in Chicago, in particular, from facial
recognition technology: the city government operates at least
24,000 cameras (as of 2013), all of which could be eventually tied
into a networked system.79 Combined with the state’s
already widespread use of license plate capture by fixed cameras
and police, as well as the state’s stop-and-identify laws, the
threat to liberties from an integrated network of cameras and
systems is strong.80

While Illinois has a mixed record on privacy and ID issues,
neighboring Indiana has one of the poorest records of any state.
The state was an enthusiastic adopter of REAL ID, embracing the
program shortly after the standards were rolled out in 2008. It was
so enthusiastic, in fact, that the American Association of Motor
Vehicle Administrators (AAMVA) — a DMV managers’ pro-REAL ID
pressure group — gave the state an award for
implementation.81
Indiana has embraced the E-Verify program, mandating its use for
all new public-sector hires and government contractors, and
offering a tax break for private employers who enroll.82

Indiana implemented a facial recognition system in conjunction
with its REAL ID rollout in 2009. In addition to literally
requiring that people not smile in their drivers’ license
photo,83 the technology
is being used by law-enforcement agencies and other agencies of the
state government — including, it seems, the state gaming
commission.84 That the
government body charged with regulating Indiana’s casinos can
access the database raises troubling questions about who else in
the state can access the database and about what authority and
justification are required.

Indiana’s law-enforcement agencies also use
license-plate-capture technology in numerous jurisdictions. Worse,
individual jurisdictions set their own policies on capture and
retention, with municipalities such as South Bend keeping capture
data and images for up to 18 months, with the possibility of an
extension.85 State
police, too, use the technology, performing more than 400,000
captures in 2013 alone.86 A 2013 bill in the state
Senate to place strict limits on how captures are obtained and how
they are retained was unfortunately killed in committee.87 The one thing Indiana does
not do to make itself a new national ID state is provide state
residents’ DMV data to the E-Verify program through the RIDE
program.

Iowa’s new national ID record is largely negative. The
legislature and executive branch have rejected mandatory E-Verify
legislation and executive orders, but the state has embraced REAL
ID wholeheartedly.88
Despite rejecting mandatory E-Verify so far, Iowa is one of a few
states to embrace the federal government’s RIDE program, making the
personal information of license holders available to the federal
government’s employment verification systems.

Iowa has also embraced the use of facial recognition technology.
The state Department of Transportation uses the technology as part
of the licensing process, and police have begun to use the database
of images to make arrests.89 Mandatory image capture for
sex offenders has been considered as well.90 It is hard to oppose the
technology’s use on sex offenders and longtime fugitives, but it
might be soon coming to all Iowans: the state Department of Public
Safety, which oversees policing and security in Iowa, is interested
in developing the capability to implement widespread use of
recognition systems for law-enforcement purposes.91

Kansas has a mixed record on national ID and privacy issues. The
state legislature rejected a statewide E-Verify mandate in
2012.92 On the other
hand, Kansas is fully compliant with the DHS’s current REAL ID Act
requirements — indeed, the state was nearly fully compliant
when the original compliance benchmarks were first rolled
out.93 The state uses
facial recognition, and the data are maintained by the state DMV,
ostensibly to prevent the issuance of multiple licenses to one
individual.94

Individual jurisdictions in Kansas use license-plate-capture
technology, with local police forces apparently setting their own
standards for how long the data are held and who can access it. A
2012 Freedom of Information request from Kansas’s branch of the
ACLU to the local police department of the small town of Hutchinson
shed some light on these policies.95 Hutchinson’s response to the
request stated that the department kept all data until space was
needed on its servers, that any officer could access the data, and
that it could be shared with other forces and agencies as part of
an investigation. The response stated that the Hutchinson Police
Department has neither training materials for the system nor any
training program at all. If Hutchinson’s example is anything to go
by, all Kansans should be concerned.

Kentucky had one of the better records on privacy and ID with
respect to participation in federal programs, but it recently moved
toward complying with REAL ID.96 The state does not require
use of E-Verify by public or private employers.

However, the state has maintained (since 2005) a facial
recognition database that uses driver’s license pictures.97 Access to the data is
limited, according to one report; only 34 DMV and law-enforcement
officials can access the database.98 The effectiveness of
Kentucky’s system has been questioned. The Electronic Frontier
Foundation has asserted that Kentucky’s system is largely useless
without “sterile” conditions, requiring a suspect’s picture to be
at the same angle as a DMV-taken picture to return an effective
result.99 If true,
Kentuckians should ask why they are paying for the system.

Louisiana has a mixed record on anti-privacy and ID programs. On
E-Verify, the state’s approach is largely governed by two 2011
laws: HB342 and HB646.100 The bills amended state law
to mandate E-Verify use for government contractors (but not public
employees) and to require private employers to check their new
hires’ IDs. The statute recommends — but does not mandate
— the use of the federal system. Louisiana does not allow
automatic license plate readers; on June 19, 2015, then-governor
Bobby Jindal (R) vetoed a bill that would have allowed widespread
use of automatic license plate readers by law enforcement.101

On facial recognition systems, Louisiana is one of 13 states
declining to use the technology for licensing or law-enforcement
purposes. However, Louisiana is compliant with REAL ID thanks to
2016 legislation signed by Gov. John Bel Edwards (D).102

Worsening matters for Louisianans, the summer of 2016 saw a
massive data breach of the state’s driver information databases.
Coinciding roughly with the state’s adoption of REAL ID, more than
290,000 residents of Louisiana were apparently affected by the
breach. The stolen information was typical of that which is held by
motor vehicle bureaus: name, license number, state of issuance,
address, phone number, email address, and driving records.
Louisiana’s adoption of REAL ID will make such occurrences more
consequential in the future.103

In total, Louisiana is quite good on plate capture and facial
recognition technology. One can hope that it will continue to be so
in the future. On REAL ID and E-Verify, it has plenty of room to
improve.

The Pine Tree State’s former strong record on ID privacy took a
step backward early last year with the passage of REAL ID
compliance legislation. Maine’s legislature passed noncompliance
resolutions for REAL ID as early as 2007, and the state remained
noncompliant for a long time in the face of federal efforts to
force adoption of the national ID law.104 In April 2017, the state
legislature finally capitulated, passing legislation to enter Maine
into the national ID system.105 On the other big federal
identification program, E-Verify, Maine does not impose a mandate
on public or private workers.106 Maine employers are free to
choose whether they want to use the system.

Maine has arguably taken one of the strongest
anti-facial-recognition-software stances in the country. The state
does not use the technology; according to Secretary of State
Matthew Dunlap, the state government prohibits its use by any state
agency.107 Only one
county in the state has purchased software for its police force,
and the press coverage of Cumberland County’s decision to spend
$35,000 on an error-ridden, privacy-trampling system has been
hostile to say the least.108

Maine has taken similarly strong stands on the issue of
license-plate-capture technology. A 2009 law places hard limits on
what law enforcement and the state Department of Transportation can
and can’t do with plate capture data.109 Plate captures can be only
for legitimate law-enforcement purposes, the data must be kept
confidential, and that information may not be stored for longer
than 21 days if not part of an active investigation.110 Maine’s law is a model for
other states.

The Old Bay State has a mixed record on federal programs and a
poor one on the new national ID programs. Maryland does not mandate
the use of E-Verify for public and private employees or for
government contractors. However, it is REAL ID compliant, issuing
gold-star licenses to all citizens and legal residents, though it
does give non-REAL ID licenses to unauthorized aliens who can prove
residency in Maryland.111 Maryland is also a
participant in the RIDE program.112

Maryland allows license plate reader technology to be used by
law enforcement. However, the use of the technology is subject to a
2014 law that limits its usage and places restrictions on access,
data use, and data retention.113 While not perfect, the law
is a step in the right direction.

However, the state put in place a facial recognition system in
March of 2011. This system was originally run by the state
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, which
oversees the state police and prison system. More than 2.1 million
photos of offenders and convicts were uploaded. But the database
does not stop there. In December 2011, Maryland joined Hawaii and
signed an MOU with the FBI, integrating the state’s smaller
database with the Bureau’s larger database of more than 12 million
photos.114

Some may not have many qualms about sharing perpetrator photos
with the chief federal law-enforcement agency. In the spring of
2013, though, Maryland added nearly 6 million driver photos from
the state’s Motor Vehicle Administration to the state (and, via the
MOU, to the federal) photo database. Maryland has erected a
formidable surveillance system. It’s not just criminals and
convicts anymore who have to fear: it’s millions of law-abiding
Marylanders, too.

Massachusetts’s experiences with privacy and ID (and facial
recognition, in particular) offer a fine example of the danger and
the absurdity of the new national ID. That the state does not
mandate or encourage the use of E-Verify is helpful, but that fact
does not detract from a problematic facial recognition
system.115

The state Registry of Motor Vehicles (RMV) maintains facial
recognition software and a database of license photos, which state
police can access if they make a request.116 Recent technological
advances have given county sheriffs’ departments the ability to
access the databases remotely, turning patrol cars into arms of a
vast, networked database.117

The experiences of one Massachusetts resident highlight the
dangers and absurdities of these programs. In 2011, John H. Gass, a
law-abiding resident of Natick, received a notification from the
RMV informing him that his license had been revoked. It turned out
that the state’s facial recognition software had flagged his
license picture as a duplicate of an existing picture; apparently,
Gass bore a resemblance to one of Massachusetts’s other 4.6 million
drivers. The innocent man was forced to go through a lengthy
process of appeals with the RMV, which required that he prove to
that department that he was who he said he was.118

Gass’s experience is a hint of what may be to come under
centralized governmental ID systems. Americans may increasingly
find themselves having to prove their identity to the government
using government documents and government-issued IDs that the
government asserts are fake or false. It creates an absurd cycle,
where the burden of proof is placed on the defendant (the ordinary
citizen) as opposed to the accuser (the government). Gass’s
experience should be a wake-up call to Massachusetts and America as
a whole.119
Massachusetts signed up for REAL ID compliance in July of
2016.120

Michigan has a mixed record on protecting the privacy and ID
rights of its citizens. On REAL ID, DHS considers the Wolverine
State technically noncompliant, but it has begun issuing federally
compliant IDs, and several benchmarks have been met.121 On E-Verify, the state has
no mandate for public or most private workers, with the only
mandate being imposed upon government contractors who work with the
state Department of Transportation.122

Michigan has not put in place facial recognition software as
part of its licensing process. However, the state police force does
use the technology, including mug shots, correctional facility
photos, and photographs taken as part of active
investigations.123 As
one of four states to sign an MOU with the FBI as part of the
Bureau’s NGI program, Michigan’s system is connected to the federal
test system. Michiganders may take solace in knowing that the
program is currently confined to mugshots and pictures of
criminals, but they should worry about the day when the state turns
over its vast database of driver’s license photos.

Minnesota recently moved from having a somewhat good record on
privacy protection and ID issues to a decidedly mixed one. The
state was long noncompliant with the REAL ID Act, even defiant of
it with a ban against participation enshrined into state law in
2009.124 However,
Minnesota finally succumbed to DHS threats and adopted compliance
legislation in May 2017.125

Use of the federal E-Verify system is only required for
government contractors executing contracts of more than
$50,000.126 In 2009,
former governor Tim Pawlenty (R) implemented an executive order for
all new public employees to be verified; in 2011 Pawlenty’s
successor, Gov. Mark Dayton (D), vetoed an attempt by legislators
to reimpose the mandate and allowed the order to lapse.127

Minnesota’s law enforcement and DMV use facial recognition
software. The former uses the technology in correctional facilities
and to run mugshots through a database of known felons, while the
latter uses it to protect against multiple-license fraud.128 Minnesota law circumscribes
how facial images can be used.129

That law hasn’t stopped some officers and officials from abusing
the system. Illicit and illegal searches of the system appear to be
rampant in Minnesota. More than 8,400 verified illicit lookups of
information were conducted according to an audit by state
officials, revealing photographs, addresses, and driving records,
typically of women who are former police officers, TV news
personalities, and ex-partners of public employees.130 Potentially 19,000 more were
conducted by a single employee of the state’s Department of Natural
Resources. Eighteen federal lawsuits against towns and the state
have been launched over the rampant abuse, and more may be in the
pipeline.131

On the issue of plate capture, 2014 legislation included
language from an earlier bill that aimed to restrict the practice.
The final bill, as passed, effectively creates a 120-day limit for
use of the data by the appropriate law-enforcement agency. If the
captured images and data are not being used, they are reclassified
as private data (as opposed to confidential data), which is more
carefully protected under the law.132 Again, this is a small
protection, but it is a protection nonetheless.

Like neighboring Alabama, Mississippi has a poor record on ID
privacy. The state is compliant with REAL ID and, to make matters
worse, is DHS’s lead state in a consortium studying how to better
integrate state and federal information databases.133 Mississippi mandates that
all employers use the E-Verify system, and the state is also a
member of the RIDE program, allowing for checks of employees’
driver’s licenses as part of E-Verify’s verification process.

On the facial recognition front, Mississippi has one of the
longest-running programs in place, first implemented in
2003.134 In addition to
integrating the state police’s collection of images with those of
the state’s 82 county forces and numerous municipal forces,
Mississippi allows law enforcement to access the state’s driver’s
license photo database under certain circumstances. Additionally,
police forces in the state use license- plate-capture technology,
especially in large municipalities such as Jackson.135

Missouri has recently faltered from its generally good record on
privacy issues. The state was noncompliant with REAL ID (with a
strict legislative ban on compliance in place),136 but recently adopted
legislation to come into compliance with the DHS’s current
requirements under the national ID law.137 Missouri also has an
E-Verify mandate in place for public employees and government
contractors working on contracts of more than $5,000; however,
there is no private-sector mandate.138

On the issue of facial recognition software, Missouri signed a
contract with a vendor to implement a driver’s license facial
recognition system in 2011. In 2013, however, work on the system
stopped.139 Opposition
to implementing the intrusive system surfaced in both the state
House and state Senate, and the fiscal year 2014 appropriations
bill for the state Department of Transportation included a clause
that killed funding for any photo verification system.140 By doing so, Missouri’s
legislature struck a blow for liberty.

Like several other states, Montana enshrines the right to
privacy in its constitution. Article 2, Section 10, of the Montana
constitution notes that “[t]he right of individual privacy is
essential to the well-being of a free society and shall not be
infringed without the showing of a compelling state
interest.”141 How, then,
does the Big Sky Country stack up when it comes to privacy?

Montana has done well to resist REAL ID in the past but recently
moved to grudgingly comply with the national ID law. Recent
legislation gives Montanans the option of paying a fee for a
special license that complies with federal requirements.142 The state has no E-Verify
mandate in place for either public or private employers. On the two
state-federal collaborative programs, then, Montana until recently
did very well.

At the state level, Montana uses facial recognition technology
as part of its licensing process, ostensibly to prevent fraud and
multiple issuances.143
Police are unable to access the database of photos.144 Police forces in the state
do not currently use license plate readers, though, and there is a
budding legislative movement against allowing the technology to be
used.145

Nebraska has a poor record on privacy and ID issues. In fact, it
is the one state that does everything on the new national ID list.
The state is fully compliant with the current requirements of the
federal REAL ID Act, adopting most of the law’s provisions via
2009’s LB 261.146
Nebraska also has an E-Verify mandate in place for public-sector
employees and government contractors, and the state Department of
Revenue grants tax breaks to certain categories of private
employers if they use the federal program.147 Businesses are given
financial incentives to embrace E-Verify, as opposed to putting in
place a hard mandate. Some local municipalities (most notably, the
town of Fremont) have put in place their own private sector
E-Verify mandates, despite ongoing legal challenges.148 Additionally, Nebraska is
one of the few states to participate in RIDE.149

As part of its embrace of REAL ID, Nebraska integrated facial
recognition into its licensing process in 2009.150 State statutes prevent the
dissemination of driver’s license photos to any but local, state,
or federal law enforcement undertaking an investigation,151 with most requests for
access routed through the Nebraska Criminal Justice Information
System.152 Nebraska has,
however, entered into an MOU with the FBI for the Bureau’s NGI
program, providing easy access to the database for federal
investigators.153
Combined with Nebraska’s various police agencies’ heavy and
increasing use of license-plate-capture technology, Nebraskans are
unwitting participants in the new national ID system.154

What happens in Vegas stays in Vegas — on video. That
statement applies also to Nevada’s new national ID programs. The
state deserves credit, though, for avoiding federal mandates in the
past.

On REAL ID, the Silver State is currently compliant with DHS’s
requirements, having reversed its earlier opposition to the
national ID program. The state legislature passed an
anti-compliance resolution as early as 2007.155 But in 2009, then-governor
Jim Gibbons (R), a REAL ID proponent, issued an executive order to
the state DMV ordering compliance. A successful lawsuit brought by
the state ACLU, the Clark County Republican Party, gun rights
groups, and libertarian groups killed the governor’s backdoor
implementation.156
Proponents, however, tried again, and the legislature brought the
state into compliance. In 2015, Nevada began issuing REAL
ID-compliant licenses.

E-Verify, too, has met opposition in Nevada — an
unsurprising fact in a state with a large population of native-born
Hispanic Americans, who are more likely than others to encounter
mix-ups in the system and discrimination from employers. The state
has so far declined to put in place public- or private-sector
mandates, despite the urgings and efforts of some elected
officials.157

Nevada does, however, have in place a facial recognition system
as part of the state’s licensing process. The system is internal to
the DMV and is typically accessed only by “sworn employees”
investigating potential cases of license fraud.158 Importantly, police do not
have free access; they must submit photos to the DMV to have them
run through the system.159 It’s a small protection, but
a protection nonetheless.

Unfortunately, the state does use license plate reader
technology, as well. The Nevada Highway Patrol (NHP) uses the
technology in conjunction with the federal Drug Enforcement Agency
(the state force having no tracking devices of its own). The reader
units themselves belong to the Drug Enforcement Agency, with the
NHP passing plate captures along to the federal agency — in
effect, acting as deputies for federal law enforcement.160 Local jurisdictions such as
Boulder City, Reno, and Henderson use their own, independent
readers for local law enforcement, as well.161

If any state in the Union is associated with the ideas of
liberty and government noninterference in the lives of citizens, it
is New Hampshire, home of “Live Free or Die” and a flinty
libertarian tradition. Unsurprisingly, New Hampshire does well on
protecting the liberties and privacy of its citizens from the new
national ID, though it has recently weakened. Efforts by members of
the state legislature to introduce E-Verify mandates have been
rejected in several sessions of the legislature, with a recent
example — HB267 — being ruled “inexpedient to
legislate” on during the 2015 session.162

Additionally, state law makes the use of facial recognition
scanners by the DMV and law enforcement exceedingly difficult, if
not impossible. Section 260:10-b of the state code prevents the
state from collecting — in conjunction with licensing or
motor vehicle registration — most forms of biometric data,
including facial scans and retina scans.163 Other provisions create
strict standards and regulations for law enforcement’s use and
maintenance of any of the biometric data that are collected as part
of legitimate criminal investigations.164

Finally, New Hampshire does not allow the use of
license-plate-capture technology. The law is clear: Section
261:75-b of the state code bluntly states, “The use of automated
number plate scanning devices is prohibited except as provided in
RSA 236:130.”165 The
sole exceptions are when the scanning is permitted on a
case-by-case basis as part of an active investigation (blocking
random, roving scans) or for operating automated toll systems,
among other mundane administrative tasks of the state Department of
Transportation.166 Even
then, hard blocks are in place about how the data can be used,
along with explicit prohibitions on transmission of data or its use
for roving or illicit surveillance.

However, there is one black mark on New Hampshire’s record: REAL
ID. New Hampshire was an early state to reject REAL ID, passing a
ban on implementation of the federal standards in June
2007.167 That ban was
overturned in May 2016 with the passage of HB 1616, a bill to bring
New Hampshire — the birthplace of the REAL ID rebellion
— into compliance with the federal ID law. Effective January
1, 2017, New Hampshire began issuing REAL ID licenses.168

New Jersey’s record on privacy and ID rights is mixed, at best.
For a long time, the Garden State was noncompliant with REAL ID,
but that noncompliance was something of a fluke: the state was
moving ahead with compliance until a court order suspended the
effort. Since then, it has become clear that state officials will
bring the state into line with the federal ID standards.169 Efforts to implement
mandatory E-Verify in New Jersey for all employers have failed in
successive sessions of the legislature, with the same bill being
introduced in 2010 and in 2014.170

The state has, however, implemented facial recognition software
for licensing and for law enforcement. A vast review of every New
Jersey facial image (creatively titled Operation Facial Scrub) was
conducted between 2011 and 2013, with more than 19 million photos
in the state Motor Vehicle Commission’s database scanned to look
for duplicates.171 All
new pictures in the database will be “scrubbed” against existing
photos as they are added. As Massachusetts’s problems with false
matches have shown, innocent New Jerseyans will risk falling afoul
of these automated scrubs.

Finally, New Jersey — famous (or infamous) for its Parkway
and Turnpike — is no stranger to the use of license plate
readers by state police and municipal police forces. The state’s
regulations relating to the use of the readers are extremely loose.
A 2010 directive issued by the state attorney general limits scans
to license plates on vehicles that are in public view, which is
defined as “vehicles on a public road or street, or that are on
private property but whose license plate(s) are visible from a
public road, street, or a place to which members of the public have
access, such as the parking lot of a shopping mall or other
business establishment.”172 In short, any car in New
Jersey that is not parked in a closed private garage is fair game
for a roving license plate reader.173

New Mexico once rejected compliance with REAL ID; the state’s
practice of issuing standard, undifferentiated driver’s licenses to
unauthorized migrant residents ensured that it could not comply
with the terms of the national ID law.174 In late 2016, however, New
Mexico adopted a two-tiered licensing system, offering both
compliant and noncompliant licenses.

The Enchantment State imposes no E-Verify mandates on either
public or private employees.175 Given the large Hispanic
American population and the rather vocal opposition of local
activists, officials, and the Catholic Archdiocese of Santa Fe to
anti-immigrant ordinances, the state’s reluctance to push E-Verify
is unsurprising.

New Mexico does, however, have a robust facial recognition
system in operation at the state DMV. The state uses the technology
for law-enforcement purposes, too. To make matters worse, New
Mexico is one of several states to sign an MOU with the FBI about
the Bureau’s NGI program.176 Although the pictures and
images that are — so far — being uploaded are mugshots,
correctional facility images, and so on, it’s not a huge leap to
imagine New Mexico’s driver’s license images joining the federal
government’s ever-expanding database for facial recognition in the
future.

Like California, the sheer size of New York’s population and its
influence on matters of public policy give the state weight beyond
that of most others. How does New York fare when it comes to
protecting the privacy and ID rights of its citizens? New York’s
record, like California’s, is complicated.

Like many, the Empire State was noncompliant with REAL ID until
recently. It is now issuing gold-star licenses to make the state’s
driver-licensing regime acceptable to the federal
government.177 New York
does not enforce an E-Verify mandate, either. The state does,
however, use a robust facial recognition system as part of its
licensing process. “Robust” may be understatement; the state DMV
maintains a database of more than 20 million images against which
every new picture is scanned. Ostensibly to fight fraud, state
officials have touted 13,000 investigations and 2,500
arrests.178

As in New Jersey and Massachusetts, the technology raises the
specter of false positives and the risk of citizens being forced to
prove to the state that they are who they say they are without
using their driver’s licenses. As the New York Police Department
(NYPD) (the largest municipal police force in the United States)
and other forces begin to use facial recognition software as a
policing tool, the likelihood of errors creating legal challenges
and rights violations for innocent citizens grows.179

Unsurprisingly, too, the NYPD and other police forces have been
eager adopters of license-plate-capture technology. In Manhattan,
for example, it is impossible to enter or leave the borough by car
without having one’s license plate scanned; all of the bridges and
tunnels into and out of the island are covered.180 Mobile readers in the city
and fixed-location cameras (both public and private) have given the
NYPD a database of more than 16 million plate captures (as of
2013), which can be stored for up to five years and run through the
city’s multimillion dollar, dashboard-equipped Domain Awareness
System.181 Other cities
and towns are getting on board, too, with the state earmarking
roughly half a million dollars in grants to local forces for the
purposes of getting their own systems.182 Leviathan grows in New
York.

North Carolina has a poor record when it comes to protecting the
privacy and ID rights of its residents. State officials brought the
state’s licensing regime into compliance last year, and several of
the DHS benchmarks for REAL ID compliance have been
implemented.183 If that
isn’t bad enough, the state also imposes an E-Verify mandate on all
public and private employers.184 The 2012 legislative
session’s HB36 apes federal proposals for mandatory E-Verify, with
staged implementation based on the size of the employer coming
fully into effect for all businesses in July 2013. An earlier bill,
SB1523 in 2007, implemented a mandatory requirement for all public
employees and government contractors.185

Unsurprisingly, North Carolina’s DMV and law enforcement use
facial recognition technology and license plate capture. The state
was one of the earlier adopters of facial recognition technology
(as early as 2004). Having signed an MOU with the FBI, it shares
its vast driver and criminal databases with the federal
government.186 License
plate captures are also poorly protected; a 2013 bill to regulate
law enforcement’s use of the technology and provide some clarity to
the state’s murky laws and regulations governing it died in the
state Senate.187

North Dakota once rejected compliance with REAL ID, but recently
made the national ID an “opt-in” program for its residents.188 The state has not
implemented E-Verify mandates for public- and private-sector
employers.189 North
Dakota does, however, participate in the RIDE program, tying the
state’s DMV database to the (for employers) voluntary E-Verify
process.190

The state uses facial recognition technology at its DMV and has
done so since 2010.191
Police appear to have limited access to the database, as part of
the DMV’s fraud prevention. License plate readers do not appear to
be used in the state, although some assert that the Bismarck Police
Department does — clandestinely — operate the
technology; the Bismarck Police Department denies this
charge.192

Ohio has a mixed record on the issue of privacy and ID rights,
with some spectacular highs and lows. Ohio is the only state (so
far) to embrace REAL ID, reject it, and then embrace it again.
Deemed compliant by DHS in December 2012, the Buckeye State rolled
back compliance, citing concerns over privacy and data
protection.193 It then
reversed course again and brought Ohio’s licenses into compliance
once again in 2015.194
Ohio has not imposed an E-Verify mandate, with a 2012 bill to do so
dying in the legislature.195

Ohio runs a facial recognition system at its DMV (an offshoot of
REAL ID compliance); according to one report, the state has the
loosest standards in the nation for access to the database.196 More than 30,000 state and
local police officers and court employees can access the Ohio
database, which was established by and is still run by the state
attorney general’s office (in contrast to other states, where the
databases are under the purview of the motor vehicle bureau). By
comparison, only 34 people in neighboring Kentucky can access that
state’s database, and all those who do must receive training on the
system. In Ohio, there is little in the way of formal training and
little in the way of checks on access. Indeed, information is
shared not only with Ohio officers and government employees, but
also with their federal counterparts and counterparts in other
states.197

Little has been done to tighten Ohio’s standards and practices
for access and use of its facial recognition database. The
potential for abuse is ripe, and Ohioans should be deeply concerned
about the easy access to their personal biometric information.
Ohio’s lax treatment and security should also concern all
Americans. As goes Ohio, so could go the whole country.

Oklahoma recently caved in an important way on protecting
citizens’ privacy and ID rights. The state and successive
gubernatorial administrations had been staunch opponents of the
federal REAL ID Act, banning compliance through 2007’s Oklahoma SB
464. But in early 2017, the Oklahoma legislature passed, and Gov.
Mary Fallin (R) signed, legislation to bring the state into
compliance with federal mandates.198 Oklahoma also has an
E-Verify mandate in the form of 2007’s Oklahoma Taxpayer and
Citizen’s Protection Act (HB 1804).199 The mandate applies only to
public-sector workers and government contractors, however; it does
not include a private-sector component.

The state does not use a facial recognition system as part of
its licensing process. However, it does capture other biometric
information as part of the process (namely, fingerprinting) and
does use high-quality photography. Oklahoma’s use of biometrics has
received some outside attention from Tea Party members and
religious groups because of a lawsuit brought by state resident
Kaye Beach. Beach’s suit objects to the biometric requirements of
the state’s licensing regime on the grounds of privacy and
religious freedom, calling the technology the “mark of the
Beast.”200

Finally, since 2012, Oklahoma City Police — the largest
municipal police force in the state — have used license plate
readers, retaining the resulting data for up to 90 days.201 The ACLU has found that
three other jurisdictions — Tulsa, Norman, and Lawton —
use the technology, meaning that the state’s four largest
municipalities (and four-largest population centers) capture
license plates with little oversight.202

Like the other states in the Pacific Northwest, Oregon has had a
good record on protecting privacy and ID rights — with a few
notable and recent hiccups. Oregon has rejected mandates for
E-Verify for both public- and private-sector employers.203 The state was firmly
noncompliant with REAL ID, having banned compliance by statute in
2009, but legislation passed in July 2017 puts the state on a path
to implementation of the national ID law.204

Oregon does use facial recognition software at its DMV. Although
Oregon’s facial recognition technology, collection of other
biometrics, and collection of personal information seem as ominous
as comparable actions in other states, the Beaver State has one
thing that most other states don’t: ironclad privacy protections in
the state code. Section 801.063 bars unwarranted and warrantless
disclosure of DMV information to outside parties, and it explicitly
bans participation in federal or multistate data sharing schemes
unless and until the other jurisdictions meet Oregon’s high
standards for privacy protection.205

Oregon does a good job of protecting biometric data, and a
movement is beginning to protect other forms of data. Spurred by
the National Security Agency spying scandal and the revelation that
Portland’s police department is capturing more than 100,000 license
plate images a day, legislators have considered important
controls.206

Pennsylvania’s record on privacy and ID rights is poor.
Promisingly, the Keystone State rejected compliance with the
federal REAL ID Act through legislation in May 2012.207 But in the spring of 2017,
it capitulated to the federal government and passed legislation to
implement REAL ID, which will cost the state $27 million in the
first year and between $17 million and $20 million per year
thereafter.208
Pennsylvania adopted a public-sector and government contractor
E-Verify mandate almost simultaneously with its July 2012 rejection
of REAL ID. That mandate imposes heavy fines and gives the state
the ability to suspend business licenses for repeat failures to use
the E-Verify system.209

Pennsylvania has, unfortunately, a facial recognition system
that it uses at its DMV, despite rejecting REAL ID. To make matters
worse, the state has fully integrated its driver database with
state law enforcement’s Justice Network.210 The Justice Network’s facial
recognition system has access to every Pennsylvania driver’s image,
allowing 500 local, state, and federal law-enforcement agencies to
access driver images. The pre-Justice Network database was
accessible only to state police and the state attorney general’s
office. Although not as bad as Ohio’s vast and easy access,
Pennsylvania has drastically expanded both the scope and level of
access to the biometric data of its 8.8 million drivers.

The smallest state has some worrisome policies when it comes to
the protection of citizens’ privacy and ID rights. Not all are bad.
In 2011, Gov. Lincoln Chafee (I) overturned an E-Verify mandate
imposed by his predecessor in 2007.211

Although noncompliant for many years, the state embraced several
of the benchmarks of REAL ID and went beyond it with an advanced
facial recognition system and the collection of other biometric
information.212 Governor
Gina Raimondo (D) recently determined to bring the state into
compliance with REAL ID.213

Law enforcement can freely tap into the facial recognition
database. There are no checks on license plate capture, the other
scourge of privacy and free travel. There have been moves to make
it more pervasive; two bills during the 2013 session of the Rhode
Island legislature would have expanded the scope of usage by
police.214 They expired
before the session ended.

Rhode Island’s code allows for untrammeled storage of digital
data and for the digitization of analog information. This storage
includes facial information, other biometrics, Social Security
numbers, tax numbers, and most other forms of personal
identifiers.215

South Carolina is part of that small group of states that
enshrines a right to privacy in its state constitution. Article 1,
Section 10, of South Carolina’s constitution is largely a
restatement of the federal Fourth Amendment, guaranteeing South
Carolinians protections against unreasonable invasions of privacy
and promising that no searches or seizures of items or information
will be conducted without a warrant issued based upon probable
cause.216

The Palmetto State was one of the earliest states to adopt an
E-Verify mandate. In June 2008, the South Carolina Illegal
Immigration Reform Act was signed into law, with the mandate coming
into effect on July 1, 2009.217 When it kicked in, the state
imposed a mandate on public and private employers with more than
100 employees, going so far as to issue employment licenses to
private employers and requiring verification of new hires as a
condition for maintaining the license. The mandate kicked in for
smaller private employers a year later. From that date on, all
employers in South Carolina and all new employees were effectively
required to turn over their private information and identification
to the government for the privilege of running a business or
earning a salary. It hardly comports with the state constitution’s
high-minded language.

South Carolina was stoutly resistant to REAL ID for a long time.
However, the state still implemented several of the federal act’s
benchmarks and was integrating a new facial recognition system into
its DMV’s licensing process. Finally, in April 2017 South Carolina
adopted legislation to bring the state into compliance with the
national ID law.218

To make matters worse, South Carolina has signed an MOU with the
FBI to join the NGI.219
Although the memorandum is not yet public, similar agreements with
other states and the Bureau’s sample memorandum would point to
South Carolina’s agreement being largely similar to others; the
state’s criminal photo database and its license database will be
integrated into the FBI’s own system. Millions of law-abiding South
Carolinians will have their pictures available for the FBI’s
perusal.

Law-enforcement officials in South Carolina can and do use
license plate reader technology. The state police supervisory
agency, the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division, operates an
integrated plate reader system that allows participating local
enforcement to “compare scanned numbers against stolen license
plate information.” This system, dubbed NCICEXT, draws from the
integrated federal National Crime Information Center.220

South Dakota’s record is mixed. The state is compliant with
DHS’s REAL ID benchmarks. The state legislature embraced the
federal law’s onerous requirements in 2009, after having passed a
strongly worded anti-REAL ID resolution only a year earlier. DHS
deemed the state compliant in 2012. Conversely, South Dakota does
not impose an E-Verify mandate on employers, and voluntary uptake
of the federal verification system has been relatively low
(hovering around 1.5 percent of registered businesses in the state
in 2011).221

At the same time South Dakota embraced REAL ID, it embraced
facial recognition. The state’s adoption of the technology was
quiet — so quiet that most members of the state legislature
were not even aware of the state DMV’s $600,000 purchase and
installation of the necessary hardware and software.222 Nor were they aware that
access to the database can be granted to state law enforcement
without a warrant. All officers need, according to the program’s
manager, is to be involved in an active investigation and make a
request to the manager’s office.223 The lack of legislative
oversight and judicial process is troubling, to say the least.

Finally, South Dakota does have license plate readers —
but only in small Aberdeen. Installed on two of the town’s eight
police cars, it was paid for by a $38,000 DHS grant. The money gave
the town the dubious distinction of being the only one to use it in
the Mount Rushmore State.224

The Volunteer State’s record is poor on privacy and ID issues.
Tennessee is compliant with REAL ID, according to DHS’s current
standards, despite some early opposition in the
legislature.225 Driver
information — including facial scans, biometric data, and
other physical markers — is considered protected information
under state law, with penalties for disclosure or illicit access to
systems containing the information.226 However, the state allows
for disclosures of the information to police and other
law-enforcement officials conducting “any civil, criminal,
administrative, or arbitral proceeding in any federal, state, or
local court or agency or before any self-regulatory body, including
the service of process, investigation in anticipation of
litigation, and the execution or enforcement of judgments and
orders, or pursuant to an order of a federal, state or local
court.”227 Information
is also allowed to be disclosed to insurers, researchers,
marketers, and other private individuals or groups, provided they
can prove a need and promise not to disclose information without
the subject’s consent.228 In short, the protections
are loose.

Additionally, Tennessee was an eager adopter of an E-Verify
mandate, with Gov. Bill Haslam (R) signing the Lawful Employment
Act in 2011.229 The law
largely mirrors South Carolina’s staged implementation of a
mandate, ordering private businesses of decreasing size to use the
system by certain dates. Only employers with fewer than five
employees are exempt. Tennessee’s law broadly resembles proposals
floated by certain federal politicians for national mandatory
E-Verify, such as in the 2013 Senate omnibus immigration
bill.230

Finally, Tennessee’s police forces have been eager adopters of
license plate readers. The Tennessee Highway Patrol operates at
least 48 mounted devices statewide, all paid for in part by a grant
from the federal government.231 Large municipalities such as
Clarksville, Jackson, and Nashville all have local police forces
that operate plate readers; Murfreesboro and Knoxville do
not.232 Of course, since
the Highway Patrol operates statewide, all Tennesseans face the
risk of having their locations and movements tracked by the
state.

Texas’s sheer size in both geography and population means that
the state (like California and New York) plays an outsized role in
national debates. All in all, when it comes to privacy, the Lone
Star State’s record is mixed, with some strengths and
weaknesses.

In December 2014, then-governor Rick Perry (R) issued Executive
Order RP-80, which requires all state agencies and contractors
engaged in projects with state agencies to use E-Verify.233 In 2015, SB 374 put the
E-Verify requirement into statute and expanded it to include public
higher-education institutions.234

Texas began complying with DHS’s requirements under the REAL ID
Act in 2016, and even before that the state had adopted many of
DHS’s compliance benchmarks.235 Those benchmarks include
biometrics collection and, at the DMV, a facial recognition system.
Most prominently, as part of issuing new licenses or renewing old
ones, the state now demands that Texans get fingerprinted, and
their license photos join millions of others that are in the
state’s facial image database.236 Both the fingerprint and
facial-imaging database can be accessed by police to stop fraud,
terrorism, or illegal immigration or for a host of other
reasons.237 Although
searches are supposed to be targeted, 250 Department of Public
Safety officials (including some members of law enforcement) can
access the system at will; others must request a search.238

Finally, Texas has little in the way of curbs on the use of
license plate readers. Indeed, jurisdictions in the state have been
eager adopters of the technology.239 Jurisdictions ranging from
Austin and the sprawl of Dallas-Fort Worth to Highland and
Grapevine have purchased systems, often using funds from the
federal government with little state oversight or direction. The
lack of oversight cannot be stressed enough: Grapevine (population
48,447 in 2012) uses multiple cameras and, according to the
Grapevine Police Department, imposes no time limits on data
retention — nor does it control access to the database,
allowing any officer in the database.240 In a town of fewer than
50,000 people, police had nearly two million plate captures in
their database as of August 2012, and the system performed nearly
16,000 captures a day.241 The numbers raise serious
concerns about the scope of these systems and programs as they go
state- and nationwide.

Utah’s record is similarly mixed on privacy and ID issues. The
Beehive State is REAL ID compliant, despite having a ban on
compliance on the statute books.242 Utah’s own, state-based
licensing standards are as strict as those set out by the REAL ID
Act, and DHS considers Utah licenses to meet federal standards. It
is, essentially, a pantomime, with Utah enacting REAL ID by another
name.243 On E-Verify, at
least, the state is direct in its adoption of the federal program:
all public-sector entities and all private-sector entities with
greater than 15 employees must use the verification system.244

Part of Utah’s REAL-ID-but-not-REAL-ID dance is the use of
biometric and facial recognition software. Access is limited to a
dozen state Department of Public Safety employees and three
licensing bureau officials, while other law-enforcement officers
must provide requests.245 Although the technology’s
use is largely limited to multiple-license fraud investigations,
some commentators have noted its potential for expansion and
becoming mobile. More widespread use will be debated, but at least
one commentator, writing in the Utah Bar Association’s journal,
believes that usage would require a warrant under state
law.246

Finally, Utah has limited the use of license plate readers. Use
prior to 2012 was largely unrestrained by state statute. That
changed with 2013’s successful SB196, which created hard time
limits for how long plate captures could be stored (9 months for
law enforcement and 30 days for authorized private entities). It
also lays out when the readers can and cannot be used, prevents
disclosure, and classifies plate and location information as
private information under state law.247 Although Utah needs to work
on its REAL ID and E-Verify problems, the state’s plate capture law
could serve as a useful model for other states.

Unlike neighboring, libertarian-leaning New Hampshire, Vermont
has a decidedly mixed record when it comes to the protection of
privacy and ID rights. Although Vermont has rejected an E-Verify
mandate for public and private employers, the Green Mountain State
was an early adopter of the federal national ID law. The state
began issuing compliant IDs on January 1, 2014.

Even prior to the adoption of REAL ID, Vermont’s issuance of
(optional) enhanced driver’s licenses (valid for cross-border
travel with Canada and Mexico) necessitated the establishment of a
facial recognition system.248 The state claims the use of
the technology is to fight fraud and multiple license issuance. The
state DMV does strictly control access to the image database. No
law-enforcement agency has direct access to the system, and only
select employees have access within the DMV. Law enforcement is
required to make requests to the DMV if officials need facial
images as part of an investigation.249

In a similar vein, Vermont has restricted the use of and access
to license plate readers. Although police in the state can use the
devices if necessary, the legislature put in place requirements for
use. Officers must be trained in the use of the technology, and
they can access system data only if they are conducting an active
investigation. A request must be made to a superior for access, and
periodic reviews must be carried out to ensure that proper
procedures are being followed.250

The Old Dominion had one of the better records on privacy and ID
rights until it recently abandoned resistance to REAL ID. Virginia
has a partial E-Verify mandate. It applies only to new
public-sector hires; it does not apply to private-sector employers
or government contractors. The 2009 state legislative session’s HB
1587 blocked participation in REAL ID so long as participation
threatens to “compromise the economic privacy or biometric data of
any resident of the Commonwealth.”251 But early last year the
Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles began “scrambling” to
implement the national ID mandate.252

Virginia does not use facial recognition technology as part of
its licensing process, making it one of the few states not to use
the technology.253 In
addition, the state’s licenses are currently issued in greyscale,
negating one of the biometric markers (skin tone) commonly used by
facial recognition systems. However, licensing authorities have
considered implementing the technology in the future, and the
state’s infamous no-smiling policy is designed to ease a potential
implementation.254

Virginia’s biggest ID problem does not involve driver’s
licenses, but rather license plates. Police forces across the state
use license plate readers; formerly, there was little to no check
on access or limits on the length of time data may be stored. A
2012 opinion by then-attorney general Ken Cuccinelli declared that
keeping a capture for more than 24 hours if it was not tied to an
active investigation was most likely illegal.255 This prompted some police
forces to begin dumping data; others, mostly in the Washington,
D.C., suburbs of Northern Virginia, have continued to retain the
data.256 A March 2015
bill in the Virginia legislature to impose further limits on the
use of the technology passed both chambers, only to be amended by
Gov. Terry McAullife (D). Unfortunately, that was not the end of
the fight. After a subsequent showdown with the legislature over
the scope of the limits on readers, the governor — on the
losing end of a fight to widen the use of the technology —
vetoed the legislation. Rather than reaching a compromise that
would have protected Virginians’ liberties, he let the perfect be
the enemy of the good and stopped the entire bill.257

Washington was, until recently, one of the leaders on privacy
and ID issues. The state was firmly noncompliant with REAL ID
(having banned compliance in 2007’s SB 5087), and it does not
impose an E-Verify mandate on its citizens and employers.258 But last year, Governor Jay
Inslee (D) signed legislation to bring Washington into compliance
with the national ID program.259

The state’s DMV does operate a facial recognition system that is
used for licensing but, unlike many states, Washington statutorily
lays out what the system can be used for and who can use it.
Strictly speaking, only select DMV personnel can access the system
— according to Washington’s code — and law enforcement
cannot. The only time law enforcement is allowed access is when
assisting the DMV in an investigation into license fraud.
Otherwise, there is no access allowed.260

Washington’s sole blemish on an otherwise spotless record is the
state’s handling of license plate readers. The devices are not
restricted under state law. Vehicle registration information (like
driver’s license information) is considered private, protected
information under state law — but no such protection exists
for license plate or GPS data.261 Although the systems are not
used by municipalities in the state, they are used by state police
forces, most prominently in Seattle. Washington should follow its
own example on facial recognition restrictions and apply the same
level of scrutiny to license plate readers.

West Virginia is no Washington. Although West Virginia does not
have in place an E-Verify mandate, the state has adopted REAL ID
standards and is compliant with current DHS standards under the
federal law and all their liberty-trampling requirements.262 Worse, West Virginia was one
of the first adopters of then-primitive facial recognition software
back in 2002. The question of the use of and access to the present
system is murky, at best, with nothing in the state’s laws
regulating the system.263

Additionally, while not currently engaged in an MOU with the FBI
on the Bureau’s NGI program, the state is home to the Biometric
Center of Excellence, the federal agency’s central testing center
for biometric data.264
All these programs, combined with the use of license plate readers
by state police and local forces large and small, underscore a
worrisome truth: Mountaineers may always be free, but their state’s
practices threaten residents’ privacy.

Wisconsin’s record is mixed. The state adopted REAL ID standards
readily, issuing its first licenses satisfactorily for DHS in early
2013. At the same time, the state has — so far —
declined to put in place an E-Verify mandate, but it has decided to
participate in the attached RIDE program.265

Along with REAL ID standards and stricter driver’s license
policies, the state implemented a facial recognition system in
2005. As early as May 2006, state officials were touting how useful
the technology was in cracking down on fraud and how the DMV could
run daily thousands of pictures of innocent citizens through a
database of more than 6 million images.266 State law does prohibit free
law-enforcement access to the database; all requests must be for
active investigations, and all must pass through an official at the
DMV.267 It’s all for the
greater good, Wisconsinites are told — and they should
consider themselves lucky, according to one state senator, since
they’re still allowed to smile in their scanned pictures.268

Wyoming has a strong libertarian tradition, but the state’s
record is mixed on privacy and ID. Wyoming is one of the states
that is fully compliant with the federal REAL ID Act, probably the
greatest blemish on the state’s otherwise good record. It has been
considered compliant since December 2012. Wyoming does not,
however, impose an E-Verify mandate, preferring to leave the issue
of use of the verification system up to the choice of public and
private employers. The state does, however, participate in the
E-Verify RIDE program.269

Despite the state’s embrace of REAL ID, Wyoming is the only
compliant state to not have or use a facial recognition system.
According to a report from Gannett News Service, one Wyoming DMV
official contacted for information on the state’s policies was
unaware that such technology even exists.270 That anecdote raises other
concerns, but Wyoming’s legislators have an opportunity to
capitalize on the situation and put a ban in place before the
state’s driving bureaucrats realize the technology exists.

Finally, according to Freedom of Information Act results
obtained by Wyoming’s branch of the ACLU, no police force or state
government entity in the state currently operates license plate
readers.271 The police
force in Casper purchased one camera in June 2009, but found the
camera and system so inefficient that the whole package was
returned to the vendor in early 2010.272

This work by Cato Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

Receive periodic updates on Cato research, events, and publications.

See our full list of email newsletters

Cato Institute
1000 Massachusetts Ave, NW
Washington, DC 20001-5403

Contact Us

Media Contact