By

Reuters


and 
Minyvonne Burke For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  17:33 EDT, 12 May 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  07:28 EDT, 13 May 2018







          14

View  comments

A father-of-five who migrated from Mexico to Texas six years ago got a chance to see his family - and meet a new family member - in an emotional reunion at the fifth annual 'Hugs Not Walls' event. 


More than 300 families joined Marcelino Pizarro at the US-Mexican border on Saturday for the event, arranged by the El Paso advocacy group Border Network for Human Rights. The reunion was approved by US government agencies.


The event gives families separated mainly by deportation the chance to briefly come together and catch up.


Marcelino Pizarro (center) greets his daughters Fatima (right) and Denise (left) and his granddaughter Aitana

It was the first time Pizarro got to meet his granddaughter. He's pictured above with daughter Denise and granddaughter 

Pizarro, pictured above with his family, left Mexico six years ago and now lives in Texas 

Pizarro is pictured above with his daughter Denise and Fatima, his granddaughter 

The 36-year-old said the hardest part is leaving his family, but he's glad to reunite with them 

Pizarro, an undocumented migrant who jumped the fence into the US six years ago, was at the event to see his children, brother and other family members. 


‘I wouldn’t trade anything for these moments,’ he told Reuters. ‘We have to enjoy them as long as we can.'


The 36-year-old lives in Texas with two of his sons. He said he fled Mexico because he was receiving death threats from inmates at the juvenile detention facility he worked at. 


Pizarro said one of his brother's was killed by gang members.  


At the 'Hugs Not Walls' he got to see his children who still live in Mexico, including his 18-year-old daughter Fatima Paola and her daughter, Aitana. It was the first time Pizarro got to meet the little girl.


‘I would see my friends, my cousins, all with their dads and I would get sad and cry. I wish he could have been here as I grew up,’ Paolo said.


Each family that attends the event gets only three minutes to greet each other, exchange hugs and talk. Although the time is short, Pizarro said he enjoys getting the chance to see his family.   


Each family who attends the Hugs Not Walls event gets three minutes each to greet their family members 

More than 300 families attended the event this year, organized by the El Paso advocacy group Border Network for Human Rights

Another family at Saturday's event greet each other at the fifth annual Hugs Not Walls 

The event gives families separated mainly by deportation the chance to briefly come together and catch up

To make sure no one crossed the border during 'Hugs Not Walls' participants in the US had to wear blue t-shirts and those in Mexico had to wear white shirts

Family members line up for a chance to greet their family members at Hugs Not Walls 

'The hardest part is that it’s over. We have to accept it, but it’s hard,' he told the outlet.


Sandra Guerta was also at the event with her husband, Lorenzo. Guerta, who lives in Texas, told the Albuquerque Journal that they got up early to make it in time to reunite with her mother, who she hasn't seen in more than 10 years.


Martin Portillo, 22, used his three minutes to propose to his girlfriend Daisy Arvizu, 21. He told the Albuquerque Journal that it was important Arvizu's family, who lives in Mexico, was present when he popped the question.   


‘Families want to be together especially for these moments,’ he said.   


'Hugs Not Walls' took place days after Attorney General Jess Sessions said parents and children entering the US illegally will be separated.    


‘If you cross this border unlawfully, then we will prosecute you. It’s that simple,’ he said during a visit to San Diego. ‘If you are smuggling a child, then we will prosecute you and that child will be separated from you as required by law.’ 


To make sure no one crossed the border during 'Hugs Not Walls' participants in the US had to wear blue t-shirts and those in Mexico had to wear white shirts.   


'Hugs Not Walls' took place days after Attorney General Jess Sessions said parents and children entering the US illegally will be separated

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group