

By Hamed Aleaziz

Caption


Close

The Trump administration threatened Wednesday to issue subpoenas to San Francisco, Berkeley, the state of California and 20 other jurisdictions across the country if they don’t hand over documents related to their communication with federal immigration authorities.

The letter from the  Department of Justice — which also went to Fremont, Los Angeles, Monterey County, Sacramento County, Sonoma County and Watsonville — was an escalation of a bitter battle between Attorney General Jeff Sessions and pro-sanctuary jurisdictions that receive federal crime-fighting grants.

Sanctuary laws and policies seek to build trust with immigrant communities by restricting cooperation with deportation and other federal enforcement efforts, but Sessions said the documents he seeks may prove San Francisco and other agencies are violating U.S. statutes.

“Protecting criminal aliens from federal immigration authorities defies common sense and undermines the rule of law,” Sessions said in a statement. “We have seen too many examples of the threat to public safety represented by jurisdictions that actively thwart the federal government’s immigration enforcement — enough is enough.”

Sessions appeared to be referring to cases in which undocumented immigrants have committed crimes after being released from jail rather than being turned over to deportation authorities. But studies have concluded there is either no correlation between immigration and crime or a negative relationship — meaning that as a city’s immigrant population increases, violent crime and property crime tend to decrease.

San Francisco is reviewing the letter, said City Attorney Dennis Herrera.

“San Francisco is proud to be a sanctuary city. We’re also in full compliance with federal immigration law,” Herrera said. “What the law requires is narrow, and San Francisco follows the law. It’s that simple. San Francisco prioritizes using our limited law enforcement resources to actually fight crime, not break up hardworking families.

“This is a request from the federal government for city policies, not for information about specific individuals,” he said. “We will satisfy the request in a timely fashion.”

Annie Lai, a professor and immigration expert at UC Irvine School of Law, said the Justice Department was “taking the few openings they still have legally and stretching them as far as they can to exert pressure on jurisdictions to abandon their immigrant protective policies.”

In July, Sessions announced new conditions for the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program, which is the largest federal criminal justice funding program. San Francisco is due to receive $1.45 million in the fiscal year that ends June 30.

The terms include allowing agents from Immigration and Customs Enforcement, known as ICE, into local jails; notifying ICE at least two days before releasing an inmate wanted for deportation; and certifying compliance with a federal law that says cities cannot block employees from communicating with federal officials about individuals’ immigration status.

In September, a federal judge in Chicago barred the department from denying the grants because of the first two conditions. The order has been appealed. In November, the Trump administration sent a letter to the jurisdictions calling on them to show that they follow the federal law governing communication.

In Wednesday’s letter, the administration stated it “remained concerned” that local policies may violate the same federal law.

The Department of Justice requested all documents that reflected orders, guidance or instructions to law enforcement employees about how they may communicate with that agency as well as the Department of Homeland Security and ICE.

“Should you fail to respond in a complete and timely manner, the Department will subpoena these documents,” the letter said.

Lai called the request a “fishing expedition,” saying jurisdictions could fight back if handed a subpoena that they considered too broad.

If jurisdictions are determined to have violated the law, the letter said, the department would seek return of certain grant funds or disqualify them from the next round of funding.

Hamed Aleaziz is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: haleaziz@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @haleaziz