
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

02/12/2018 07:22 AM EST

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

The Weinstein Companies allowed “unlawful conduct to continue far beyond the date when, through reasonable diligence, it should have been stopped” by failing to investigate complaints of sexual misconduct against Harvey Weinstein and approving confidentiality clauses, according to a lawsuit filed Sunday by Attorney General Eric Schneiderman. He’s accusing the film studio of violating New York’s sexual harassment law, and the suit will be a speed bump as its executives work to finalize its sale.


Story Continued Below

Schneiderman says the deal doesn’t adequately ensure that victims can get compensation. While journalistic exposes felled Harvey Weinstein last autumn, he’s not faced any criminal charges as a result of his alleged predation on female actresses and colleagues.

The case is also a reminder that the office of attorney general gives its occupant a great platform to tackle national issues. Eliot Spitzer took on Wall Street banks. Andrew Cuomo cracked down on student lenders. And Schneiderman himself has previously sued Donald Trump over his Trump University program, to say nothing of more than a dozen cases dealing with environmental regulations and immigration.

IT’S MONDAY. The Percoco trial is taking a day off because one of the attorneys is sick. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? In New York City and Albany with no announced public schedule.

WHERE’S BlLL? Making his regular weekly appearance on NY1’s Inside City Hall with Errol Louis

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “GET YOUR KID A FLU SHOT”— Daily News: “WATER BOARD PRISON HELL” — See Them

More Tabloids: — Newsday: “East Hampton Study Proposes: MOVE MONTAUK BUSINESSES INLAND”— El Diario New York: “Embajadores contra el ‘bullying’” TRANSLATION: “Ambassadors against bullying”— See Them

The Free Papers: — Metro New York: “OPEN FOR BUSINESS” — AM New York: “#FashionToo”— See Them

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 1 col., above the fold: “AIDE’S DEPARTURE EXPOSES FISSURES OVER ABUSE RESPONSE” — 1 col., above the fold: “Pelosi Fighting To Keep Hold On Split Party” — 4 col., above the fold: “Gaza Is Near Financial Collapse, Prompting Fears of Violence” — Wall Street Journal: — 4 col., above the fold: “Iran Looms Over Israel-Syria Clash” — 1 col., above the fold: “Investors Brace for More Market Turmoil” —See Them

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “Cuomo and Percoco ran the Governor's office like the mafia — with bribery, a pay to play protection racket and a lifelong membership that punished individuals who tried to leave.” — Joel Giambra, who says this has set Italians back.

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— CUOMO’S POPULARITY DIPS, SIENA FINDS  — POLITICO’s Bill Mahoney: Support for Gov. Andrew Cuomo has fallen over the past month. But the governor’s agenda remains popular and his potential Republican challengers are still mostly unknown, a Siena College Research Institute poll released Monday found. In the poll, 53 percent of registered voters said they view Cuomo favorably and 40 percent unfavorably. That’s down from a second-term high the governor enjoyed in January, when he was viewed favorably by a 62-30 margin, but it is consistent with several surveys conducted in 2017. Similarly, the number of voters who would prefer to reelect him over an unnamed opponent fell from 55-36 to 50-42. “Cuomo’s drop this month comes as there was little change in how voters viewed the Legislature, just a modest drop in voters’ optimism about the direction of the state and, largely, continued strong support for many of the Governor’s high-profile proposals,” Siena spokesman Steve Greenberg said. “Of course, much of what Cuomo has been talking about over the last several weeks has been overshadowed by the ongoing coverage of the Federal corruption trial in Manhattan, in which the governor has been featured prominently.” Read more here 

— HOWE ARRESTED — Wall Street Journal’s Erica Orden: “A key witness in the case against a former aide to Cuomo was arrested, taken into custody and had his bail revoked on Thursday night following his admission in court that he likely had violated his cooperation deal with federal prosecutors. The actions against the witness, Todd Howe, signal that prosecutors may nullify his cooperation agreement, a move that could cast doubt on his four days of testimony and put at risk the government’s case against former Cuomo aide Joseph Percoco. Mr. Howe was arrested Thursday evening at his hotel in Manhattan, according to a person familiar with the matter. In Manhattan federal court Friday, he appeared with tousled hair and ankles in shackles, wearing a rumpled T-shirt bearing a ‘Martha’s Vineyard Beach Permit’ logo. … 

“Mr. Howe’s credibility has long posed difficulties for the government. Before the start of the trial, he pleaded guilty to eight felonies as part of his deal with prosecutors to testify against Mr. Percoco. He faces up to 130 years in prison on those charges. Both prosecutors and defense attorneys had prompted Mr. Howe in his testimony to admit to a yearslong criminal résumé that included fraud, embezzlement, tax evasion and a litany of more minor offenses, from a failure to return scores of rental cars to a host of unpaid bills. But it appeared that Mr. Howe had withheld from prosecutors the incident involving the Waldorf charge until Thursday, when he was compelled to admit it on the stand.” Read more here

— Prosecutors hope that Howe doesn’t have to wear prison garb when he re-takes the stand.

COX CALLS FOR CUOMO INVESTIGATION— Daily News’ Ken Lovett: “State GOP Chairman Ed Cox is calling on Manhattan District Attorney Cy Vance Jr. to investigate Gov. Cuomo and his office. Cox, in a letter to be delivered Monday to Vance’s office, says testimony coming out of the trial of former Cuomo aide and confidante Joseph Percoco raises questions about ‘what role other executive chamber employees, including the governor, played in Mr. Percoco’s unlawful acts and whether they knowingly aided and abetted or acquiesced to such unlawful acts.’” Read it here. 

KOLB DROPS OUT OF GUBERNATORIAL RACE — Ken Lovett: “Assembly Minority Leader Brian Kolb abruptly dropped out of the Republican race for governor Friday afternoon. That leaves Senate Deputy Majority Leader John DeFrancisco (R-Syracuse) as the favorite for the nomination, assuming a surprise candidate does not emerge before the May party nominating convention. … Kolb, who was the first Republican to get into the race, announced Friday 'with a heavy heart' that he was pulling out, citing family considerations. The timing was a surprise given Kolb's insistence he would take his campaign to the party convention.” Read more here

— State GOP Chairman Ed Cox told Gannett that Kolb did not call him before he dropped out.

— “The departure took place one day after The Post inquired about rumors about an ‘inappropriate’ incident that allegedly took place 15 years,” Kirstan Conley writes.

— “Not true. None whatsoever. There has been no misconduct,” Kolb told WHEC. 

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

LOWER YOUR EXPECTATIONS — Big ideas at de Blasio's State of the City? Don't get your hopes up, by POLITICO’s Gloria Pazmino: Mayor Bill de Blasio's State of the City address will be delivered at a palatial theater but his rhetoric is not expected to match the theater's glitz. De Blasio is expected to deliver his fifth State of the City address before an audience of 2,500 at the Kings Theater in Brooklyn this Tuesday. As the mayor courts national prominence as a progressive Democratic leader, his message to the city will deal with electoral reform and voter access, among other issues. But the speech, typically an opportunity for the sitting mayor to lay out his or her agenda for the upcoming year is expected to be light on ideas around some of the city's most pressing issues. It will not address the ongoing subway crisis, include new plans to build more affordable housing, or address the ongoing plight of thousands of residents living in the city's deteriorating public housing stock, aides to the mayor said. Read more here. 

ALICIA GLEN IN THE HOT SEAT — New York Post’s Michael Gartland: “A deputy mayor who publicly called City Council members “not that smart” may soon find out what a bone-headed move that was, as legislators are demanding she appear before the body to be grilled on her performance.” Read more here. 

“Putting a Price on Heat, Legal Aid Threatens to Sue Housing Authority” — New York Times’s Jeffery C. Mays: “The Legal Aid Society has threatened to take the New York City Housing Authority to court unless the agency agrees to refund up to $15 million in rent to tenants who were left without heat or hot water during this winter’s cold snap… Nycha officials have said that between Oct. 1, 2017, and Jan. 22, 143,000 apartments were without heat and hot water for an average of 48 hours. Using this information, Legal Aid Society lawyers argue that anywhere from $2.5 million to $15 million in rent payments should be rebated based on the average monthly rent of $509, or $17 per day.” Read more here. 

A “VERY LOYAL” FRIEND TO DE BLASIO — Read this account from Newsday’s Emily Ngo, about the donor who pleaded guilty to bribing Mayor de Blasio in the hopes of getting his help as he frantically tried to re-negotiate a lease for his restaurant on the East River: “‘I am a very loyal and early friend of Bill and not be able to get in touch with anyone is a little heart wrenching,’ Singh wrote on March 22, 2014, to Emma Wolfe, a top de Blasio aide. ‘Happy to see if I can help,’ a Wolfe aide replied two days later. Over the course of 2014 and 2015, Singh repeatedly sought City Hall’s help in connecting him with the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, or DCAS, to save Water’s Edge, his restaurant in Long Island City, Queens, according to correspondence obtained by Newsday under the Freedom of Information Law. De Blasio’s aides were initially receptive, the emails show. At the office where de Blasio worked as city public advocate in 2011, and then at City Hall in 2014 and 2015, de Blasio staff told DCAS staff to ‘resolve this matter’ because Singh was a ‘friend of the mayor,’ according to a July 7, 2017, city Department of Investigations memo, which cited DCAS employee interviews.” Read more here 

— RELATED — Daily News’s Andrew Keshner: “A federal judge rejected a Long Island politician’s claim he’s getting unfairly prosecuted for corruption while Mayor de Blasio is a free man. Former Nassau County Executive Edward Mangano and de Blasio both had links to crooked businessman Harendra Singh, but the similarities ended there, Long Island Federal Judge Joan Azrack said Friday.” Read more here 

DE BLASIO’S FARE EVASION LOGIC— POLITICO’s Gloria Pazmino and Brendan Cheney: Facts and logic aside, the issue of fare evasion presents a classic conundrum for de Blasio. He is a self-proclaimed progressive, elected on a promise to reduce inequality. But he also must not let the city backslide from an impressive drop in crime. Fare evasion, and its use as a law enforcement tool, sits uncomfortably in the middle of that tension. Read more here. 

— Here are the facts— Daily News’s Erin Durkin and Rich Shapiro: “An analysis by the Community Service Society of fare beating arrests in Brooklyn in 2016 found that rates are higher at subway stations in poor neighborhoods, and especially poor black neighborhoods. The four stations with the most arrests per swipe were all along the border of East New York and Brownsville...The analysis found that as the poverty rate increases from 30% to 40% in a black neighborhood, the arrest rate more than doubles from 1.7 arrests to 3.6 arrests per 100,000 swipes. In white areas, the same increase in poverty pushes the rate from 0.6 arrests to 0.9. More than one in four low-income New Yorkers said in a survey sponsored by the group that they are often unable to afford subway and bus fare.” Read it here

—INMATE PLANNED ATTACKS ON RIKERS GUARD — New York Times’s Jan Ransom: ”A gang-affiliated Rikers Island inmate awaiting trial on an attempted murder charge was furious that a New York City Department of Correction officer had written him up for a recent infraction. He vowed to get even, union officials said, boasting on Saturday during a taped phone conversation that he planned to ‘knock out this super cop.’ At 6:27 p.m. on Saturday, the inmate and Bloods gang member, Steven Espinal, walked up to the uniformed officer in a vestibule of the George Motchan Detention Center and punched him, knocking him to the floor, according to Elias Husamudeen, president of the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association.” Read more here. 

OP-EDS AND EDITORIALS: 

— ”The Problem With Parole” — New York Times Editorial Board: “States that set out a decade ago to trim prison costs have learned that success lies in a few areas — rolling back draconian sentencing that drove up prison populations in the first place, and remaking parole and probation systems, which have, in numerous cases, sent as many or even more people to jail for rule violations as the courts do for new crimes. Significant progress has been made on both fronts. Yet New York, a national leader in reducing its prison population, could do much more to reform its parole and probation systems..” Read more here. 

—”New York Puts a Price on Freedom With Cash Bail” — Journal News Editorial Board: “While state politicians are talking about finally fixing New York's archaic and discriminatory bail system, a state Supreme Court justice in Poughkeepsie took action: In a court ruling, she called out the use of cash bail as unfair to poor defendants, and forced courts to consider other ways to assure someone accused of a non-violent crime return to court without being locked up in jail...Here's the crux of the judge's ruling, and it's a fair one: While New York's rules for setting bail do not specifically include such consideration, not to consider defendants' ability to pay violates their rights under the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution and the due process and equal protection clauses of the New York State Constitution.” Read it here. 

— “Under Cuomo’s Watch: Blind to his Best Friend’s Alleged Crimes” — Daily News Editorial Board: “Cuomo says a trusted friend abused personal and public trust. Take him at his word. Given the brazen nature of Percoco’s misdeeds, the governor is still guilty of extreme blindness.” Read it here. 

— “IDC’s Sales Tax Grab Won’t Fix the MTA”— Ross Barkan for the Village Voice: “De Blasio is guilty of lacking a serious vision for urban transportation in the 21st century. He obsesses over ferries that will carry about as many passengers in one year as the subways do in a day. His proposed Brooklyn-to-Queens streetcar has no viable funding mechanism and appears to be little more than a giveaway to his favorite developers. His Department of Transportation has failed to improve and expand bus service in any meaningful way. He has yet to come up with a substantial solution for curbing congestion in his city.None of this, though, means that city money should be robbed to pay for a meager subway rescue plan that the MTA can and should easily fund on its own.” Read more here. 

—”Cuomo’s Call For Special Elections Shortchanges Voters” — New York Post Edit Board: “Gov. Cuomo must be nervous about his November re-election prospects. Why else, after all, did he just cave in to party bosses and call special elections for April 24? The elections are to fill 11 vacant seats in the Legislature — two in the Senate and nine in the Assembly. But in New York, candidates in special elections are handpicked by party bosses rather than chosen by voters in open primaries. So voters won’t get full say over whom they want representing them. Plus, the 11 lawmakers elected in April will have an advantage as the incumbents when primaries roll around in September.” Read here. 

TRUMP’S NEW YORK 

— GILLIBRAND GETS 12 MINUTES ON 60 MINUTES — Gannett’s Joe Spector: “CBS' 60 Minutes ran a 12-minute segment Sunday night on New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand as she seeks re-election this fall and as she continues to be discussed as potential presidential candidate. The national spotlight comes as Gillibrand has rose to the forefront of the #MeToo movement after spending years fighting from stronger protections against sexual harassment in the military and sexual assaults on college campuses. The 60 Minutes profile was largely positive, showing the Democratic senator walking along her family's property she grew up in Albany, taking a sled ride with her mother and speaking at a Martin Luther King Jr. Day celebration at Rev. Al Sharpton's National Action Network in Harlem. ‘Once President Trump was elected I think something changed, and I think it changed for women,’ Gillibrand said.” Read more here

— “Where's my moral compass if I can't speak out just because I like someone? Just because they're my friend? It's okay to be a harasser as long as you're my friend? That is not okay,” she said of Al Franken.

— @NewYorkGOP: @SenGillibrand’s compass is pointed in the direction of the White House, not toward doing what’s right for New Yorkers. Time for real leadership. @60Minutes

— "Progressives storm Democratic primaries," by POLITICO’s Laura Nahmias and Lauren Dezenski: Progressive insurgents are launching challenges to Democratic members of Congress in some of the country's bluest districts, sparked by deep frustration with the party establishment and anti-Trump anger. Most of the challengers are longshots at the moment. But some are putting a scare into entrenched incumbents, thanks to their muscular fundraising and a message of liberal disaffection on issues ranging from Wall Street to criminal justice reform to single payer health care. Six veteran incumbents already face energetic primary challenges from younger candidates in New York and Massachusetts. In Illinois, two Chicago-based members are being targeted from the left. "I think Donald Trump getting elected president is part of it — the old institutional political knowledge we had about the way things works clearly just doesn't work. And now people are knocking down the door," said Bill Hyers, a political consultant and campaign strategist for New York Mayor Bill de Blasio and Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand "There's a new energy and excitement out there in a new way and its palpable." Read more here. 

— “D.C. Budget Deal Creates Winners and Losers in NY”— Crain’s Greg David: “The two-year budget deal reached in Washington on Friday ensures no draconian cuts in federal aid to the state and city, undercuts arguments to raise some local taxes and portends problems for Gov. Andrew Cuomo as he exaggerates the impact of Congress’s tax bill on New Yorkers.”Read it here. 

— 120,000 members of the Teamsters in New York City and on Long Island are training to become a “sanctuary union,” educating members on their immigration rights and how to challenge federal immigration agents who come to their work sites. 

— WHAT WALL STREET IS READING -- “From Goldman Sachs Wine Thief to Hometown Hero,” by the Weekly Standard’s Alice Lloyd: “A charismatic kid with an obsessive love of the finer things and a powerful sway over nearly everyone he met, [Nick] Meyer also had a dramatic flair and a dishonest streak. ... ‘He would always lie about things to impress people, things that you could kind of see through, that couldn’t be believable.’ Meyer told his prom date, Barton recalls, they were going to take his father’s Porsche to the dance and get her a dress to match. But, according to [high school friend Ryan] Barton, ‘There was no such car.’ One family friend, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told me: ‘People back here that knew him, when they read the story, we all view him as a folk hero in a way.’ He’s ‘kind of a like a Robin Hood figure.’” http://tws.io/2H4doxG 

— ”Trump’s Army Battles For New York”— WNYC’s Robert Lewis: “JOIN THE FIGHT to Reclaim New York TODAY,” the mailer said. There was a link to the group’s website. The name didn’t mean anything to Ball or many other people in the town. Little did they know they were suddenly the frontlines of a battle to remake New York government, started by savvy conservative operatives and right wing Libertarian crusaders, including some of the people who helped put Donald Trump into the White House – Steve Bannon, Kellyanne Conway and Long Island billionaire Robert Mercer....Documents and interviews show Reclaim New York is ramping up as it builds a network of citizen watchdogs and pushes into issues at all levels of New York government. Disclosure forms filed with the state show the group started lobbying last summer and has been spending more than $18,000 a month on issues from the state budget to video-game subsidies to a local jail project. Last month, the group filed a lawsuit against the state’s economic development agency over spending records. Its Facebook page has 120,000 followers – pumped up with help from data firm Cambridge Analytica, a Mercer-backed company that worked on the Trump campaign.” Read more here. 

SOCIAL DATA: 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Anna Miroff of Stu Loeser and Co. … WSJ management reporter Rachel Feintzeig … WAMC producer Sarah LaDuke

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

— The New York Times reports that Fox News's Jeanine Pirro, one of the president's biggest boosters, has discussed with him the possibility of a book rebutting Michael Wolff's critical account, "Fire and Fury." It's been dubbed "No Fire, No Fury" in the West Wing, according to the Times. Pirro already has a book coming out in June, "Liars, Leakers and Liberals," which she told the Times "is not a direct response" to Wolff's book.

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

— “While the Landlord Renovates, Life in a Homeless Shelter,” by New York Times’ Julie Satow: “It was in late 2014 that Najary Torres first began noticing men traipsing through her building on a heavily Orthodox Jewish block in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. They wielded large tools and even drove an excavator into the backyard. The building manager reassured her: They were merely making repairs. But when the workers began bricking up Ms. Torres’s kitchen windows, choking off the apartment’s light and blocking her views of the yard where her young daughters often played, she grew distraught. Ms. Torres dialed 311, and several months later, in July, a city building inspector arrived at her home at 94 Franklin Avenue. ‘The first thing he did was look in the backyard and told me the construction had blocked our emergency exit,’ said Ms. Torres, a 40-year-old Mexico City native, who has been in New York for 15 years. … That afternoon the inspector ordered Ms. Torres and her neighbors to vacate their apartments. By midnight, she said, she found herself at a seedy hotel in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, shushing her girls to sleep, surrounded by the few belongings she managed to collect in garbage bags. Three years later, the family is still not home. They have been living in a temporary shelter in Brownsville, an hour’s commute from the children’s schools and her job. The building on Franklin Avenue is still vacant and increasingly derelict; belongings that the tenants hadn’t managed to remove have been ruined by water damage and vermin. The illegal structure that the landlord was erecting — a synagogue, it turns out — also remains.” Read the story here

— “New York’s Commercial Property Slump Shows Signs of Slowing,” by Wall Street Journal's Keiko Morris: “After a two-year sales plunge in New York City commercial real estate, signs are emerging that a bottom could be near. Brokers are optimistic that more deals will take place in 2018, pointing to an expected economic boost from the new law cutting corporate taxes, as well as an uptick in signed contracts in the fourth quarter, which could lead to an increased number of deals completed this year. In addition, property values, a lagging indicator that usually falls after sales and the number of transactions drop, appear poised for a decline, according to a broker, with the average price per square foot already falling in Manhattan—a harbinger of what could be to come citywide.” Read the story here

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— An industry-backed ad campaign attacking Mayor de Blasio’s plan to sue oil companies over climate change will launch today. 

— KKK flyers were found in Saratoga Springs.

— Monroe Mann, who founded “Save Our Tappan Zee,” has been paying himself a salary with the funds the group raised.

— Assemblywoman Pamela Harris hasn’t been at the Capitol since she was arrested for fraud last month.

— Carl Paladino spoke at a forum on race after a screening of “The Blackness Project.”

— Parents got letters of recommendation from the Dalai Lama to get their kids into New York City private schools. 

— City Councilman Mark Gjonaj hired his fourth cousin to work for him without posting the job publicly. 

— A Brooklyn yeshiva was fined $22,500 for operating in an unsafe building. 

— The NYPD agreed to make reforms to its property seizure policy. 

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

Pacers 121, Knicks 113: Look past the score. New acquisition Emmanuel Mudiay scored 14 and added ten rebounds. That's how to measure Knicks progress for a while, until at least Kristaps Porzingis returns from his knee injury.

The day ahead: The Knicks are in Philly. The Nets host the mid-teardown Clippers.

#UpstateAmerica: Three Western New York teens are heading to Norway next month to represent the U.S. in the world baton twirling championship.

#ZooYork: —”Mayor Bill de Blasio was spotted on the A train Friday heading uptown with an entourage of security personnel and aides in tow. When Page Six asked Hizzoner, who was enjoying a cup of yogurt with granola, what he was doing riding the rails, he replied, ‘What’s wrong with riding the train?’” 

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew


                                            By Edward-Isaac Dovere


                                            By POLITICO Magazine

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC