Kaiser Health News 

Connect With Us 

FROM FRED’S BASEMENT: THE MARKETING PLAN THAT FUELED AN ADDICTION EPIDEMIC. Tune in to the next KHN Facebook Live — Friday, July 13 at 12 p.m. ET — when KHN senior correspondent Fred Schulte will explain how a bunch of files from the early 2000s offers a window into Purdue Pharma’s early plans to push OxyContin. You can submit your questions and watch here.


		
		Kaiser Health News Original Stories	


					
												State Prisons Fail To Offer Cure To 144,000 Inmates With Deadly Hepatitis C
				


					A survey of 49 states reveals that an estimated 144,000 inmates with hepatitis C, a curable but potentially fatal disease, can’t get the expensive drugs they need to cure it.											(Siraphob Thanthong-Knight,
						7/9)
									


					
												Feel Like The Last Friend Standing? Here’s How To Cultivate New Buds As You Age.
				


					Seniors who outlive their friends — and sometimes family members — know it’s tough to make new friends. But they also know it’s essential to well-being.											(Bruce Horovitz,
						7/9)
									


				
										Political Cartoon: 'Bookworm?'
			


					Kaiser Health News provides a fresh take on health policy developments with "Political Cartoon: 'Bookworm?'" by Dave Coverly, Speed Bump.				

Here's today's health policy haiku:

Scott Pruitt resigned
Replaced by coal lobbyist.
Dirty air follows.

 - Jeff Levin-Scherz


				If you have a health policy haiku to share, please Contact Us and let us know if you want us to include your name. Keep in mind that we give extra points if you link back to a KHN original story.			


					
					Health Law				


							
																Administration Freezes Program That Pays Billions To Insurers To Help Stabilize Health Law Marketplaces
						

Trump administration officials said they decided to suspend payments under the program because of a ruling in February from a Federal District Court in New Mexico. The judge tossed out the formula used to calculate payments, finding that it was flawed. Insurers warned that the move will have a detrimental effect on the marketplaces just as the companies are setting premiums for next year.


					
						The New York Times:
						Health Insurers Warn Of Market Turmoil As Trump Suspends Billions In Payments					
					
					The Trump administration said Saturday that it was suspending a program that pays billions of dollars to insurers to stabilize health insurance markets under the Affordable Care Act, a freeze that could increase uncertainty in the markets and drive up premiums this fall. Many insurers that enroll large numbers of unhealthy people depend on the “risk adjustment” payments, which are intended to reduce the incentives for insurers to seek out healthy consumers and shun those with chronic illnesses and other pre-existing conditions. (Pear, 7/7)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						Trump Administration Takes Another Swipe At 'Obamacare'					
					
					In a weekend announcement, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said the administration is acting because of conflicting court ruling in lawsuits filed by some smaller insurers who question whether they are being fairly treated under the program. The so-called "risk adjustment" program takes payments from insurers with healthier customers and redistributes that money to companies with sicker enrollees. Payments for 2017 are $10.4 billion. No taxpayer subsidies are involved. (7/8)				


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						Trump’s Latest Affordable Care Act Move Adds To Insurers’ Uncertainty					
					
					CMS officials didn’t specify how long the suspension would last or what would trigger a resumption of payments in the program. CMS officials said they are looking for a quick resolution to the legal issues raised. “We’re now in the midst of the 2019 rate-filing process and it’s not clear how the risk-adjustment program will be operating,” said Cori Uccello, senior health fellow at the American Academy of Actuaries. (7/8)				


					
						Reuters:
						Insurers Warn Of Rising Premiums After Trump Axes Obamacare Payments Again					
					
					America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), a trade group representing insurers offering plans via employers, through government programs and in the individual marketplace, said the CMS suspension would create a "new market disruption" at a "critical time" when insurers are setting premiums for next year. "It will create more market uncertainty and increase premiums for many health plans - putting a heavier burden on small businesses and consumers, and reducing coverage options. And costs for taxpayers will rise as the federal government spends more on premium subsidies," AHIP said in a statement. (7/8)				


					
						Politico:
						Trump Administration Freezes Billions In Obamacare Payments, Outraging Advocates					
					
					Blue Cross Blue Shield Association President and CEO Scott Serota said the administration has the legal justification needed to move forward with the payments regardless of the New Mexico ruling. “This action will significantly increase 2019 premiums for millions of individuals and small business owners and could result in far fewer health plan choices,” Serota said in a statement. “It will undermine Americans’ access to affordable coverage, particularly those who need medical care the most.” (7/8)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Trump Administration Takes Another Major Swipe At The Affordable Care Act					
					
					Risk adjustment is one of three methods built into the 2010 health-care law to help insulate insurance companies from the ACA requirement that they accept all customers for the first time — healthy and sick — without charging more to those who need substantial care. The other two methods were temporary, but risk adjustment is permanent. Federal health officials are required each year to calculate which insurers with relatively low-cost consumers must chip in to a fund, and which ones with more expensive customers are owed money. This idea of pooling risk has had significant practical effects: encouraging insurers to participate in the insurance marketplaces the ACA created for Americans who cannot get affordable health benefits through a job. (Goldstein, 7/7)				


					
						Bloomberg:
						Trump Health Officials Toss Obamacare Insurers Another Curveball 					
					
					The effect of the cut-off will be complex. In the short-term, it will likely favor health insurers that have drawn healthier, less-costly customers. Under the risk-adjustment program, those insurers make payments into a pool is redistributed to plans with sicker, more costly patients. As a result, some plans that had already been doing better financially will benefit from not having to make the payments. (Tracer, Broderick and Kopit, 7/7)				


					
						Modern Healthcare:
						Trump Administration Freezes Risk Adjustment Payments 					
					
					The risk-adjustment program has been a source of frustration for small insurers and ACA co-ops that claim the formula makes their membership bases look healthier than they are. One reason could be that newer insurers have limited information on their members' health status and claims history. Legacy insurers that have a wealth of patient data may have a leg up on coding. Small health plans also have far less capital than more established insurers to comfortably make large risk-adjustment payments. (7/8)				

In other health law news —


					
						San Francisco Chronicle:
						Affordable Care Act’s Unexpected Side Effect: An IOU To The IRS					
					
					It is unclear how many Americans are paying back some or all of the financial assistance they received to buy health insurance because their income turned out to be higher than they projected. The most recent analysis of the issue was done in 2015 by H&amp;R Block, which found that 52 percent of people who enrolled in health insurance through Affordable Care Act marketplaces around the country ended up paying back some of the subsidies. (Ho, 7/8)				


					
						Georgia Health News:
						Insurers Seek Modestly Higher Premiums For 2019 Georgia Exchange					
					
					Premium increases of 2 percent to almost 15 percent would seem like bad news for Georgians needing health care coverage. But the rate hikes proposed by insurers for Georgia’s 2019 insurance exchange appear almost as a relief, compared with huge rate hikes a year ago — more than 50 percent. (Miller, 7/6)				


					
					Supreme Court				


							
																Trump Holds Cards Close To Chest, Stokes The Dramatics Surrounding Supreme Court Nomination
						

President Donald Trump says that he will make a decision today before a televised event announcing the pick. The four judges on the short-list are Brett Kavanaugh, Amy Coney Barrett, Thomas Hardiman and Raymond Kethledge. Kavanaugh was at one point rumored to be the front-runner, but it's unclear if that's still the case. 


					
						The New York Times:
						Trump ‘Very Close’ To Supreme Court Decision, But May Wait Till Final Hours					
					
					President Trump sought to mine a last bit of drama from his decision on a Supreme Court nominee on Sunday, saying he might need to extend the process well into Monday, just hours before he is scheduled to announce the pick in a prime-time address. “I’m very close to making a decision,” Mr. Trump said on Sunday afternoon as he boarded Air Force One to return to Washington after a weekend spent golfing at his private club in Bedminster, N.J., and soliciting opinions from dozens of people about what he should do. (Haberman, Liptak and Schmidt, 7/8)				


					
						The New York Times:
						In Making His Second Supreme Court Pick, Trump Has A Model: His First					
					
					All four of President Trump’s candidates for the Supreme Court are white, middle-aged federal appeals court judges with reliably conservative legal records. One of them, Brett M. Kavanaugh, went to the same high school as Mr. Trump’s last nominee, Neil M. Gorsuch — Georgetown Preparatory School, outside Washington. Another, Raymond M. Kethledge of the Sixth Circuit, so resembles Justice Gorsuch in background, philosophy, hobbies — both are outdoorsmen who like fishing — and even physical appearance, that some conservatives have taken to calling him “Gorsuch 2.0.” (Landler and Haberman, 7/6)				


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						Trump Takes A Final Look At Supreme Court Choices					
					
					Judge Kavanaugh had been a front-runner as late as Saturday, but the fact that Mr. Trump hadn’t settled on him suggested his front-runner status may have slipped by Sunday, several people familiar with the search said. (Nicholas and Radnofsky, 7/8)				


					
						Politico:
						Teenage Immigrant Abortion Case Could Be Hurdle For Kavanaugh’s Supreme Court Bid					
					
					One of the leading contenders for the Supreme Court, D.C. Circuit Judge Brett Kavanaugh, could see his chance at the nomination hinge on his handling of a legal battle last year over a 17-year-old immigrant's request for an abortion. To Kavanaugh's backers, his role in the legal showdown that played out over a couple of weeks last October exhibits the kind of judicial restraint conservatives have long called for from members of the bench. (Gerstein, 7/6)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Religious Liberty Becomes A Main Focus For Conservatives In Supreme Court Nomination					
					
					Raymond Kethledge, one of President Trump’s finalists for the U.S. Supreme Court, has never explicitly stated his views on abortion or same-sex marriage. But he has spoken loudly on an issue that is just as important to conservative court-watchers. In April, Kethledge ruled in favor of Cathedral Buffet, a church-run Ohio restaurant being sued by the government because of claims that congregants were “spiritually coerced” by their pastor to work without pay. Kethledge went further than his fellow judges on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit in arguing that the restaurant’s Christian affiliation shielded it from federal labor laws. (Goldstein, 7/7)				


					
						The New York Times:
						McConnell Tries To Nudge Trump Toward Two Supreme Court Options					
					
					Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, told President Trump this past week that Judges Raymond M. Kethledge and Thomas M. Hardiman presented the fewest obvious obstacles to being confirmed to replace Justice Anthony M. Kennedy on the Supreme Court, according to Republican officials briefed on the conversation. While careful not to directly make the case for any would-be justice, Mr. McConnell made clear in multiple phone calls with Mr. Trump and the White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II, that the lengthy paper trail of another top contender, Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, would pose difficulties for his confirmation. (Haberman and Martin, 7/7)				


					
						Politico:
						Graham: Supreme Court Candidates ‘Are All Winners’					
					
					The four judges believed to be in the running to be President Donald Trump’s next nominee to the Supreme Court “are all winners,” Sen. Lindsey Graham said Sunday, and will present a “nightmare” decision for red-state Democrats in the Senate. “Republicans are holding four lottery tickets and all of them are winners,” the South Carolina Republican, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, told “Fox News Sunday.” “If you’re a conservative Republican, the four people named — particularly Thomas Hardiman, I'm glad he’s on the list — are all winners and every Republicans should embrace these picks.” (Nelson, 7/8)				


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						Who Are The Supreme Court Contenders?					
					
					As the clock ticks on President Donald Trump’s choice for a Supreme Court vacancy, each of the four people under close consideration could move the court in a more conservative direction for decades. “Republicans are holding four lottery tickets, and all of them are winners,” Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) said Sunday in a Fox News interview. Here’s a look at the top contenders. (Kendall and Bravin, 7/8)				


							
																Risk Their Own Seats Or Demoralize Liberal Voters? Red-State Dems Caught Between Rock And Hard Place
						

The upcoming battle over the Supreme Court nominee may prove tricky for Democratic senators who come from more conservative states. “You deserve a senator who doesn’t just talk like he’s from Montana,” President Donald Trump said as he stepped up pressure on one of the senators, Jon Tester, the conservative state’s two-term Democrat. “You deserve a senator who actually votes like he’s from Montana.”


					
						The New York Times:
						‘It’s A Terrible Vote’: Red-State Democrats Face An Agonizing Supreme Court Choice					
					
					Democratic senators running for re-election in Trump Country face an agonizing choice over President Trump’s coming Supreme Court nominee: Vote to confirm the pick and risk demoralizing Democratic voters ahead of the midterm elections, or stick with the party and possibly sacrifice their own seats — and any chance at a Democratic majority in 2019. The actions of a handful of Senate Democrats struggling to hold their seats in red states where Mr. Trump remains popular — notably Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Joe Manchin III of West Virginia — will have broad implications for the party at a critical political juncture. (Hulse, 7/7)				


					
						Politico:
						‘The Super Bowl Of Politics’: Trump’s Team Readies For Supreme Court Battle					
					
					In a sparsely decorated “war room” next to the West Wing on the White House grounds, Trump administration officials have been preparing for the president’s Supreme Court pick with an anything-can-happen approach to the historic task. With the knowledge that President Donald Trump could change his mind at the last minute — and with the president’s obsession to keep his final decision tightly held — Trump aides and Republicans familiar with the planning told POLITICO they initially were prepping for two possible nominees. (Cadelago, 7/8)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						What To Expect In The Supreme Court Confirmation Battle					
					
					The coming battle over a Supreme Court nominee promises to be a bruising one. Republicans are eager for conservatives to gain a firm majority on the court. Democrats are voicing alarm about what the new justice could mean for charged issues such as abortion rights and gay rights. The stakes are enormous, and advocacy groups that don't have to unveil their donors are spending heavily to shape the fight. (7/9)				


					
						The Hill:
						Dem Senator Promises 'Tough Questions' On Reproductive Rights For Trump Supreme Court Pick					
					
					Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) said Sunday that he will ask President Trump’s Supreme Court nominee “really tough questions” on reproductive rights. Blumenthal told New York AM 970 radio host John Catsimatidis in an interview broadcast Sunday that he has “deep and serious concerns” about Trump’s top picks for the court. (Thomsen, 7/8)				


					
					Government Policy				


							
																America Tries To Upend Global Resolution On Breast-Feeding With Threats Of Trade Retaliation
						

The resolution on the benefits of breast-feeding from the World Health Assembly was expected to pass easily, but U.S. officials resorted to threats after their attempts to water the measure down failed. In the end, Russia stepped in to introduce the resolution.


					
						The New York Times:
						U.S. Opposition To Breast-Feeding Resolution Stuns World Health Officials					
					
					A resolution to encourage breast-feeding was expected to be approved quickly and easily by the hundreds of government delegates who gathered this spring in Geneva for the United Nations-affiliated World Health Assembly. Based on decades of research, the resolution says that mother’s milk is healthiest for children and countries should strive to limit the inaccurate or misleading marketing of breast milk substitutes. (Jacobs, 7/8)				

In other news from the administration —


					
						ProPublica:
						How The EPA And The Pentagon Downplayed A Growing Toxic Threat					
					
					Now two new analyses of drinking water data and the science used to analyze it make clear the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Defense have downplayed the public threat posed by these chemicals. Far more people have likely been exposed to dangerous levels of them than has previously been reported because contamination from them is more widespread than has ever been officially acknowledged. (Lustgarten, 7/9)				


							
																Daunting Realities Of Reuniting Young Children With Parents An Obstacle As Deadline Ticks Closer
						

Government attorneys have asked U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw to grant them more time to bring together about 100 toddlers with parents who may be scattered across the country or the world.


					
						Texas Tribune:
						Some Migrant Children Under 5 Unlikely To Be Reunited With Their Parents By Tuesday Deadline					
					
					The clock is ticking on a court-ordered Tuesday deadline for the federal government to reunite migrant parents with kids under 5 who were taken from them at the border. With a mere four days left, government attorneys have asked for more time — and some migrant parents say they have been given no information about how these court-ordered reunifications will take place. (Platoff and Parker, 7/6)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						Kids As Young As 1 In US Court, Awaiting Reunion With Family					
					
					The 1-year-old boy in a green button-up shirt drank milk from a bottle, played with a small purple ball that lit up when it hit the ground and occasionally asked for “agua.” Then it was the child’s turn for his court appearance before a Phoenix immigration judge, who could hardly contain his unease with the situation during the portion of the hearing where he asks immigrant defendants whether they understand the proceedings. “I’m embarrassed to ask it, because I don’t know who you would explain it to, unless you think that a 1-year-old could learn immigration law,” Judge John W. Richardson told the lawyer representing the 1-year-old boy. (Galvan, 7/8)				


					
						Reveal:
						Defense Contractor Detained Migrant Kids In Vacant Phoenix Office Building					
					
					A major U.S. defense contractor quietly detained dozens of immigrant children inside a vacant Phoenix office building with dark windows, no kitchen and only a few toilets during three weeks of the Trump administration’s family separation effort, Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting has learned. (Bogado, Branstetter and Swales,7/6)				


					
					Pharmaceuticals				


							
																Alzheimer's Drug Results Send Stocks Soaring, But Experts Temper Expectations After String Of Failures Against Disease
						

Biogen and Eisai announced that the drug slowed the progression of Alzheimer’s disease and reduced the amount of clumps of a protein called beta amyloid that build up in the brains of patients. The data cheered even skeptics that have been burned by decades of failed Alzheimer's drugs. But they did warn about getting too excited, as the study is preliminary. 


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						Drugmakers Call Experimental Alzheimer’s Drug Study Positive					
					
					An experimental Alzheimer’s drug showed positive results and raised hopes anew that pharmaceutical companies were moving closer to a medicine that could finally disrupt the disease’s memory-robbing course, though a string of failures shadow the efforts. Alzheimer’s has proved an especially tough drug target. Approved therapies only relieve symptoms temporarily, and one experimental treatment after another promising to stymie the neurodegeneration has ultimately failed to work. Some pharmaceutical companies, after costly failures, pulled out. (Hernandez and Loftus, 7/6)				


					
						Stat:
						4 Burning Questions After Biogen's $12 Billion Alzheimer's Surprise					
					
					Here’s what we know: In a complex study, a single subgroup of patients saw significant improvements in both cognition and the buildup of the toxic brain plaques thought to contribute to Alzheimer’s. The trial failed its primary endpoint, but that subgroup result marks a win on a secondary goal, according to Biogen and Eisai. What we don’t know — and won’t for a matter of months — is how many patients were in that group, how big the effects were, and whether the likes of the Food and Drug Administration will take the data seriously. That last point is particularly key. (Garde, 7/6)				

In other pharmaceutical news —


					
						Miami Herald:
						Novartis, Sandoz Recall 470,000 Packs Of Prescription Drugs					
					
					A child showed that some drug blister packs weren't "child resistant" as they should have been, so drugmakers Sandoz and Novartis recalled 470,000 of them. The exact description of the problem, as stated in the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission recall notice: "The prescription drug packaging is not child resistant as required by the Poison Prevention Packaging Act, posing a poisoning risk if swallowed by children." (Neal, 7/8)				


					
					Women’s Health				


							
																South Carolina Governor Cuts $16M In Health Funding From Budget To Limit Money Going To Abortion Providers
						

Critics, however, say that Planned Parenthood receives less than $100,000 from what was cut. Even some Republicans called the move shortsighted since so little goes to the organization in the first place and removing it from the spending plan could mean less money for things like law enforcement or help for families with children with autism.


					
						The Associated Press:
						GOP Governor Cuts Health Care To Take Anti-Abortion Stand					
					
					South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster removed $16 million for health care from the state budget, saying Friday he wanted to make sure no taxpayer money goes to abortion providers. The Republican governor said he was keeping a promise he made repeatedly as he campaigns for a full term, disagreeing with Democrats and some Republicans who said Planned Parenthood gets less than $100,000 of the money and all of it goes for family planning and not abortion. (7/6)				


					
						The Hill:
						GOP Governor Cuts Health Care Budget To Prevent Planned Parenthood Funding 					
					
					"Taxpayer dollars must not directly or indirectly subsidize abortion providers like Planned Parenthood," McMaster told The State. "There are a variety of agencies, clinics and medical entities in South Carolina that receive taxpayer funding [that] offer important women's health and family-planning services without performing abortions." (Wise, 7/6)				

And abortion news comes out of Indiana, Texas and Arizona, as well —


					
						The Associated Press:
						Indiana Sees Increase In Abortions For First Time Since 2009					
					
					The number of abortions performed in Indiana increased last year for the first time since 2009, a state report shows. Nearly 7,800 women opted to terminate pregnancies in Indiana in 2017, almost 500 more than the previous year, according to an annual report released June 30 by the Indiana State Department of Health. The report looks at abortion trends over a five-year period. (7/6)				


					
						Houston Chronicle:
						Texans Paid $500,000 To Anti-Abortion Activists. Here’s What They Got. 					
					
					The Texas Attorney General has drawn on a network of pro-life advocates to defend the state’s abortion restrictions in federal court, spending half a million in taxpayer dollars for testimony that has done little or nothing to help the state make its case. The attorney general’s office has paid 21 expert witnesses to testify in legal challenges to a string of abortion laws and regulations enacted since 2013. Judges disregarded the testimony of six of the state’s experts and gave little or no weight to the others, according to their rulings and comments in court. (Matos, 7/7)				


					
						Arizona Republic:
						Arizona Still Has A Law Banning Abortion On Its Books					
					
					According to the Guttmacher Institute, nine other states have pre-Roe bans similar to Arizona's on the books: Alabama, Alaska, Massachusetts, Mississippi, New Mexico, Oklahoma, West Virginia and Wisconsin. Four states have post-Roe laws that would immediately ban abortion if Roe v. Wade was overturned: Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota and South Dakota. (Castle, 7/7)				


					
					Medicaid				


							
																Medicaid Expansion Poised To Go Before Nebraska Voters In November
						

Advocates have been working in several states on the new strategy of taking expansion right to the voters with ballot initiatives. News on Medicaid comes out of Kentucky, Connecticut and Iowa, as well.


					
						NPR:
						133,000 Nebraskans Sign Petitions To Put Medicaid Expansion On The Ballot					
					
					Voters in Nebraska may get to decide whether their state expands Medicaid this November. Supporters of Nebraska's Medicaid expansion campaign, Insure the Good Life, turned in petitions bearing more than 133,000 signatures to the secretary of state Thursday. If 85,000 are validated, the issue will appear on ballots this fall. (Knapp, 7/6)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						Advocates: Dental Care Denied Wrongly After Medicaid Cuts					
					
					Some children and pregnant women in Kentucky have wrongly been denied access to dental care since the state abruptly cut dental and vision coverage for as many as 460,000 people, public health advocates say. The cuts came after Gov. Matt Bevin's plan to overhaul the state's Medicaid program was blocked by a federal judge. (7/6)				


					
						The CT Mirror:
						Plaintiffs Ask Court To Find DSS In Contempt In Medicaid Case					
					
					The plaintiffs in a federal class action lawsuit who settled with the state Department of Social Services want a judge to find the state in contempt for failing to process certain types of Medicaid applications in the mandated time frame. Legal aid attorneys filed the lawsuit in 2012, claiming that DSS had failed to employ enough workers to process Medicaid applications in the time frame required by federal law, leaving thousands of low-income residents without access to health care coverage. (Rigg, 7/6)				


					
						Des Moines Register:
						UnitedHealthcare Is Trying Again To Cut In-Home Care To Paralyzed Iowan					
					
					Jamie Campbell can’t believe his Medicaid management company is messing with his care again. Campbell, who is paralyzed from the neck down, lives in his home with daily assistance from aides paid by Iowa’s Medicaid program. UnitedHealthcare, which the state hired to help manage Medicaid, tried last year to drastically reduce the amount of in-home help Campbell could receive. He appealed, saying he needed all the assistance he was using. An administrative law judge agreed, writing in a decision last summer that the evidence was “overwhelmingly” in Campbell’s favor. The judge ordered the insurer to continue covering his care as before. (Leys, 7/6)				


					
					Marketplace				


							
																Brothers Claim Small Contracting Firm Let Them Go Because Of Their Expensive Blood Disorder
						

Signature Industrial Services, however, says the decision was nonmedical and a part of a larger reduction in workforce. As bigger companies start relying on smaller firms to fill in worker gaps, issues over expensive health care coverage can become a flash point. 


					
						The Wall Street Journal:
						When Three Brothers With A Blood Disorder Lost Their Jobs, The EEOC Sued					
					
					Five years ago, Anthony, Drew and Raymond West were called into their supervisor’s office and let go from their jobs performing heavy-duty maintenance work at an oil refinery in Beaumont, Texas. “We kind of knew it was gonna happen, but then again we were all shocked,” said Raymond West, age 26, the youngest of the brothers. The Wests were employed for a contract-worker firm, Signature Industrial Services LLC, and were contracted to do work for Exxon Mobil Corp. Their Signature supervisor had been instructed to let them go because of their medical condition, hemophilia A, according to a lawsuit filed in February by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission that charged Signature with violating the Americans with Disabilities Act. (Weber, 7/9)				

In other news from the health industry —


					
						Stat:
						5 Challenges Atul Gawade Will Face In A Risky New Health CEO Role					
					
					Dr. Atul Gawande will step out of health care’s limelight on Monday to put himself under its microscope. Taking the helm of the new health venture funded by Amazon, JPMorgan Chase, and Berkshire Hathaway is the riskiest move of his career — one that will subject his acclaimed New Yorker narratives to a real-world stress test whose outcome is far from certain. In the balance will hang not just his reputation as a physician and writer, but perhaps the highest-profile effort to date to leverage the private sector to fix America’s fragmented and dysfunctional health care system. Gawande has made a name for himself by proposing novel solutions to the system’s many shortcomings — from surgical checklists to rooting out unnecessary care — and testing them in specific hospitals or markets around the world. (Ross, 7/9)				


					
						Modern Healthcare:
						Fitch Expects Healthcare Defaults Will Remain Low					
					
					Stable cash flows and robust capital markets have kept the U.S. healthcare sector's 16-year default rate well below the overall market rate, according to a new report from Fitch Ratings. The sector that includes healthcare and pharmaceuticals saw an average high-yield default rate of 1% between 2002 and 2017, materially lower than the 4.1% rate for the market overall during that period. Given the short list of bonds Fitch is concerned about, the ratings agency wrote that it expects the sector's below-average default environment to stick around another year, absent unexpected regulatory changes or other external factors. (Bannow, 7/5)				


					
					Opioid Crisis				


							
																Study On Opioids, Criminal Justice System Highlights Need To Have Law Enforcement Engaged In Fighting Crisis
						

Although a large number of people who have a substance abuse disorder are in the system, most jails and prisons don't offer medication-assisted treatment. The study's author urges alternatives to incarceration for people with addictions. "We need a response that will ideally prevent people from entering the criminal justice system," he says. News on the epidemic comes out of Tennessee and Massachusetts, as well.


					
						NPR:
						Greater Opioid Use Linked To Higher Chance Of Arrests, Criminal Convictions					
					
					People addicted to prescription opioids or heroin are far more likely to have run-ins with the law than those who don't use opioids, according to a study published Friday in JAMA Network Open. The study provides the first nationwide estimate for the number of people using opioids who end up in the American criminal justice system. The results suggest a need to engage law enforcement officials and corrections systems to tackle the opioid epidemic. (Chatterjee, 7/6)				


					
						Modern Healthcare:
						U. Of Tenn. Medical Center Admits Drug Addicted Patients Under Strict Conduct Rules					
					
					Almost a year ago, the University of Tennessee Medical Center in Knoxville started requiring addicted patients admitted for medical treatment of drug-use associated infections to submit to tough new conduct rules. They must agree to a search by security, turn over their clothing and all personal property, hand over their cellphone, not leave the hospital floor, and receive no visitors. If they won't sign an agreement to follow those rules, they must leave. (Meyer, 7/7)				


					
						Boston Globe:
						Addicted People Often End Up In Jail. And That Can Be Deadly For Them.					
					
					In Massachusetts, 26 advocacy and health care groups, including the Massachusetts Medical Society and Massachusetts Health and Hospital Association, have joined a coalition pushing the Legislature to require jails and prisons to provide the medications for opioid addiction to inmates. These medications ease cravings, prevent overdoses, and help people stay in treatment. (Freyer, 7/9)				


					
					Public Health And Education				


							
																The Superbug Era: Big-Gun Antibiotics Being Used To Treat Gonorrhea Which Used To Be Taken Out By Single Pill
						

A case study of a man who traveled to Thailand and picked up a strain paints a grim picture of what lays ahead in terms of treatment. The only drugs that worked were expensive and intensive to administer. In other public health news: egg freezing, relationships and health, nutrition, aphasia, Zika, retirement communities, and more. 


					
						Stat:
						A Case Study In The Fast-Rising Threat Of Antibiotic Resistance					
					
					In the good old days — way back in early 2012 — people who contracted gonorrhea were given a single pill to cure the infection. A newly published paper shows that a time is fast approaching when a far more onerous course of medical care may be required to get rid of a bacterium that seems hell-bent on becoming untreatable. Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the bug that causes gonorrhea, has relentlessly vanquished every antibiotic medical practice has used against it. The current recommended cure — an injection of a drug called ceftriaxone, given in combination with a second antibiotic, azithromycin — is the last good option to treat this infection, and there are already signs that its days may be numbered. (Branswell, 7/6)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Do ‘Social’ Egg Freezers Use Their Eggs? Here Are New Numbers From A Large Fertility Center.					
					
					Social egg freezing is a big topic of conversation in our office these days. My colleague Nicole Ellis has launched a video docuseries about her journey to figure out whether she should use the technology to save eggs that she could potentially use to fertilize later, when she feels the time is right. ("Social" differentiates this reason for egg storage from, say, freezing eggs before cancer treatment or for other medical reasons.) A number of other 20- and 30-something reporters, editors, producers and others are thinking about the procedure, too. (Cha, 7/6)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Relationships Protect Your Health, Even Casual Ones					
					
					Close relationships with family and friends, we know, are important for our health and well-being. But what about the people who make up our broader social networks: the parents at school drop-off, the neighbor down the street or that colleague in another department who always makes you laugh? While research on the benefits of social connections has generally focused on the importance of “strong ties,” or the intimate relationships we have with family and close friends, a growing body of research is shedding light on the hidden benefits of casual acquaintances, too. Surprisingly, these “weak ties” (that funny colleague, for example) can serve important functions such as boosting physical and psychological health and buffering against stress and loneliness, researchers have found. (Wallace, 7/7)				


					
						Kaiser Health News:
						Feel Like The Last Friend Standing? Here’s How To Cultivate New Buds As You Age. 					
					
					Donn Trenner, 91, estimates that two-thirds of his friends are dead.“That’s a hard one for me,” he said. “I’ve lost a lot of people.” As baby boomers age, more and more folks will reach their 80s, 90s — and beyond. They will not only lose friends but face the daunting task of making new friends at an advanced age.Friendship in old age plays a critical role in health and well-being, according to recent findings from the Stanford Center on Longevity’s Sightlines Project. Socially isolated individuals face health risks comparable to those of smokers, and their mortality risk is twice that of obese individuals, the study notes. (Horovitz, 7/9)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Nutrition And Diet Advice Often Are Small Part Of Medical Education					
					
					When Americans hear about a health craze, they may turn to their physician for advice: Will that superfood really boost brain function? Is that supplement okay for me to take? Or they may be interested in food choices because of obesity, malnutrition or the role of diet in chronic disease. But a doctor may not be a reliable source. Experts say that while most physicians may recognize that diet is influential in health, they don’t learn enough about nutrition in medical school or the training programs that follow. (Cernansky, 7/8)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Aphasia Makes You Lose Your Words After Brain Damage					
					
					What if you wanted to speak but couldn’t string together recognizable words? What if someone spoke to you but you couldn’t understand what they were saying? These situations aren’t hypothetical for the more than 1 million Americans with aphasia, which affects the ability to understand and speak with others. Aphasia occurs in people who have had strokes, traumatic brain injuries or other brain damage. Some victims have a scrambled vocabulary or are unable to express themselves; others find it hard to make sense of the words they read or hear. (Blakemore, 7/7)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						When Searching For Happiness, Try Eating Popcorn With Chopsticks					
					
					It happens fast: You crack open a bottle of your favorite drink and put it to your lips. The delicious flavor is nearly overwhelming. But a minute later, you’re barely noticing the taste as you drink it. Or you buy a new car and think it will make you smile every time you drive it for years. But a month later, that sensation is gone. Now it’s just a car. (Smith and O'Brien, 7/7)				


					
						PBS NewsHour:
						What Happened To Zika?					
					
					Now that the weather is warm and mosquitoes are out, how much do we need to worry about Zika? Should we factor it into our summer travels? Here’s a guide to help you out. (Grennell, 7/6)				


					
						NPR:
						Essential Tremor Treatment Uses Focused Ultrasound					
					
					Alan Dambach was in his late 50s when he noticed how unsteady his hands had become. Over the next decade, his tremor got so bad he had difficulty eating with a spoon or fixing equipment at his family's tree farm in western Pennsylvania. "I couldn't get nuts and bolts to work," he says. (Hamilton, 7/9)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Retirement Communities Turn Their Sights On A Once-Invisible Group: LGBT Seniors					
					
					In 2016, as Kenneth MacLean was about to turn 90 and was looking to move to a retirement community, he had a question for Asbury Methodist Village in Gaithersburg, Md. “I asked, ‘Would there be many gays here? Would gays be welcomed?’ ” MacLean, a retired Unitarian minister, wanted to be sure his partner of 22 years, a man who lives in England and spends several months a year visiting him, would be welcomed by staff and other residents. (Bahrampour, 7/8)				


					
						NPR:
						To Repel Ticks, Try Spraying Your Clothes With A Pesticide Called Permethrin					
					
					There's new evidence to support a decades-old strategy for preventing the tick bites that lead to all sorts of nasty diseases, including Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. The remedy involves spraying your clothing with permethrin — a pesticide that's chemically similar to extracts of the flowering chrysanthemum plant. (Aubrey, 7/9)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Kalea And Noah Avery: Brother And Sister Were Diagnosed With The Same Brain Tumor Less Than Two Weeks Apart					
					
					Just weeks after their 6-year-old daughter started complaining about severe headaches, after numerous doctors' appointments and desperate trips to the emergency room — and after doctors discovered a brain tumor and took it out — it was happening all over again. Duncan and Nohea Avery had been tending to their daughter, Kalea, who was recovering last month from surgery to remove a medulloblastoma when they learned their 4-year-old son had one, too. (Bever, 7/7)				


					
					State Watch				


							
																State Highlights: Health, Safety Violations Rampant At Washington's Largest Psychiatric Hospital; Sanders Backs Vermont Nurses Union Ahead Of Negotiations
						

Media outlets report on news from Washington, Vermont, Ohio, California, Texas, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Arizona, Oregon and Colorado. 


					
						The Associated Press:
						AP Exclusive: Washington Psychiatric Hospital Called 'Hell'					
					
					Behind tall brick walls and secure windows, hundreds of patients at Washington state's largest psychiatric hospital live in conditions that fail U.S. health and safety standards, while overworked nurses and psychiatrists say they are navigating a system that punishes employees who speak out despite critical staffing shortages. "They don't have enough staff to protect patients, or provide them with the bare minimum of care," said Lisa Bowser, whose mother spent two years at Western State Hospital and suffered dozens of falls and assaults. (7/6)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						Sanders: Nurses' Contract Negotiation Is About Priorities					
					
					U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders threw his support behind University of Vermont Medical Center nurses ahead of union negotiations Friday, saying hospital administrators need to increase wages and avert a scheduled strike. Sanders railed against the "exorbitant" salaries paid to hospital administrators, including over $2 million paid to hospital network's CEO John Brumsted. (7/6)				


					
						The Associated Press:
						Family Of Ohio State Doctor Says It's Cooperating In Probe					
					
					The family of a former Ohio State University team doctor accused by athletes of sexual misconduct says it is "shocked and saddened" by the allegations and is cooperating with the school's independent investigation. The Columbus Dispatch in a story published online Saturday said the statement was emailed by Scott Strauss. He's the son of the late Dr. Richard Strauss, who killed himself in 2005 at age 67. The statement said Strauss' family learned from news reports about the allegations that athletes were fondled by Strauss during medical examinations. The allegations date back to the 1970s. (7/7)				


					
						KQED:
						California’s Push To Make People Healthy—And Save Taxpayers Money					
					
					That idea is at the heart of the state’s effort over the past two decades to revamp its system for delivering health care to the neediest. The strategy has included a shift to managed care, meshing mental health services with physical care and creating programs specifically to coordinate an array of services so patients don’t have to hunt them down one at a time. (Gorn, 7/8)				


					
						Politico Pro:
						Houston’s Biggest Jail Wants To Shed Its Reputation As A Mental Health Treatment Center					
					
					The Harris County sheriff’s office doesn’t want its jail to be the largest mental health facility in Texas anymore — but first it needs to find somewhere else to accommodate patients before they get swept up in the criminal justice system. (Rayasam, 7/8)				


					
						WBUR:
						5 Takeaways From The First Ever 'Cancer In Boston' Report					
					
					Massachusetts is one of 22 states where cancer regularly beats out heart disease as the leading cause of death. In Boston, cancer actually causes more deaths than stroke and heart disease combined — a trend that holds across all races and ethnicities. (Kaplan, 7/6)				


					
						Dallas Morning News:
						Feds Say Kickbacks And Bribes Forced Surgical Patients To Travel Long Distance To Dallas Hospital					
					
					They were so motivated by money, the doctor and chiropractor were willing to make patients travel long distances from West Texas to a Dallas hospital for surgeries — a five-hour drive, federal court records say. Shawn Henry, a Fort Worth spine surgeon, was “aggressive” in recommending surgeries at Forest Park Medical Center, the court records said. But what the Midland patients didn’t know was that Henry was being paid by the hospital’s owners for referring them there, according to prosecutors. Those are the allegations in newly-released court records related to another plea deal in the $200 million federal bribery and kickback case against 21 people associated with the bankrupt Forest Park Medical Center. (Krause, 7/7)				


					
						Austin American-Statesman:
						Mental Health Calls, Some Deadly, A Growing Challenge For Austin Cops					
					
					Police, community leaders and mental health advocates agree that most patrol officers aren’t always the best suited to treat the nation’s mentally ill, despite often being the first ones responding to those in crisis. (Wilson, 7/6)				


					
						The Star Tribune:
						Little-Known Exception For Studies Gains Attention In Ketamine Debate					
					
					Ethics concerns over a Hennepin Healthcare clinical trial have raised public attention to a federal rule permitting research on patients in emergency situations without their initial consent. While little known, the rule has been commonly used in the Twin Cities for studies of everything from resuscitation equipment to breathing tubes to medications to slow bleeding at emergency scenes. U.S. Food and Drug Administration since 1996 has allowed “exceptions” from the usual process of gaining consent before performing experimental treatments on patients — but only in studies involving emergency treatments that couldn’t be accomplished any other way, and only if they propose to improve practices that are unproven or substandard. (Olson, 7/7)				


					
						Arizona Republic:
						Valley Fever: What You Should Know					
					
					Those dust storms can kick up dirt and soil that carry fungal spores called Coccidioides, or cocci. Found in Arizona desert soil, they can cause valley fever, a potentially serious lung infection. (Fish, 7/6)				


					
						Sacramento Bee:
						Dignity Health Lab Workers Plan Informational Picket July 9					
					
					Union representatives for more than 200 laboratory scientists and technologists at Dignity Health say they plan informational picketing Monday at their employer's facilities in Woodland, Stockton and Carmichael, having rejected the company's latest contract offer for wages and benefits. Michael Aidan, assistant executive director of Engineers and Scientists of California Local 20, said a mediator from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service will begin working with company and union contract negotiators on Monday to try and reach common ground. (Anderson, 7/9)				


					
						The Oregonian:
						Savings Plan Helps Oregonians With Disabilities Save Money And Keep Benefits 					
					
					Money saved in the special accounts must be used for living expenses or costs relating a disability, such as education, housing, transportation and medical costs not covered by insurance. But that definition is broad. It can be used to pay rent, buy groceries, pay for college, purchase a wheelchair-accessible van and take a vacation -- as long as it "helps maintain or improve the health, independence, or quality of life of the person living with a disability," state guidelines say. Oregonians with disabilities can deposit up to $15,000 a year in such an account and accumulate up to $100,000 without affecting their benefits. They can deposit an extra $12,000 if they are employed and stay covered under Medicaid, although they may lose other benefits. Family members or friends can contribute too. (Voorhees, 7/6)				


					
						Denver Post:
						At Least 30 Colorado School Districts And Charter Schools Allow Teachers To Carry Guns, But No Statewide Training Standards Regulate Them					
					
					Colorado is one of at least nine states where teachers may arm themselves in the classroom if their districts or charter schools allow it. Thirty school districts or charter schools in the state have done so — though which districts do is less clear. There is no statewide training standard for school employees who carry guns, no standard use-of-force policy like the kinds intended to advise police officers and little guidance for school districts other than what their liability insurers provide. The result is that the arming of teachers in Colorado is a local issue not subject to debate, questioning or review by state regulators or lawmakers. That’s likely the way many rural districts prefer it, but even some ardent gun-rights supporters have sought a more uniform approach. (Hernandez, 7/8)				


					
						Arizona Republic:
						Valley Cities Eye Sober Living Home Regulations					
					
					This spring, state legislators passed a law requiring sober living homes to secure licensing with the Arizona Department of Health Services. But that agency still has about 18 months of work left to get a licensing system up and running, according to Mesa Mayor John Giles. (Altavena, 7/7)				


					
					Editorials And Opinions				


							
																Different Takes: Many Individual Liberties Rest With Roe V. Wade, Not Just Abortion Rights
						

Opinion writers express views about how overturning Roe V. Wade could impact the nation.


					
						The Washington Post:
						The Roe V. Wade Fight Isn’t Just About Women’s Rights					
					
					On Monday, President Trump is expected to announce his nominee to replace Justice Anthony M. Kennedy on the Supreme Court. Given the president’s promise to appoint justices who would overturn Roe v. Wade, it’s widely understood that his nominee will pose a clear danger to women’s reproductive rights. What most don’t realize is that everyone’s personal-liberty rights are on the line. The constitutional framework of Roe is about far more than abortion. It’s about rearing our children without unwarranted government interference. It’s about choosing whom we want to marry. It’s about deciding with whom we want to create a home. It’s about the right to use contraception. It’s about what the Supreme Court in Planned Parenthood v. Casey explained is the “promise of the Constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty which the government may not enter.” (Nancy Northup, 7/8)				


					
						Bloomberg:
						Trump's Values And The Fate Of Abortion Rights					
					
					Public opinion on abortion has been remarkably stable in recent decades, with significant but never overwhelming majorities supporting legal yet restricted abortion rights. Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court decision that guarantees the right to abortion, with caveats based on the viability of the fetus and health of the mother, is an apt reflection of a national ambivalence that nonetheless decisively tips toward the rights of the woman over the rights of the fetus. The majority opinion in Roe is notably free of the triumphalism that has accompanied declarations of other rights. Still, the politics of abortion have been changing even as public opinion appears predictably settled. (Francis Wilkinson, 7/7)				


					
						The Hill:
						Birth Control As Basic Health Care Hangs In The Balance Of The Next Supreme Court Pick					
					
					In addition to so many other implications, it is essential that we consider the impact that the next Supreme Court Justice could have on women’s access to birth control. Believe it or not, it was just 46 years ago that single women gained the legal right to use birth control with the 1972 decision, Eisenstadt v. Baird, which followed the 1965 landmark Supreme Court case, Griswold v. Connecticut, that made birth control legal but only for married women. These Supreme Court decisions changed the game for women. Countless studies have pointed to the unparalleled impact of birth control in helping women build careers, achieve higher education, have healthier babies when they want to, and improve their overall quality of life. Birth control, for example, was directly tied to 30 percent of the wage gains realized by women between the 1960s and 1990s. (Ginny Ehrlich, 7/6)				


					
						The Washington Post:
						Pro-Lifers Should Focus Less On Roe V. Wade And More On Changing Hearts					
					
					As President Trump zeroes in on his nomination to replace Justice Anthony M. Kennedy on the Supreme Court, abortion has returned to the forefront of a national debate, and to a degree not seen since the 1980s. The topic never completely goes away, and Americans remain deeply divided on the subject. But abortion’s overall ranking as an issue of importance, compared with others, has risen and fallen over the years. It is resurrected now because Trump’s choice to replace Kennedy could conceivably tilt the court dramatically to the right, and progressives are making the prospect of overturning Roe v. Wade their rallying cry to oppose Trump’s pick. (Gary Abernathy, 7/8)				


							
																Viewpoints: Idea For Medicaid Work Requirements Is Truly Flawed; Small Towns Lack Adequate Access To Mental Health Care
						

Editorial writers look at these and other health issues.


					
						The New York Times:
						Do Poor People Have A Right To Health Care?					
					
					The 16 Kentuckians who recently won a lawsuit challenging the legality of Medicaid work requirements include a law student with a rare heart condition, a mortician with diabetes, a mother of four with congenital hip dysplasia and a housekeeper with rheumatoid arthritis. It’s a mixed bunch, united by two grim facts: They live at or below the federal poverty level, and they’re caught in the cross hairs of a debate over what society owes its neediest members. (7/7)				


					
						Des Moines Register:
						Health Care Crisis: Rural Americans Are Most Vulnerable To Suicide					
					
					While the highly publicized deaths of celebrities frequently shock America, rural areas are suffering the most. Each year, thousands of Americans in small towns take their own lives after suffering — often for years — without adequate access to mental health professionals. (Jagdish Khubchandani, 7/9)				


					
						The Baltimore Sun:
						It's Time To Talk About Suicide					
					
					There is an approximately one in 10 chance that you or someone you know will attempt to end their life. Over 45,000 Americans kill themselves every year — more than all the annual deaths from terrorism across the world combined. In fact, there are twice as many suicides every year as there are homicides. And more than 500,000 people are treated in U.S. emergency rooms each year for injuries related to self-harm. Yet we rarely talk about suicide. Why? Because there is a strong sense of shame, guilt and stigma associated with mental health challenges and suicide. People are afraid to initiate conversations, as if talking about it will increase the incidence of suicide. Nothing can be further from truth. (Mansoor Malik, 7/8)				


					
						The Hill:
						To Improve Minority Mental Health, Research Must Put Patients First					
					
					As physicians, we care for patients with acute and chronic diseases every day, doing whatever we can to help them achieve the best health outcomes possible and live long, productive lives. But as leaders of the two largest physician organizations dedicated to health advocacy for racial minority populations in the United States, we know that far too many of the patients our members treat will have less access to the care they need, and see poorer outcomes, than non-minorities. We see these disparities across all conditions, but one of our greatest challenges is in helping patients in minority communities live with serious mental illness. One in six U.S. adults has an illness like depression, bipolar disorder, or anxiety disorder, but African Americans are 10 percent more likely, and Latinos 40 percent more likely, to experience serious psychological distress than non-Hispanic whites. And those minority populations are only half as likely to receive needed treatment or counseling as non-Hispanic whites. Statistics are even worse for American Indians and Alaska Natives. (Elena Rios and Doris Browne, 7/7)				


					
						The New York Times:
						Seriously, Juice Is Not Healthy					
					
					Obesity affects 40 percent of adults and 19 percent of children in the United States and accounts for more than $168 billion in health care spending each year. Sugary beverages are thought to be one of the major drivers of the obesity epidemic. These drinks (think soda and sports drinks) are the largest single source of added sugars for Americans and contribute, on average, 145 added calories a day to our diets. For these reasons, reducing sugary beverage consumption has been a significant focus of public health intervention. Most efforts have focused on sodas. But not juice. Juice, for some reason, gets a pass. It’s not clear why. (Erika R. Cheng, Lauren G. Fiechtner and Aaron E. Carroll, 7/7)				


					
						The Hill:
						Don't Turn A Blind Eye To Nearsightedness In Kids					
					
					We’ve all heard of peanut allergies — a problem that was hardly existent when we were kids, but now is everywhere, with various warnings and awareness campaigns to make sure our kids stay safe. Because allergic reactions to peanuts may be life threatening, it garners massive attention from the medical community, parents, educators, lawmakers and the media. But there is another medical problem for our children, growing every year but getting much less attention: myopia, or nearsightedness. It is a condition that allows people to see things clearly close-up, but view objects at a distance as blurry. (Ed Towns, 7/6)				


					
						The New York Times:
						For Whom The Trump Trolls					
					
					One of the more chilling things I’ve heard recently came from Jaron Lanier, the Silicon Valley founding father whose new book is “Ten Arguments for Deleting Your Social Media Accounts Right Now.” Lanier, who met Trump a couple of times back in the real estate developer’s New York heyday, thinks the president’s addiction to tweeting is rewiring his brain in a negative way. As Trump picks up speed on Twitter, the Oval Office is becoming a Skinner box. Like other “behavior modification empires,” as Lanier calls social media sites, Twitter offers positive reinforcement for negativity. (Maureen Dowd, 7/7)				


					
						The Hill:
						Here's Why We Must Continue To Study Kratom And Other Opioid-Like Drugs					
					
					The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently gave final approval for the first non-opioid drug shown to lessen the severity of opioid withdrawal symptoms. Meanwhile, President Trump signed into law groundbreaking “right to try” legislation allowing the terminally ill to explore unapproved medical treatments as a last resort. In light of these developments, researchers and advocates of the botanical Kratom were hopeful for increased support for the study of the herb as a new treatment for opioid withdrawal symptoms, acute and chronic pain, and a range of mood disorders.Instead the FDA has spoken out against Kratom, ignoring a history of safe use and existing research. By overstating safety concerns, the FDA has dismissed any possibility that Kratom might have benefits. (Paula N. Brown, 7/7)				


					
						The New York Times:
						Sometimes Patients Simply Need Other Patients					
					
					When Jodie Ofosuhene learned she had breast cancer at age 29 in 2016, she got more than standard medical care. She was connected with Noel Peters, a former patient who serves as a mentor to new ones. “Noel helped me tremendously,” Ms. Ofosuhene said in an interview. “Every time I had a question about my response to treatment — whether it was normal — she had answers from her own experience.” In an ideal world, when we are faced with a new health problem, a clinician is available to sit down and address all our questions and anxieties about the condition and its treatment. This ideal is rarely met in the United States health system. More typically, we’re rushed through doctor visits that fly by too quickly for us to gather our thoughts. (Aaron E. Carroll and Austin Frakt, 7/9)				


					
						Sacramento Bee:
						Legislature Must Not Slight Seniors In Mental Health Money					
					
					An important measure to expand access to mental health care services in California is going through the Legislature, but it would make it more difficult for counties to serve older adults. Senate Bill 1004, which was approved by the Assembly Health Committee on June 19, would amend Proposition 63, passed by voters in 2004 to provide funding for county mental health services with a 1 percent tax on annual incomes of more than $1 million. (Cheryl Brown, 7/6)				


	We want to hear from you: Contact Us



									Listen: A Sudden Freeze On ACA Payouts And What It Means For You								


									Democrats Rally Against Threats To The ACA To Block Trump’s Supreme Court Nominee								


									Support Circle: Family Caregivers Share Stories And Tips To Ease Alzheimer's Toll								


									If High Court Reverses Roe V. Wade, 22 States Poised To Ban Abortion								


				© 2018 Kaiser Family Foundation. All rights reserved.			


				Powered by WordPress.com VIP			