Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Max Jaeger


		
		
		
		
	


									June 19, 2018 | 2:45pm
											| Updated June 19, 2018 | 3:06pm
												

Two lawmakers were blocked from a tour of a controversial federal immigrant detention center that houses young children Tuesday.

Sen. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) and US Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-Fla.) were turned away from the US Department of Health and Human Services-run Homestead Temporary Shelter for Unaccompanied Children facility in Homestead, Florida, after the private operator hired to run the center said they could tour the facility, according to Nelson.

“The company running this facility told us we would be welcomed to tour the facility. HHS then denied us entry and said that they need ‘two weeks notice’ to allow us inside. That’s ridiculous and it’s clear this administration is hiding something,” Nelson tweeted.

“These are kids who were taken from their moms and dads. They are scared. And this administration should be ashamed of itself.”

Federal immigration detention centers have come under scrutiny since the Trump administration implemented a “zero tolerance” policy of prosecuting all adults who illegally cross the border. More than 2,000 children have been ripped from their families as a result.

The Homestead facility houses 1,000 migrant children, according to Nelson.

Some were separated from their families and others came to the US as unaccompanied minors, a rep from Nelson’s office told The Post.

HHS did not immediately respond to a request for comment.


			Read Next
		


			
				Macron rips sassy teen for calling him by nickname: 'You s...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Macron rips sassy teen for calling him by nickname: 'You s...			
		

Share Selection

81,800

58,326

53,559

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters