A group of journalists were granted a tour of a Texas detention center that houses immigrant children, including some who have been separated from their parents after attempts to seek asylum or cross the border into the United States. The tour occurred after a U.S. congressman was denied access to the facility.


The detention center, called Casa Padre and located in a converted Walmart building in Brownsville, Texas, housed 1,469 migrant boys as of Wednesday, June 13, according to the Los Angeles Times. The publication reports that the facility is state-licensed to hold 1,200 migrant youth, but was recently granted a variance from state officials to house an additional 297. The average stay is 49 days, according to the LA Times. During this time, the Office of Refugee Resettlement has been tasked with “identifying and screening the nearest relative or family friend living in the U.S. to whom the child can be released,” according to VOX.


The Washington Post reports the facility is licensed to house children between the ages of 10-17. ABC News says it is the largest licensed facility in the U.S., and is overseen by the Office of Refugee Resettlement. It gained national attention earlier this month after Senator Jeff Merkley [D-OR] posted a live stream of himself attempting to visit the facility. He was denied access inside.


According to CBS News, Merkley believed the center was housing migrant children who were separated from their families at the border, which turned out to be true.


The incident follows the Trump administration’s announcement of a “zero-tolerance policy” earlier this year. Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced the policy in April, stating the administration would criminally prosecute everyone who crosses the border without documentation. Earlier in June, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit challenging the Trump administration’s practice of taking children away from parents who are seeking asylum. An Immigration and Customs Enforcement staffer told NBC News that the Department of Homeland Security does not have a new blanket policy that states children must be separated from their parents, but the Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance policy” is a tougher enforcement policy that experts say will lead to more prosecutions and, thus, more families being separated.


"This is not zero tolerance. This is zero humanity,” Merkley told CNN after his attempt to enter. “It's damaging children, putting them through a horrific experience in a land where they know no one, and they don't know where they're being sent and they don't understand why they're being sent."


https://twitter.com/jacobsoboroff/status/1007071603887362048

https://twitter.com/prernaplal/status/1004371630968197120/photo/1

According to the Post, the Southwest Key nonprofit organization that runs Casa Padre under a federal contract operates 26 shelters and houses 5,129 immigrant children in three states. That’s nearly half of the 11,200 migrant children that are currently in U.S. custody. The organization’s founder, Juan Sanchez, estimates 10% of children in the care of Southwest Key facilities were separated from their parents, some of whom are being held in federal prisons. Sanchez says the number is closer to 5% at Casa Padre. The Post reports the detained children — in this case, boys — are able to make two phone calls per week. Jaime Garcia, program director at Casa Padre, told the LA Times all of the children have been able to speak with their parents.


At Casa Padre, each child is assigned a clinician to help them deal with trauma and mental health issues, according to ABC News. They are granted three meals a day and two snacks, and given access to video games, pool tables and educational classes. The LA Times reports the migrant children must be allowed to spend two hours per weekday and three hours on weekends outdoors, where they have access to a soccer field, volleyball nets, and basketball courts.


MSNBC correspondent Jacob Soboroff posted a thread about the tour on Twitter. According to Soboroff, the president of Southwest Key told him that “tent cities,” which have recently been proposed as an option to detain migrant youth and could help house the growing population of migrant children, won’t have to be licensed. This report comes days after the Department of Health and Human Services confirmed that it is looking at three military bases in Texas as potential sites for “temporary shelters" for unaccompanied minors who arrive at the border.


Earlier this month, the Houston Chronicle reported approximately 150 health violations at more than a dozen Southwest Key facilities. According to the publication, violations over the last two years included “inadequate supervision, lack of timely medical care and children given medicine to which they were allergic.” A spokesperson for the organization told the Houston Chronicle the violations amounted to less than 1% of the standards reviewed by regulators.


MSNBC’s Soboroff also reported that Casa Padre staff wasn’t given a heads-up about the Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance policy,” despite having weekly policy calls with the federal government “about changes that will affect the shelter.”


The LA Times reports a media tour of another Southwest Key facility is scheduled for Friday, June 15.


Let us slide into your DMs. Sign up for the Teen Vogue daily email.


Want more from Teen Vogue? Check this out:


© 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and  Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement  (updated 5/25/18). Teen Vogue  may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. Your California Privacy Rights.  The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 


CNWN Collection