We get it—you’re not here to read advertisements. But we rely on advertisers to support the quality journalism we work hard to produce. To support our work, consider signing up for our weekly newsletter (we won't bug you again) or whitelisting texasmonthly.com within your ad blocker. And, of course, please email us your feedback anytime.


Get a free pass by signing up for our weekly editor's pick newsletter.



Or, whitelist texasmonthly.com.


An expert on helping parents navigate the asylum process describes what she’s seeing on the ground.

Jun 19, 2018

Jun 15, 2018

Jun 16, 2018

Jun 18, 2018

John Moore/Getty Images

Everyone involved in U.S. immigration along the border has a unique perspective on the new “zero tolerance” policies—most notably, the increasing number of migrant parents who are separated from their children. Some workers are charged with taking the children away from their parents and sending them into the care of Health and Human Services. Some are contracted to find housing for the children and get them food. Some volunteers try to help the kids navigate the system. Some, like Anne Chandler, assist the parents. As executive director of the Houston office of the nonprofit Tahirih Justice Center, which focuses on helping immigrant women and children, she has been traveling to the border and to detention centers, listening to the parents’ stories. We asked her to talk with us about what she has been hearing in recent weeks.

This interview has been edited for clarity and length.

Texas Monthly: First, can you give us an overview of your organization?

Anne Chandler: We run the Children’s Border Project, and we work with hundreds of kids that have been released from ORR [Office of Refugee Resettlement] care. We are not a legal service provider that does work when they’re in the shelters. To date, most of our work with that issue of family separation has been working with the parents in the days when they are being separated: when they’re in the federal courthouse being convicted; partnering with the federal public defenders; and then in the adult detention center, as they have no idea how to communicate or speak to their children or get them back before being deported.

TM: Can you take me through what you’ve been seeing?

AC: The short of it is, we will take sample sizes of numbers and individuals we’re seeing that are being prosecuted for criminal entry. The majority of those are free to return to the home country. Vast majority. We can’t quite know exactly because our sample size is between one hundred and two hundred individuals. But 90 percent of those who are being convicted are having their children separated from them. The 10 percent that aren’t are some mothers who are going with their children to the detention centers in Karnes and Dilley. But, for the most part, the ones that I’ve been working with are the ones that are actually being prosecuted for criminal entry, which is a pretty new thing for our country—to take first-time asylum seekers who are here seeking safe refuge, to turn around and charge them with a criminal offense. Those parents are finding themselves in adult detention centers and in a process known as expedited removal, where many are being deported. And their children, on the other hand, are put in a completely different legal structure. They are categorized as unaccompanied children and thus are being put in place in a federal agency not with the Department of Homeland Security but with Health and Human Services. And Health and Human Services has this complicated structure in place where they’re not viewed as a long-term foster care system—that’s for very limited numbers—but their general mandate is to safeguard these children in temporary shelters and then find family members with whom they can be placed. So they start with parents, and then they go to grandparents, and then they go to other immediate family members, and then they go to acquaintances, people who’ve known the children, and they’re in that system, but they can’t be released to their parents because their parents are behind bars. And we may see more parents that get out of jail because they pass a “credible fear” interview, which is the screening done by the asylum office to see who should be deported quickly, within days or weeks of arrival, and who should stay here and have an opportunity to present their asylum case before an immigration judge of the Department of Justice. So we have a lot of individuals who are in that credible fear process right now, but in Houston, once you have a credible fear interview (which will sometimes take two to three weeks to even set up), those results aren’t coming out for four to six weeks. Meanwhile, these parents are just kind of languishing in these detention centers because of the zero-tolerance policy. There’s no individual adjudication of whether the parents should be put on some form of alternative detention program so that they can be in a position to be reunited with their kid.

TM: So, just so I make sure I understand: the parents come in and say, “We’re persecuted” or give some reason for asylum. They come in. And then their child or children are taken away and they’re in lockup for at least six weeks away from the kids and often don’t know where the kids are. Is that what’s happening under zero tolerance?

AC: So the idea of zero tolerance under the stated policy is that we don’t care why you’re afraid. We don’t care if it’s religion, political, gangs, anything. For all asylum seekers, you are going to be put in jail, in a detention center, and you’re going to have your children taken away from you. That’s the policy. They’re not 100 percent able to implement that because of a lot of reasons, including just having enough judges on the border. And bed space. There’s a big logistical problem because this is a new policy. So the way they get to that policy of taking the kids away and keeping the adults in detention centers and the kids in a different federal facility is based on the legal rationale that we’re going to convict you, and since we’re going to convict you, you’re going to be in the custody of the U.S. Marshals, and when that happens, we’re taking your kid away. So they’re not able to convict everybody of illegal entry right now just because there aren’t enough judges on the border right now to hear the number of cases that come over, and then they say if you have religious persecution or political persecution or persecution on something that our asylum definition recognizes, you can fight that case behind bars at an immigration detention center. And those cases take two, three, four, five, six months. And what happens to your child isn’t really our concern. That is, you have made the choice to bring your child over illegally. And this is what’s going to happen.

TM: Even if they crossed at a legal entry point?

AC: Very few people come to the bridge. Border Patrol is saying the bridge is closed. When I was last out in McAllen, people were stacked on the bridge, sleeping there for three, four, ten nights. They’ve now cleared those individuals from sleeping on the bridge, but there are hundreds of accounts of asylum seekers, when they go to the bridge, who are told, “I’m sorry, we’re full today. We can’t process your case.” So the families go illegally on a raft—I don’t want to say illegally; they cross without a visa on a raft. Many of them then look for Border Patrol to turn themselves in, because they know they’re going to ask for asylum. And under this government theory—you know, in the past, we’ve had international treaties, right? Statutes which codified the right of asylum seekers to ask for asylum. Right? Article 31 of the Refugee Convention clearly says that it is improper for any state to use criminal laws that could deter asylum seekers as long as that asylum seeker is asking for asylum within a reasonable amount of time. But our administration is kind of ignoring this longstanding international and national jurisprudence of basic beliefs to make this distinction that, if you come to a bridge, we’re not going to prosecute you, but if you come over the river and then find immigration or are caught by immigration, we’re prosecuting you.

TM: So if you cross any other way besides the bridge, we’re prosecuting you. But . . . you can’t cross the bridge.

AC: That’s right. I’ve talked to tons of people. There are organizations like Al Otro Lado that document border turn-backs. And there’s an effort to accompany asylum seekers so that Customs and Border Patrol can’t say, “We’re closed.” Everybody we’ve talked to who’s been prosecuted or separated has crossed the river without a visa.

TM: You said you were down there recently?

AC: Monday, June 4.

TM: What was happening on the bridge at that point?

AC: I talked to a lot of people who were there Saturdays and Sundays, a lot of church groups that are going, bringing those individuals umbrellas because they were in the sun. It’s morning shade, and then the sun—you know, it’s like 100 degrees on the cement. It’s really, really hot. So there were groups bringing diapers and water bottles and umbrellas and electric fans, and now everyone’s freaked out because they’re gone! What did they do with them? Did they process them all? Yet we know they’re saying you’re turned back. When I was in McAllen, the individuals that day who visited people on the bridge had been there four days. We’re talking infants; there were people breastfeeding on the bridge.

TM: Are the infants taken as well?

AC: Every border zone is different. We definitely saw a pattern in McAllen. We talked to about 63 parents who had lost their children that day in the court. Of those, the children seemed to be all five and older. What we know from the shelters and working with people is that, yes, there are kids that are very young, that are breastfeeding babies and under three in the shelters, separated from their parents. But I’m just saying, in my experience, all those kids and all the parents’ stories were five and up.

TM: Can you talk about how you’ve seen the process change over the past few months?

AC: The zero-tolerance policy really started with Jeff Sessions’s announcement in May. One could argue that this was the original policy that we started seeing in the executive orders. One was called “border security and immigration enforcement.” And a lot of the principles underlying zero tolerance are found here. The idea is that we’re going to prosecute people.

TM: And the policy of separating kids from parents went into effect when?

AC: They would articulate it in various ways with different officials, but as immigration attorneys, starting in October, were like, “Oh my goodness. They are telling us these are all criminal lawbreakers and they’re going to have their children taken away.” We didn’t know what it would mean. And so we saw about six hundred children who were taken away from October to May, then we saw an explosion of the numbers in May. It ramped up. The Office of Refugee Resettlement taking in all these kids says that they are our children, that they are unaccompanied. It’s a fabrication. They’re not unaccompanied children. They are children that came with their parents, and the idea that we’re creating this crisis—it’s a manufactured crisis where we’re going to let children suffer to somehow allow this draconian approach with families seeking shelter and safe refuge.

TM: So what is the process for separation?

AC: There is no one process. Judging from the mothers and fathers I’ve spoken to and those my staff has spoken to, there are several different processes. Sometimes they will tell the parent, “We’re taking your child away.” And when the parent asks, “When will we get them back?” they say, “We can’t tell you that.” Sometimes the officers will say, “because you’re going to be prosecuted” or “because you’re not welcome in this country” or “because we’re separating them,” without giving them a clear justification. In other cases, we see no communication that the parent knows that their child is to be taken away. Instead, the officers say, “I’m going to take your child to get bathed.” That’s one we see again and again. “Your child needs to come with me for a bath.” The child goes off, and in a half an hour, twenty minutes, the parent inquires, “Where is my five-year-old?” “Where’s my seven-year-old?” “This is a long bath.” And they say, “You won’t be seeing your child again.” Sometimes mothers—I was talking to one mother, and she said, “Don’t take my child away,” and the child started screaming and vomiting and crying hysterically, and she asked the officers, “Can I at least have five minutes to console her?” They said no. In another case, the father said, “Can I comfort my child? Can I hold him for a few minutes?” The officer said, “You must let them go, and if you don’t let them go, I will write you up for an altercation, which will mean that you are the one that had the additional charges charged against you.” So, threats. So the father just let the child go. So it’s a lot of variations. But sometimes deceit and sometimes direct, just “I’m taking your child away.” Parents are not getting any information on what their rights are to communicate to get their child before they are deported, what reunification may look like. We spoke to nine parents on this Monday, which was the 11th, and these were adults in detention centers outside of Houston. They had been separated from their child between May 23 and May 25, and as of June 11, not one of them had been able to talk to their child or knew a phone number that functioned from the detention center director. None of them had direct information from immigration on where their child was located. The one number they were given by some government official from the Department of Homeland Security was a 1-800 number. But from the phones inside the detention center, they can’t make those calls. We know there are more parents who are being deported without their child, without any process or information on how to get their child back.

TM: And so it’s entirely possible that children will be left in the country without any relatives?

AC: Could be, yeah.

TM: And if the child is, say, five years old . . .?

AC: The child is going through deportation proceedings, so the likelihood that that child is going to be deported is pretty high.

TM: How do they know where to deport the child to, or who the parents are?

AC: How does that child navigate their deportation case without their parent around?

TM: Because a five-year-old doesn’t necessarily know his parents’ information.

AC: In the shelters, they can’t even find the parents because the kids are just crying inconsolably. They often don’t know the full legal name of their parents or their date of birth. They’re not in a position to share a trauma story like what caused the migration. These kids and parents had no idea. None of the parents I talked to were expecting to be separated as they faced the process of asking for asylum.

TM: I would think that there would be something in place where, when the child is taken, they’d be given a wristband or something with their information on it?

AC: I think the Department of Homeland Security gives the kids an alien number. They also give the parents an alien number and probably have that information. The issue is that the Department of Homeland Security is not the one caring for the children. Jurisdiction of that child has moved over to Health and Human Services, and the Health and Human Services staff has to figure out, where is this parent? And that’s not easy. Sometimes the parents are deported. Kids are in New York and Miami, and we’ve got parents being sent to Tacoma, Washington, and California. Talk about a mess. And nobody has a right to an attorney here. These kids don’t get a paid advocate or an ad litem or a friend of the court. They don’t get a paid attorney to represent them. Some find that, because there are programs. But it’s not a right. It’s not universal.

TM: What agency is in charge of physically separating the children and the adults?

AC: The Department of Homeland Security. We saw the separation take place while they were in the care and custody of Customs and Border Protection. That’s where it was happening, at a center called the Ursula, which the immigrants called La Perrera, because it looked like a dog pound, a dog cage. It’s a chain-link fence area, long running areas that remind Central Americans of the way people treat dogs.

TM: So the Department of Homeland Security does the separation and then they immediately pass the kids to HHS?

AC: I don’t have a bird’s-eye view of this, besides interviewing parents. Parents don’t know. All they know is that the kid hasn’t come back to their little room in CBP. Right? We know from talking to advocates and attorneys who have access to the shelters that they think that these kids leave in buses to shelters run by the Health and Human Services Office of Refugee Resettlement Department of Unaccompanied Children Services—which, on any given day there’s like three thousand kids in the Harlingen-Brownsville area. We know there are eight, soon to be nine, facilities in Houston. And they’re going to open up this place in Tornillo, along the border by El Paso. And they’re opening up places in Miami. They’re past capacity. This is a cyclical time, where rates of migration increase. So now you’re creating two populations. One is your traditional unaccompanied kids who are just coming because their life is at risk right now in El Salvador and Honduras and parts of Guatemala, and they come with incredible trauma, complex stories, and need a lot of resources, and so they navigate this immigration system. And now we have this new population, which is totally different: the young kids who don’t hold their stories and aren’t here to self-navigate the system and are crying out for their parents. There are attorneys that get money to go in and give rights presentations to let the teenagers know what they can ask for in court, what’s happening with their cases, and now the attorneys are having a hard time doing that because right next to them, in the other room, they’ve got kids crying and wailing, asking for their mom and dad. The attorneys can’t give these kids information. They’re just trying to learn grounding exercises.

TM: Do you know if siblings are allowed to stay together?

AC: We don’t know. I dealt with one father who knew that siblings were not at the same location from talking to his family member. He believes they’re separated. But I have no idea. Can’t answer that question.

TM: Is there another nonprofit similar to yours that handles kids more than adults?

AC: Yes. In Houston it’s Catholic Charities. We know in Houston they [the Office of Refugee Resettlement] are going to open up shelters specific for the tender-age kids, which is defined as kids under twelve. And that’s going to be by Minute Maid Stadium. And that facility is also going to have some traditional demographic of pregnant teenagers. But it’s going to be a young kid—and young kids are, almost by definition, separated. Kids usually do not migrate on their own at that age.

TM: That’s usually teens?

AC: Teens. Population is thirteen to seventeen, with many more fifteen-, sixteen-, and seventeen-year-olds than thirteen- and fourteen-year-olds. They’re riding on top of trains. You know, the journey is very dangerous. Usually that’s the age where the gangs start taking the girls and saying “you’re going to be my sex slave”–type of stuff. I’ve heard that it’s going to be run by a nonprofit. ORR does not hold the shelters directly. They contract with nonprofits whose job it is to provide essential food, mental health care, caseworkers to try to figure out who they’re going to be released to, and all those functions to nonprofits, and I think the nonprofit in charge of this one is Southwest Key.

TM: So how long do the kids stay in the facility?

AC: It used to be, on average, thirty days. But that’s going up now. There are many reasons for that: one, these facilities and ORR are not used to working with this demographic of young children. Two, DHS is sharing information with ORR on the background of those families that are taking these children, and we’ve seen raids where they’re going to where the children are and looking for individuals in those households who are undocumented. So there is reticence and fear of getting these children if there’s someone in the household who is not a citizen.

TM: So if I’m understanding correctly, a relative can say, “Well, I can pick that kid up; that’s my niece.” She comes and picks up the child. And then DHS will follow them home? Is that what you’re saying?

AC: No. The kid would go to the aunt’s house, but let’s just imagine that she is here on a visa, a student visa, but the aunt falls out of visa status and is undocumented and her information, her address, is at the top of DHS’s files. So we’ve seen this happen a lot: a month or two weeks after kids have been released, DHS goes to those foster homes and arrests people and puts people in jail and deports them.

TM: And then I guess they start all over again trying to find a home for those kids?

AC: Right.

TM: What is explained to the kids about the proceedings, and who explains it to them?

AC: The Health and Human Services Office of Refugee Resettlement goes through an organization called the Vera Institute of Justice that then contracts with nonprofit organizations who hire attorneys and other specialized bilingual staff to go into these shelters and give what they call legal orientation programs for children, and they do group orientation. Sometimes they speak to the kids individually and try to explain to them, “This is the process here; and you’re going to have to go see an immigration judge; and these are your rights before a judge; you won’t have an attorney for your case, but you can hire one. If you’re afraid to go back to your country, you have to tell the judge.” That type of stuff.

TM: And if the child is five, and alone, doesn’t have older siblings or cousins—

AC: Or three or four. They’re young in our Houston detention centers. And that’s where these attorneys are frustrated—they can’t be attorneys. How do they talk and try to console and communicate with a five-year-old who is just focused on “I want my mom or dad,” right?

TM: Are the kids whose parents are applying for asylum processed differently from kids whose parents are not applying for asylum?

AC: I don’t know. These are questions we ask DHS, but we don’t know the answers.

TM: Why don’t you get an answer?

AC: I don’t know. To me, if you’re going to justify this in some way under the law, the idea that these parents don’t have the ability to obtain very simple answers—what are my rights and when can I be reunited with my kid before I’m deported without them?—is horrible. And has to go far below anything we, as a civil society of law, should find acceptable. The fact that I, as an attorney specializing in this area, cannot go to a detention center and tell a mother or father what the legal procedure is for them to get their child or to reunite with their child, even if they want to go home?

And my answer is, “I don’t think you can.” In my experience, they’re not releasing these children to the parents as they’re deported. To put a structure like that in place and the chaos in the system for “deterrence” and then carry out so much pain on the backs of some already incredibly traumatized mothers and fathers who have already experienced sometimes just horrific violence is unacceptable.

This post has been updated to clarify who is planning to open up shelters in Houston for children under twelve. It is the Office of Refugee Resettlement, not Catholic Charities. We apologize for any confusion.

Jun 19, 2018

Jun 15, 2018

Jun 16, 2018

Jun 18, 2018

July 9, 2018 — By Robert Moore

July 5, 2018 — By Texas Monthly

July 8, 2018 — By David Courtney

And now, for a few words about the party of family values – the Republican party:

“…we don’t care why you’re afraid. We don’t care if it’s religion, political, gangs, anything. For all asylum seekers, you are going to be put in jail, in a detention center, and you’re going to have your children taken away from you. That’s the policy.“

““Your child needs to come with me for a bath.”

Using that as an excuse to kidnap a parent’s children should send a shiver up the spine of all of those who are my age and older and it should affect those younger than me who paid any attention in history class.

“In the shelters, they can’t even find the parents because the kids are just crying inconsolably. They often don’t know the full legal name of their parents or their date of birth.”
[…]
“I would think that there would be something in place where, when the child is taken, they’d be given a wristband or something with their information on it?”

Might I suggest tattooing an I.D. number on the children’s arm?
(It seemed to work before.)

https://scontent-iad3-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/35148046_1742461595834044_172142589871390720_n.jpg?_nc_cat=0&amp;oh=e67876c7b3b4f5a1b6aa43a049046f5e&amp;oe=5BB0866F

Listen to yourself please. Thier parents are such bad parents they are willing to cross illegaly knowing the kids will be seperated and leave them witout knowing the very basics to be reunited? Don’t know parents full name? Don’t know thier birth date? And you blame the American governments? What is WRONG with you?

What’s wrong with me?
First, most of these people started on their journey before this policy was fully implemented. Second, trying to protect one’s family from injury, rape and death in one’s home country is hardly being a “bad parent”. And third, you’re trying to say it’s the parent’s fault that ICE is separating children from their parents and not making provisions to reunite them? What’s wrong with you Ms. Trump-age Christian?

Stop acting like you know what i am you a**. You don’t. What DO YOU suggest? The parents have to be detained while thier case is heard. They go to jail that is the law. Send the kids with them? Maybe they will tell thier kids thier actual name and the children’s birthdate. Noooo just let them all in to steal ss numbers and drag down salary needs for legal citizens

Uh, maybe we should do what Bush and Obama did. Put GPS ankle monitors on them ($5 per day) instead of jailing each member of the family ( $118 per day). It keeps families together, the daily cost is borne by the asylum seeker, it’s hospitable and it doesn’t damage the minds of the children. It has the added bonus of also feeding the jail-industrial complex.

http://raycomgroup.worldnow…

Valid idea…why don’t you suggest it to someone who can do it? Oh wait…even with a braclet you are back to catch and release. Trump supporters don’t want anymore illegals melting into the interior never to show up for court da y. Any ideas that will actually stem the tide of these invaders?

Good try Rexgal – opinions again before facts.

Undocumented immigrants with ankle monitors had a 99.6% success rate of appearing at all court and administrative hearings.

Care to try again?

Naw. Seen waaaaay too much of how they manage to cheat the system. Keep em out and deport the illegals already here. Time to quit screwing around

Again, tell me how to get legal residency in Mexico and Nicaragua, and I’ll believe that you have a clue about how to get residency in the US under all the multiple categories and also how much it costs in all three countries to get it. Also, you’re obviously wrong about the asylum application laws.

Rebecca, let her be. She’s bitter over being put in a wheelchair and there is nothing that you can say or do that will change her. Do as I’m going to do – just walk away.

Some of them are too young to know these things. And they are fleeing horrible circumstances, not coming over here to lounge around the pool and drink martinis. You have no room to call anybody horrible, that’s for sure.

The Nazis used to tell the parents that the child needed to go for a shower.

I’m ashamed of my country. We are putting children, including those who are still breastfeeding, in concentration camps. Trump/Sessions should be tried on crimes against humanity.

Well head on out if you are so ashamed.

We are not doing anything to the children. The parents are doing this to the children by bringing them here. We should be returning the parents back to their home government. All that needs to happen for this to end is every illegal criminal that comes across that border needs to stop. Their kids would not be taken away if they did not do any illegal act. America cannot afford to continue the immigration rate that has been happening for the past 10 years.

Yes, Larry we are doing things to children. We’re violently separating them from their parents and locking them up.

It is the law, Larry, that we accept all asylum requests by anyone.

The parents of these children are not doing anything illegal by asking for asylum, Larry.

and we should be sending their children with them if/when we do. It gives me the creeps to even consider why that is not being done.

Thank you greatly for this article. So much of what we read on social media is not useful. Someone or some organization needs to take the bull by the horns like they did when Houston flooded and lead us to do what is necessary to put a stop to the chaos that is being created on the border. Millions want to help but do not know what to do! I am one of those people.

People need to stop immigrating illegally, that’s what needs to stop. 

If you try to do so in any other country, you’re turned away, not housed for weeks and your child allowed to be released to a relative who then disappears.

Minors are not competent, legally or neurologically, to make decisions concerning their own safety or their own fates. It’s obvious that there needs to other solutions to this problem, but terrifying children is unthinkably horrible. Go watch “Sophie’s Choice” for a refresher course on the consequences. And for those traumatized youngsters…. How long before they join resistance gangs? Will there ever come a time when they can forgive us for doing this to them – or for standing by with our hands in our pockets just watching this happen? And what about all of us who read about African slave families sold to different “masters” and politely tell each other “What a shame. *I* would never countinence that.” How long before
African-Americans recognize their ancestors’ history unfolding before their very own eyes? Does Sessions think his biblical so-called justification is going to win the admiration of global civilization? Or is this winning converts to ISIS…?

“Minors are not competent, legally or neurologically, to make decisions concerning their own safety or their own fates.”

Unless they want to change their gender.
Unless they want to have an abortion.
Unless they want to have sex.

Just sayin.

Gender: This is still open for discussion in the public mind, but medically, scientists have concluded from evidence that (most) transgendered individuals are born with that orientation. It’s not a choice; it seems to be inborn. Nevertheless, it is still evident that the advanced decision—making portions of the cerebrum are not developed enough until later in the teen years to make a well-informed judgement. The “grey matter” simply is physically lacking. IMO, parental and psychological participation are still required. A child cannot make this choice either rationally or legally.

Abortion: I am dismayed that abortion and non-coercive guidance is not readily available. Non-coercive guidance. NON-COERCIVE. This is exactly why I say pre-adult teens aren’t really capable of making such decisions maturely. Having said that, I’m 100% pro-choice: it’s not my body, not my life, not my decision. I feel strongly that failures in this area are largely the faults of our education system and our social system that guilts youngsters into making uninformed, mature choices. Google how the Netherlands educates its’ children from in school from very early grades to remove the sense of guilt and mystery from sex. Young people choose to initiate sex at a much later age, have far more unwanted pregnancies and abortions, and experience far less sexual violence than we can even imagine.

Sex: (see above!)

just saying what, exactly?

Oh, just saying, either we treat minors as minors or we treat them as adults. Doesn’t seem right for them to have it both ways.

If they came here by themselves, of their own volition i suppose they could be treated as adults. Your example lumps all children in together, though, so it’s not analogous. Nice try, though.

The parents traumatized them by uprooting them from their homes and dragging them 2000 miles. They’re showing up in detention centers with lice, bed bugs, communicable diseases like chicken pox. They should be taken away permanently and put up for adoption here in the US.

wow… how utterly heartless

You judge from your own comfortable American circumstances. What part of desperate do you not get? Fleeing a burning building, would you leave your kids in it? Have some damned empathy and stop showing how stupid you are.

I watched with interest the “children” that were being discussed. There were a fee young children, but the greatest majority of those “children” appeared to be males from age 17-25, looking for all purposes to be similar to the coyotes that smuggled them here. The liberal press has exploited a precious few images that they have made viral around the internet, but have miserably failed to tell us the truth about the ages of these “children” you see marching from [air-conditioned] tent to other [air-conditioned] tents on their way to meals and other privileges. I think you might find some MS-13 guys in that group, too.

if you had bothered to actually read the piece you would know that a large number of the refugees are asylum seekers. and that this policy is in violation of the refugee convention. You are so biased that you see them all as illegal border jumpers coming to take something from you,not as children and families often fleeing desperate situations.

If YOU had read the article, you would see that they are suspect in their ‘asylum’ seeking, because they are NOT coming to the port of entry to LEGALLY claim asylum, they are ILLEGALLY jumping the border! (Then lying about asylum as the obsma administration advertised, telling them how to do it, a number of Years ago!)

and if YOU had understood the article you’d have learned that the legal points of entry are CLOSED

If YOU had read the article you’d see that despite waiting days on days, they are told the port is full or closed. They CAN’T enter legally through the port. Is there something wrong with you???

The other day it was reported on an online news media outlet that one woman said she was seeking asylum because her husband was abusive to her children and her. 

Duh. That is NOT grounds for seeking asylum after traveling 2000 miles to get to the only country that you want to go to. I suspect that there are very few families that actually qualify for asylum as specified by our immigration laws. But liberals have their own definition of asylum. That is the problem. 

If they wanted asylum, they would be in line for just such an agency that does that kind of thing at the border crossings. But, alas, they just are so impatient that they decide to illegally enter our country.

Actually Obama changed the interpretation to include domestic violence and gang threats thus opening the flood gates. What a mess he made for Trump to clean up at the behest of the American electorate.

Are you aware that immigration rates were already decreasing before trump, and were at their lowest in 40 years before this zero-tol policy? Maybe you should do some homework. We can always tell when someone is parroting RW talking points. Original thoughts and some facts, please.

what would make YOU travel 2000 miles? An opportunity to earn minimum wage picking strawberries?

No Obama changed the definition of asylum to include domestic violence and gang threats. Sessions changed it back to its true definition. Blame our former president for this mess.

Blame the electorate for thinking that the accident of birth that allows them to be an American citizen in the first place means that they are automatically more privileged than people less fortunate than they who come from another country… through an accident of birth.

And they’re actually BETTER than these less fortunate! Talk about entitlement!

You didn’t actually read the whole article, did you? It clearly states that many are trying to go through the legal access point, but are being turned away (which is against the law for asylum seekers).

They can apply for asylum at any US Consulate. They walked across Mexico. I think they could have gotten to a US embassy.

And you think they should know that how? The internet in the shack they left?

From the smart phones that all of them seem to have. Who said they came from shacks? You’ve been watching too much TV, Saint.

*I* say many of them live in shacks. No running water, no infra-structure such as medical, hospital, etc. No money for internet. No jobs. Would you spend the little money you could get your hands on buying roach poison instead of a few pounds of rice to feed your family? 

That doesn’t make it our responsibility to feed them, but at least don’t treat them as any less than completely good, worthy humans who had the misfortune to be born poor in an impoverished nation. 

What *does* make it our responsibility are the demands of our common humanity and the goodness of our hearts….

And why not get asylum in Mexico? Many of these people are from Central America. Why not go south to Brazil or other South American countries? They are much closer than the US! The reason? They are not seeking asylum at all.

They want freebies duh

Read what is happening in Mexico to Central American asylum seekers. They ARE trying to seek asylum in Mexico. And one of the reasons they are seeking asylum at all is that the mass deportations of US immigrants from El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua back to where they come from into a society that cannot integrate them is leading to the most unbelievable violence due to no jobs, no money and no hope. People who were not originally criminals have now become criminals, many of whom did nothing wrong.

incorrect. has to be on US soil

No it states that Some supposedly are, but the majority are ILLEGSLLY crossing the river!

If they’re full what can they do? Have you seen pictures of inside the detention centers? Overflowing.

Why don’t they have people on the MX border telling them not to cross because they will take their kids away and the parents arrested? I think that would stop a lot of them.

Why doesn’t America simply act like a moral nation?

I REALLY don’t want to start a whole new debate about religion, but have you noticed that cultures based on the Abrahamic religions (Jews, Christians, Muslims) all have wonderful things to say – but all are shame- and guilt-based…? (“If you don’t believe in XYZ, you will be punished, either here or in the afterlife. Think the way *I* think, or else….”)

***Absolute end of this thread.***

We are. We are spending hundreds of millions of dollars to accommodate these ungrateful people, taking care of their kids far better than these “parents” could possibly do. And they are illegal! In what world are you and they living? It is a fantasy.

I’d argue that it’s immoral – we’re siphoning resources from our own citizens to subsidize these illegals. Highly immoral.

Did you READ the article or are you just trolling? They ARE asylum-seekers TRYING to enter legally through the port, which they are told is “CLOSED,” and so rather than sit in the hot sun exposed and without aid indefinitely, they go around. They often SURRENDER to authorities they see and DECLARE ASYLUM. So asylum-seekers are being FORCED to become “ILLEGALS.” Now read it again and stop your nonsense because people like you perpetuate the impression that trump supporters are ignorant and “low-information.” Otherwise take your nonsense to an alt-right site where they’ll gobble it up – without fact-checking, ok?

Why are they not receiving aid from Mexico? Have you ever – EVER -seen a Mexican police officer or military person on the other side of the border trying to stop this flow? Of COURSE Mexico wants to be rid of them; they cost money. So, the Mexican government needs to be punished, I think, severely for their absolute washing of their hands of these people – and their abandonment of law and order.

How do you know that anything in this article is factual? Why do all insist on believing every lie told to you? They know they will be separated from their children, the cross illegally anyway. The parents put them in harms way. There is no way to sugar coat it.

but they are NOT trying to immigrate illegally. The ones who are trying to immigrate illegally are succeeding by NOT presenting themselves to border guards. All you are doing is terrorising the honest ones and turning them into traumatised future terrorists

What country does that and please back it up:_________
Did you even read this article? People are being forced to enter illegally.

2000 miles thru Mexico and no place there for safety.
I would think dragging a young child thru Mexico would be a serious concern of child abuse. And unaccompanied minors are either better off with out their parents or are trafficking victims of some sort. Common sense would seem to say there is some Mexican help to cross the southern border, travel ??days to get to the northern border, food? Water? bathrooms? money? There are alot of unanswered questions that are just glossed over.

Bingo, fix. I am saying the same thing over and over again. Not everyone who asks for asylum is actually qualified for such status. But the liberal crowd wants us to blindly allow anyone merely CLAIMING that they are persecuted, with little or no evidence of such, into our country with a full financial ride, getting benefits even our own citizens don’t get.

You are not the one who determines who or how many are “not qualified” for asylim status. Our agencies down there should be, but apparently they are not. Forcing desperate people to become “illegals” is cruel, but so convenient for you all to justify this human rights abuse (which it doesn’t – nothing does.) Now name these benefits that “they” get – and back it up, not make it up:______________

Well, I am not sure this comment forum has the bandwidth to list the massive list of benefits that illegals get from the taxpayers of the US, on the federal, state and local levels. Also, surely you, accusing me of being unable to justify my claims, did not even do a Google check about benefits for illegals or you would have kept your mouth shut out of embarrassment. 

One surprising benefit that might obviate the listing of the hundreds of benefits that the illegals take from the US taxpayer is that illegals can qualify for workers comp. Can you believe that? But, alas, that ti but one instance, if a blatant one, of the silly nonsense of giving illegals a host of benefits that they have neither contributed to or pay taxes for [please don’t make a further fool of yourself by saying that illegals have to pay taxes on their cigarettes!]. 

So, let’s list a few that can be easily gleaned from only a brief Google search, which you clearly did NOT do. 

* Emergency medical assistance;
* Free education for the children;
* Free lunch programs for their children in schools;
* Fred public health benefits, including immunizations, testing and treatment;
* Medicaid [if considered an emergency, and of course all cases are considered emergencies];
* Welfare benefits, some hugely generous, like California.
* driver’s licenses;
* some state funded Healthcare [California again]

Actually the benefits go much further, but these should at least show the ignorance that you exhibited in your comment. 

And these benefits pale into insignificance when compared with benefits obtained by forged documents, such as SSI, state funded welfare, etc, etc., all by forged documents, a cottage industry on our southern border. 

By the way, I have worked with more than a few illegal immigrants, on the condition that they would seek legal immigration status if it were available to them, and that they would attempt to learn our language. I personally have spent more than $10,000 on a single family, though I got some of it back by hiring the guy to do work on my home — at $17 an hour, the locally determined standard for a decent living standard. Sadly, despite the help the family ultimately split up, the mother and two anchor babies moving back to their middle-class life in Mexico city, the father moving around the country in migrant circles, still unable to speak English, but still communicates with me from time to time. 

Thus, I think I have both the knowledge and the personal experience with illegal migrants from Mexico to speak to the matter. Now, how about you? Tell us, oh wise one, how you have helped these people. By hating on Trump?

One wonders why parents would subject their children to this. Oh. They are breaking laws to “help” their children.

FIRST, it is LEGAL to seek asylum (see The United States Refugee Act of 1980 [Public Law 96-212]). Second, you think they should just stay where they are an allow their children to be raped or shot? I mean, after all, they are just “animals.” right?

International law says that shops seek asylum in the first country they enter. That isn’t what is happening here. Have you have been scammed?

You are a jerk and a racist pig for suggesting that they are animals.

No, that’s not what “international law” says. There’s nothing in international law that says those seeking asylum must do so in the first country of arrival. That’s an EU concept.

Safe county. Mexico is safe. We faction there regularly.
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2010/sep/21/claim-asylum-uk-legal-position

As I said, and as your link confirms, no refugee is required by international law to seek asylum in a “first safe country.” Did you read the link yourself? Refugees from Guatamala are not breaking any international law by seeking asylum in the US. And the fact that you have vacationed in Mexico has nothing to do with whether or not it enjoys “safe country” status.

I do understand that it is for the UK. It is still a standard. OH my stars. So Mexico is a sh*thole? The condescension is amazing. Legal immigrants from Mexico come here for the opportunity. Did you know that the majority of the immigrants, legal and illegal, from south of our border siphon off around $69 billion dollars a year form the American economy? Do you know what that money would do here? The jobs they take are not just the jobs that Americans won’t do. US companies can pay them under the table which means minimum or less than minimum wage. That makes the companies using these people as employees much more competitive in the marketplace. This drives wages down in every competing company. This is not good for our economy.
I know that people in the USA just LOVE it when they are standing in line for something and a group of people cut to the front of the line. That is exactly what illegal immigrants and faux refugees are doing.
If we don’t like law, we need to change it, not break it. That is what is happening now. Trump is requiring congress to act and make laws that work. Do you remember how he agreed to sign a law giving a path to citizenship in return for border security? The Dems and GOP Establishment said no. The real question here is why are our politicians so corrupt that they cannot protect our borders or make more usable immigration law.

You are parroting the bull spewed by Fox, Breitbart and other pro Fascist propaganda outlets. Anyone who endorses children being forcibly taken from their parents without any explanation is an inhumane heel! There is no justification for this, no matter what! This is a foul stain on the honor of this Nation!

No explanation? Lol. I guess all those unaccompanied minors need to be put in with adults who smuggled them in for the taking? Predatory adults are no match for the kids. A lot of those kids are drug runners and victims of the sex traffickers.
The parents who actually brought their own kids in are being treated like all other incarcerated criminals. They expected it, so they accepted the terms before they crossed into our sovereign nation.
Do you people know how myopic and uninformed you sound every time you shriek “FOX News” and “Breitbart” at everyone you disagree with? Feeels, baby, feeeels.

They are not UNACCOMPANIED minors until they are separated from their parents. Not understanding the words you use doesn’t make you seem very informed, either.

Read up on it. Many of them are unaccompanied, or are accompanied by their traffickers. Families are nowhere to be found.

Red47:”If we don’t like law, we need to change it, not break it.”

That would be fine Red if it was the law, but it isn’t, it’s a Comrade Trump administration policy. And Red, if you would get your news from anywhere else than Fox and Breitbart, you would know that Comrade Trump is using this policy change as leverage to get his immigration laws passed (“It’d be a shame if anything happened to these families and children if I don’t get what I want.”).

“Do you remember how he agreed to sign a law giving a path to citizenship in return for border security? The Dems and GOP Establishment said no.”

Maybe all of them disagreed with him because his border security proposal is stupid, ineffective and ridiculously expensive.

Duh. Policy is changed by changing policy or making a law. Do you think past the end of your nose?

You are amazingly obtuse. Do you think that a law and a policy are the same thing?

If someone, let’s say Comrade Trump, decides to change the policy of, say separating children from their parents, he certainly can do so but he can’t blame that policy change on previous administrations or anyone else. It is his abomination, no one else’s.

You can’t even understand that policy can be changed by changing the policy or by making a law to change the policy. I am out.

Yes, Red a policy can be changed by passing a law but it can also be changed much easier by changing the policy.

Comrade Trump did not ask for a law change when he decided to start separating children from their parents and he doesn’t need a law change to stop it.

The ruling was made in the 9 th district. These courts are the same ones that refused to let him set immigrating policy with his pen. Our last administration enforced this, they just didn’t announce it. Why don’t we change this bizarre law that allows these peels to illegally enter our country and then complain because we noticed.
They are accepting the consequences of their actions because the reward is release in the USA. The policies and the laws allowing/requiring people to be in this situation needs to end.

He didn’t decide. He simply enforced that law more often than Obama’s administration already did. Lawlessness from the White House is not a good thing.
These people come to the USA because we have what they don’t– a nation of laws defined as a Constitutional Republic. If we don’t like laws, we need to change them, not ignore them. Overturn the decision of judge Dolly Gee (sp) and get rid of this separating of families.

Mexico is safe?? Are you serious??

Um. Yeah. It is. You believe that it is not?

Parts of Mexico are safe, but Mexico has the same immigration and tourist visa standards as the US, only without charging people $160 to be turned down or not. I tried to help get a Nicaraguan friend a tourist visa for Mexico (wrote a letter saying he was my interpreter) but because he had a bank debt, the visa wasn’t granted. Another friend who has dual citizenship traveled on her Swedish passport and had no problems.

Parts of Mexico are safe; parts are not safe. Mexicans are leaving the US in around the same numbers that go to the US, so net population change in that national community is zero.

Everyone I know who travels there has no problems. Unless you count the ones who have to pay bribes now and again. The Left and the Media made certain that we all understood that these other countries are not sh*tholes. They cannot both be not sh#tholes and places from which to flee.

Yes, but these people are not going there for a vacation. I have been to Mexico as well, and where we were isn’t a place I would spend more than a few hours…

they also can seek asylum at any embassy or consulate in central america… you know, places on their way to the USA

If they have a spare $160, if the embassy isn’t closed, if the country they’re fleeing from isn’t one that has a US-approved government that only kills people because they oppose it, and if their own national security forces aren’t tracking everyone who goes into the US embassy.

Anyone with enough money goes to Spain.

No sir there is a legal way to attempt this. They ignore whatever law they want and enter illegally ….well wonder why they are arrested. If told they have no openings today you wait your turn. Not these folks

Rexgal, maybe you should become a little more informed before you make such an ignorant statement.

International refugee law, which the U.S. signed, states that an immigrant can claim asylum anywhere at any time.

The Comrade Trump administration has decided to ignore the law and say that asylum can only be claimed at legal ports of entry (i.e. the bridges) and only when they have “room” for the immigrant (and they no longer seem to ever have room).

No one is breaking the law seeking asylum in the U.S.

If there is no more room there isn’t. But your answer is mute cause tjey sneak in illegal no matter what the law. And trump is doing just what we elected him to do. Crush daca deport illegals and stop the invasion at the border

If you institute Catch-22 rules and then claim that nothing can be done then the problem is not with those affected by the Catch-22 but by the ones who made the rule.

You are on the wrong side of the law and on the wrong side of Christianity. Think about that. What has a person become when that person is so conservative that he refuses to follow the law and quits being a Christian. What hath Comrade Trump wrought.

I don’t think i am on the wrong side of the law. These people are. And do you think God approves of using your child to squeeze by the law? Leave them in ignorance about vital and basic info? Take them to a country where they know noone don’t speak the language and have no status? To me that is child abuse. These kids had to be shown how to use a toliet. Do they teach them anything? Oh yeah. How to cheat and lie outstanding Christian traits

Wow, to you laws that we agree to are not the law and laws of asylum that refugees claim are not the law. To you trying to protect one’s children from rape and murder is child abuse. Meanwhile, Christian hospitality, one of the mainstays of the Bible, to you, is not what God would approve.

I suppose you think these child abusing parents will just sail into heaven huh

In what universe is protecting your children child abuse?

By dragging them to a country where they have no legal status so they grow up scared and always looking over thier shoulder for the police. Gee haven’t you read about the dacas crying saying they have ptsd? So stressed from being illegal poor babies

I live in one of those countries. Country people have outhouses. Urban people have toilets where paper isn’t put in the toilet. Children will learn very quickly how to use the new toilets. Given how many white US citizens do not know the laws of their country or even if they qualify for residence in a second country, I think one might be more charitable to people whose educations were compromised by corrupt regimes and maybe show some compassion that’s required by most major religions, though obviously not the one you practice.

That is because your country isn’t being over run by these invaders all sucking off programs funded by taxpayers. All gravy trains stop sometime

O.K. Rexgal, here are the facts about undocumented immigrants and welfare programs:

“Unauthorized immigrants are ineligible for most major federally-funded safety net programs. Key safety net programs, including the cash welfare program Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly known as the Food Stamp Program), and the means-tested disability program Supplemental Security Income (SSI) are available only to ‘qualified’ immigrants and citizens (see here for a review). Undocumented immigrants, along with some legal immigrants, are typically in the “unqualified” category unless they are victims of abuse or trafficking. Undocumented immigrants are also excluded from most federal health programs. They are prohibited from non-emergency Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and the Medicare program. Undocumented immigrants are not eligible to receive insurance subsidies under the Affordable Care Act or to participate in the ACA insurance exchanges. They may be able to privately purchase insurance through their employer or on the non-group market. An estimated 40 percent of non-elderly undocumented immigrants have no health insurance. According to a study by the CATO Institute, low-income non-citizens (documented and undocumented combined) have lower participation rates in safety net programs than low-income citizens, in part due to eligibility restrictions for the undocumented.

Undocumented immigrants are not eligible to receive Social Security benefits even though many contribute to the system. Many undocumented immigrants work in the formal sector and contribute to the social security trust fund. Estimates suggest that up to $12 billion per year are contributed by undocumented immigrants and their employers. Most undocumented immigrants will never draw from the system. One hypothetical exception is that if the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program lasts long enough and participants pay into the system, they would eventually be eligible for benefits, but the first payouts in this hypothetical eventuality are nearly three decades away. Other immigrants who transition to legal status can also collect benefits based on their contribution history, even if some of their contributions were made while unauthorized.

There are some federal programs that serve those in need, regardless of immigration status. Programs that serve undocumented immigrants include school meal programs, the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), Head Start, and various in-kind emergency services. Undocumented immigrants are also eligible for Emergency Medicaid. This program typically covers acute medical situations including childbirth but not longer-term treatment for chronic conditions, even if they are life-threatening. The services provided vary by state. Emergency Medicaid is estimated to cost about $2 billion per year, well less than 1 percent of the overall Medicaid budget, and most of that cost is thought to be attributable to unauthorized immigrants.

State and local governments disproportionately bear the burden of supporting undocumented immigrants. Undocumented immigrants are legally required to have access to K-12 public school, and almost all K-12 education funding comes from state and local governments. The share of children who are undocumented immigrants and attend Kindergarten through 12th grade at public and private schools is relatively small, making up about 1.3 percent of total enrollment in 2014 (about 725,000 students) according to a study by the Pew Research Center. However, another 5.9 percent of students who are U.S. citizens have at least one undocumented parent. Some states also provide other benefits to undocumented immigrants, including in-state tuition to undocumented students and state-funded safety net programs. Authors of a National Academy of Sciences report note that, because immigrants tend to pay income and payroll taxes to the federal government, but tend to use services provided by states and localities, their overall fiscal impact is unevenly distributed. (See the related question of whether immigrants cost native-born U.S. taxpayers money.)

Many unauthorized immigrants have dependent children or a spouse who are citizens and who may qualify for public benefits. About three quarters of children of undocumented immigrants are citizens. A study using 2014 data estimated that about 40 percent of all adult undocumented immigrants live with U.S. citizen minor or adult children. Therefore, although undocumented immigrants are not eligible for most benefits, their households often receive support. Studies which look at household-level benefit receipts have higher estimated rates for immigrant households than studies that focus on individual level support (for instance, compare this study to this one).

Immigration enforcement activity reduces the degree to which undocumented immigrants access benefits for their families. The local enforcement environment matters to benefit participation. For example, in my research looking at immigration enforcement increases in the 1990s, I found that immigrants in areas with elevated enforcement are discouraged from accessing Medicaid benefits on behalf of their citizen children.”

http://econofact.org/do-und…

Yeah and they skirt all these rules. They only get emergency Medicaid so very trip is to the emergency room…be it a heart attack or a sore throat.
They have kids…taxpayers paying..and then get food stamps welfare housing
They claim abuse…don’t have to prove it and unlock tons of benifits
Wise up

You might know how to talk about God, but that’s about the extent of it. God isn’t a Republican, or any of the other things you appear to be.

Spoken like a person whose biggest challenge in life is opening up a Twinkie. We can’t imagine what these people are running away from. Their biggest crime is not realizing there were people like you waiting for them.

Insulting me didn’t make anything better for anyone. I get it. Your feeeels are more important than laws.
Did you know why those people have such sh*thole countries? They have no legal protections available di them. Let’s make our county a lawless nation as well.
You get to be the one that people bribe to overlook the laws.
This isn’t a victimless crime.

I looked at your Disqus page. Here’s an insult: you’re an idiot, and your opinions are worthless. Blocked.

OH! OH! Block me! Block me!!!!

I have a terrific response for you. You are not smart enough to insult me.

Spoken like a hillary following snowflake. We CANNOT take in everyone what is WRONG with you?

Too much starch in your sheet?
Bar stool wanna-be kluxer!

Ohhhh stop please the terrible insults…you really aren’t capable of making them snowflake

The total population of Northern Central America is around 38.5 million. The US and Canada could take them all, but all wouldn’t be coming. The ones who can afford it and who are better educated will go to the EU, especially Spain, or to Mexico.

Please, please Rebecca. Don’t try to use logic on her!

Then get a moving. Lots of europe is turning them away as well

Why would they subject their kids to this? You would too, if you believed what you were leaving was even worse.

No speak for yourself. Never would i use my children to try to break the law just to make life easier and steal from the American citizens

Easier? you’re clearly completely clueless about what goes on in some of these countries and wouldn’t last a week down there. Some of these people have already had one child murdered, and are trying to save their other children’s lives. When you say “easier”, you are implying that they’re “breaking into” America because they want cable television. If you wouldn’t try to escape your country, by any means, to save your children’s lives, you’re either lying or just completely disingenuous, don’t actually have kids so are clueless to the lengths parents will go to to save their children’s lives…or, well, I feel for your kids.

No not for the cable…for the foodstamps welfare free schooling..and probably the cable too now that i think about it

Oh and i consider winning this battle protecting my children by not having them ne 2nd class citizens to a bunch of lying cheating law breaking illegals

Yea, Rexgal, I know you guys hate this but it’s so true in your case: You are a bonafide racist.

That is YOUR opinion. I just don’t see how wanting to keep illegals out secure my safety in my own country is racist

Dude, it’s not my opinion. Read what you have written. It’s a fact.

But law breaking, cheating white guys are just wonderful?

Sure there are some but these illegals do little more than that from the time they set foot here. Lying about thier real name place of birth …then stealing ss numbers…then on to looting programs paid for by taxpayers. And you think i should bw ashamed

Rexgal, you’re a textbook example of what LBJ said:
“If you can convince the lowest white man that he’s better than the best colored man, he won’t notice you’re picking his pocket. Hell, give him somebody to look down on, and he’ll even empty his pockets for you.“

Given how much the US has stolen from Latin America (like half the original territory of Mexico), I find this really not very convincing. Most immigrants are hard working people who take jobs US citizens don’t tend to take.

Yeah yeah yeah i hear that bull all the time. You forget the mexies in the west stole the land from the native Americans so thier hands are hardly clean. And the mexies are notpicking veggies they are working factory jobs stealing jobs from Americans

Or if you were convinced to go for the free stuff.

Your country has degenerative repugnican syndrome

If these humanitarian groups had any humanity, they’d stop encouraging people to come here and claim asylum.
It has been abused for years and simply claiming asylum is NOT going to work anymore.
For God’s sake stop using them like pawns.
You want to help these people…..then tell them “DO NOT GO UNLESS YOU HAVE A VISA!!!”

Exactly.

Make it easier for them to apply for asylum in the US consulates and perhaps the problem will be easier. Do any of you understand that to apply for any kind of visa at all requires paying $160 for the privilege and most other countries, including Mexico, do not charge fees for visa applications? Half the people who apply in most Central American countries get turned down.

The other thing is that given how little US citizens understand about applying for residency in Central American countries and how many of them pretend to be tourists for years on end and even encourage others to do this, I’m not surprised that people fleeing violence who have less education imagine that the US will be a refuge, just like US propaganda says, and don’t understand how our system works (often making people wait for years for legal immigration.

Why import indigents?

Really, don’t we have enough here already?
Oh, wait, I thought you said ignorance. My bad.

Only 15 comments on this devastating article? People should be marching in the streets. How can we allow our government to behave this way? I taught school in Honduras as an American once upon a time. I loved the kids, and their parents. They are not criminals, nor subhuman. Seeking asylum out of fear is not illegal. Trying to do what’s best for your family is not wrong. We are treating these travelers as “illegal aliens”, a loaded phrase, rather than as undocumented immigrants, which is what they really are. We are rapidly losing our humanity under Trump’s government, and this behavior has horrible precedents. I’m old enough, as is my whole age cohort, to remember the holocaust. We’re on that pathway again today. Fight back.

“We are rapidly losing have lost our humanity under Trump’s government, and this behavior has horrible precedents.

FIFY

How is it losing our humanity when we are being invaded by child abusing parents who are trying to use kids to force us to let them in and let them suck the taxpayers dry? Huh?

If I have to explain such a simple Christian principle as hospitality then you would not understand how ignoring it causes a loss of humanity. Do you claim to be a Christian?

buddy ain’t none of your business. I don’t get why you are so welcoming to people who the first thing they do is ignore our laws. Hospitality? Are you kidding me? The first thing they do is sign up and loot taxpayer funded programs into which they pay nothing. They steal ss numbers causing much trouble and asset lose for citizens. They drive drunk without care and kill citizens. What in the world is WRONG with you?

MOST ARE NOT IGNORING OUR LAWS. They are seeking asylum and THE LAW says that we have to listen to their case.

Locking them up is a POLICY of the Comrade Trump administration.

I can explain it to you but I cannot understand it for you.
Please, do some reading and learn the truth before you post your opinions as facts.

And if they say no according to the law they crawl across the border anyway

Shame on you. You hate these people, period. They would be guilty of something regardless. You don’t have a good leg to stand on. you are morally vacant.

N your opinion…there are tons who agree with me

Tons of US citizens are apparently not Christians or even decent agnostics who are good in case there is a God.

Hey, hey, hey Rebecca.
Don’t lump agnostics and atheists in with her lot. They are generally much better people.

oh they are many many who agree with you, all of you just have not felt okay with expressing your hate and ignorance publicly until now. bu t a day is coming very soon when the real citiens of this country will take our society back.and your ilk will crawl back to where you came from and die in silence.pleasedo not reproduce

And YOU have NO Legal leg to stand on, lol!

why dont you go crawl under a rock there areno brownpeople there you will be safe.Oh yeah and please dont reproduce. get sterilized

Why would i neef to reproduce when t he illegals do about 5 ti 10 kids for us taxpayers to support? And already hhave had my children sweetie

Liar, go look up the 1997 bill ,that clinton signed into law! It’s NOT Trump’s policy, he’s just Enforcing the Law! You know, like his Oath of Office requires of him…unlike the 3 violators of their oaths before him! !!

You’re obviously uninformed. The Costa Ricans try to say that the Nicaraguans who move there are more criminal than the average Costa Ricans. Statistics prove them wrong. Likewise here, the migrants are not on average lawbreakers.

I currently live in Nicaragua and if I had kids and any way to get out of Nicaragua, I would at least consider it. Honduras and El Salvador are even more problematic. Telling people with young children to stay and fight the governments and gangs is very easy for someone to say who lives in a safer and richer country.

Again in Your opinion. And hey sister…isn’t there some rule about not judging? Not very Christian and YOU are not God and judge. Stay just where you are…we are full up

Rexgal: “Not very Christian and YOU are not God and judge. ”

You are such a hypocrite!

“Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. 42 For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink, 43 I was a stranger and you did not invite me in, I needed clothes and you did not clothe me, I was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.’

Do you mind if i leave judgement up to God? You have some issues to deal with. And wheredoes it say lay down during the invasion and let em all in? And am i soppose to allow those lovely ms 13 gang members walk over me too?

sterotypes are a hallmark of ignorance, thats nomore true than me saying you are an inbred racist redneck who wants a white country for whites. I do not know you. Yo do not know them

You go girl. Call anyone who disagrees with you inbred. What a charming little snowflake you are. You go to h*ll for talking about my family in that way you ignorant cow.

And by the way…one day you are going to throw your inbred comment out to someone who may have been sexually abused by a parent. Won’t you feel proud then? Now preach another sermon you fluffy little snowflake wanna be Christian

The man insulting undocumented immigrants as invading hoards that do nothing but sponge off of the welfare system and join MS-13 has his feelings terribly hurt when someone insults him (although Tracy didn’t actually insult him – his poor reading comprehension simply led him to think so).

Sounds more like she is mad because she thinks someone from another country might take all the welfare before she can get hers. It is obvious what she is about, I wouldn’t waste any more time replying to the racist troll.
PS-America is not favored above all others in God’s eyes. And for that matter, Jesus was as brown-skinned as any of these people fleeing their native countries. Your pretty, fair-skinned Jesus is a fantasy.

*What* humanity?
*What* invasion”?
*What* abuse?
*What* sucking?

If you would do be good enough to do a little research of knowledgeable sources, I suspect you would discover that there is relatively little drain on our resources – except by the HSA – by Hispanics, and that Hispanics are among the hardest-working people in this country. Don’t think so? Ask anyone in your own family if they’d be willing to do stoop labor for 12 hours a day in the burning sun for far less than minimum wage. Washing dishes, cleaning toilets, yard work for peanuts. Did you know that two months ago the agricultural industry was complaining they couldn’t find enough workers – at any price?

Abuse. Bringing your child to a country where they do not speak the language..have no status..know no one.
Sucking. Having children…at taxpayers expense of course..to use them to gain access to welfare and food stamps. Of course they have paid nothing in.
Invasion. People who sneak into the country ignoring our laws…stealing ss numbers and assets from legal citizens
Humanity. Legal citizens have a right to be safe in thier own country. To have our kids be safe and not be 2nd class citizens to a bunch of lying cheating law breaking illegals.

Not knowing a language is not abuse. If it was, every immigrant to this country except the English, Irish and Scots would be guilty of child abuse.

For many decades, the U.S. had open borders. First we had the Pilgrims, then the Puritans and the English convicts. Of course, no problem with them, they were white. But then came the slaves from Africa (but, really, no problem there either, they were slaves, after all). Next came the Irish and, of course, being poor and Catholic, everyone hated them so much that Irish and dogs were routinely excluded from many establishments. The Irish were followed by the Germans who everyone also hated because everyone knew that they were going to overrun the country. The railroads and the gold rush brought many Asians. When the railroads finished exploiting the Chinese in the 1860’s, the Chinese Exclusionary Act was passed, the first law limiting immigration (you see, they were yellow, not white). But never fear, Italians (white) came next followed by European Jews (uh oh, Jews!). Finally, came the Russians and Cubans.

And the Mexicans, what about Latinos?

Well, they were crossing the border with impunity since most of the time in U.S. history it was their land. Even when great swaths were taken from Spain and Mexico, Latinos crossed largely unhindered. It was only during time of economic recession and depression that their free flow was restricted.

In 1965, the Immigration and Nationality Act resulted in a shift in immigration to mainly Asians and Latin Americas. Everyone seems to ignore the Asians but the brown skinned ones sure seem to be a problem. (It might be because they are magical – they take everyone’s jobs but, because they don’t work, they are a drain on welfare services.)

So there you have it, historic U.S. immigration where every immigrant hates the immigrant that comes after them, especially if they aren’t white, and will cause the country to be overrun, bankrupted, become crime infested, have its language changed, have its religion changed, be outbred, be killed in their beds, lose its culture and be totally ruined.

To characterize all illegals as “law breaking lying cheaters” is a while vast amount of stupidity, immorality, heartlessness, and brainlessness. I am sure you are a good Christian.

And i clearly see you are not judging me sister. Isn’t there a rule about that in the bible

I believe that you are judging hundreds of people, most of whom you have not met. yes, there is a rule about that in the Bible. do not judge even the migrants.

Then follow it and stfu

Illegal is defined as law breaker.

So for you, those people have basically no humanity, they are all criminals, and you are the judge of that?

No i was asked by the poster questioing me

Minors are not competent, legally or neurologically, to make decisions concerning their own safety or their own fates. It’s obvious that there needs to other solutions to this problem, but terrifying children is unthinkably horrible. Go watch “Sophie’s Choice” for a refresher course on the consequences. And for those traumatized youngsters…. How long before they join resistance gangs? Will there ever come a time when they can forgive us for doing this to them – or for standing by with our hands in our pockets just watching this happen? And what about all of us who read about African slave families sold to different “masters” and politely tell each other “What a shame. *I* would never countinence that.” How long before
African-Americans recognize their ancestors’ history unfolding before their very own eyes? Does Sessions think his biblical so-called justification is going to win the admiration of global civilization? Or is this winning converts to ISIS…?
————
We have a grave problem. But the solution can *NEVER* BE INHUMAN or IMMORAL. 

In addition, as with any mass of people, there are going to be problem behaviors, but as someone who has taught these very children for 27 years, I can guarantee you that the vast majority of them have better and more civilized family and social values and behavior than any equivalent group of US children. 

I say if we want to take care of our own first, we couldn’t do better than by modeling loving charity for each other.
—————

BCinBCS BCinBCS
a day ago
““Your child needs to come with me for a bath.”
Using that as an excuse to kidnap a parent’s children should send a shiver up the spine of all of those who are my age and older and it should affect those younger than me who paid any attention in history class.
——————-

*  
* − 
*  
* 

*   LK312 BCinBCS a day ago  The Nazis used to tell the parents that the child needed to go for a shower. I’m ashamed of my country. We are putting children, including those who are still breastfeeding, in concentration camps. Trump/Sessions should be tried on crimes against humanity.
————-
*
It’s curious – and somewhat sad – that you didn’t address a single issue I raised but choose instead to rebut with extreme claims that are clearly exaggerated. 

First, my bona fides: I taught exactly the kids we are talking about for ab. 27 years in Salinas, California. At a guess, I’ve averaged about 5 classes per day, 140 high school students per class, 35-40% of whom were Hispanic. Because of their poverty, many of the schools in their backgrounds were not “optimal”, and they had to work like fiends to succeed in my college-prep classes. 

They worked harder and more honestly and gratefully than many of the rest of my students. And in summer, they were expected to help their families by working at stoop labor cutting the lettuce you and I eat. 110 degrees in the summer is not all that uncommon there. And the pay was pathetic. None of the teenage girls ever said anything to me, of course, but we’ve all heard stories of the treatment given the composinas of all ages….

Their family values make many of ours shameful. They are generally highly respectful and close with ALL generations, living and dead (Google “el Dia de los Muertos”)

In our district of about 5000 students, gangs are sadly inevitable, but the numbers of nationalities from one gang to the next (to the best of my knowledge) were essentially evenly-divided. But get this: when gangs fought over the weekend (not really that often), the newspapers naturally reported it: “The northside gang fought with the eastside gang. about 10 members from each side were involved.” 

Know what WASN’T reported? 4,980 OTHER STUDENTS WERE TOO BUSY HELPING THEIR FAMILIES OR DOING HOMEWORK OR MOWING THEIR NEIGHBORS’LAWNS OR PARTICIPATING IN CHEERLEADING PRACTICE OR AT FOOTBALL PRACTICE OR LEARNING TO PLAY AN INSTRUMENT to get into trouble….

I meant what I said about checking with any youngsters around you to see how they give account of themselves. I don’t intend to run down any of the other kids: I love them just as much. I just don’t like seeing an entire race get demeaned (or harmed!) because of the bad behavior of a few. 

Let’s you and I have a fair and decent discussion of the facts….

Again you raise good points but this coutry is so worried about illegals while they are stealing my children’s future by looting programs intended for citizens. I am not saying we shouldn’t help but we can’t help everyone. When do the legal citizens get the first concern? To help by bankrupting the programs meant for legal citizens is wrong.
Ever been in line behind a mexi in the store? Cart full uses food stamps. Leaves the reciept for someone else to clean up. It showsa balance of 1500 dillars. This has to stop.
And you mentioned gangs. Should we keep allowing the ms13 gangs to threaten to shoot up schools like on the east coast? Where does it end?
I read daily how people…including me…are hit by drunk illegals who run to mexifornia to avoid prosecution. Just let this continue?
And what issues do you think i am avoiding with you?

Do you have any idea of what the US had done to destabilize Honduras and the history of El Salvador and Guatemala? Or what’s happening now in Nicaragua where people who are afraid for their lives from paramilitary forces on the left can’t get out, either?

you are equating your taxes with a child’s life and well-being? Are you kidding me? Do you have children? Do you have any feelings for anyone other than yourself? “Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. 42 For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink, 43 I was a stranger and you did not invite me in, I needed clothes and you did not clothe me, I was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.’ Follow your beloved Bible- and not just the hateful parts

See you ignorant cow you are making alot of assumptions. You don’t know jack about me let alone if i am a Christian. And didn’t it say you should follow the law? You think waaaay too much of your judgin a**

wow dont be so paranoid there is enough America to welcome everyone. that is what makes us different from the rest. why are you sonthreatened by families whowant a better life. dont worry they aint asking to stay at your placeor eat at your table. and what trump &amp; co is spending being nazis would goa long way towards easing the taxpayer burden caused by these people.

Oh yes they are asking to eat at my table…called food stamps. Wise up

So few replies cause people are fed up hearing how these children are placed in a center than American children living in poverty. Repeat illegals with no right to ne here being treated better than legal American born citizen…AGAIN. i agree..why aren’t people in the streets? To protest the massive invasion happening at the border!!! Can’t we take care ofour country and citizens first?

Rex: “…illegals with no right to ne (sic) here being treated better than legal American born citizen.”

Really?
So undocumented children, as young as breastfeeders, are ripped from their parents and warehoused under arrest and they are being treated better than U.S. children living in poverty?

I’d believe your argument a little more if I had any thought that you actually gave a damn about U.S. children living in poverty.

Really. Check out the shelters these kids are in. US citizens…homeless with kids..dont come close to getting those benefits. Daca kids get special scholarship not anywhere offered to legal citizens. And if illegals kill someone…they steal a new ss numbet and run to a sanctuary city to repeat. Wise up

So you are saying that everyone would be hunkie-dorie if we separated poor U.S. children from their parents and placed them in confinement in tents in west Texas? Somehow I doubt that.

“And if illegals kill someone…
Do you and others sit up at night in the dark making stupid stuff like this up in order to scare each other?

They wouldn’t have to buddy cause US citizens are not breaking the law and not using thier kids to guilt others to subsidize thier life! Good heavens try to keep up here!

You avoided my question.

“So you are saying that everyone would be hunkie-dorie if we separated poor U.S. children from their parents and placed them in confinement in tents in west Texas?”

No i didn’t. This is happening to these families cause they broke the law. Follow the law…no problem. Also i heard they can get thier kids and return home at any time

I hope they take your kids away next time you break the law.

They won’t get to. I don’t break the law loser

Never speed? Double park?
Liar.

I know a liar too….you

When has speeding ever been a federal crime?

If I commit a crime that requires me to be in detention and see a judge for arraignment, I am absolutely removed from any children I have custody over, and those children are placed into child protective services who then place those kids with relatives if available. This is the exact same process these border crossers are going through. If they wait for legal processing as asylum seekers, then they are not removed from their children. It is only when they illegally cross the border.

Chron67, illegally entering this country is a minor misdemeanor. It is a crime that does not require detention. Your beloved Comrade Trump changed policy to require universal detention. This moral decadence is on him and his supporters, like you.

Legal processing of asylum seekers has become a Catch-22. The government states that a legal asylum request can only be made at certain border crossing but the Border Patrol refuses entry at those crossings.

You claim to want everyone to follow the law yet your Dear Leader is not following the asylum treaty requirements that this country agreed to and signed.

The second attempt is a felony, A-wipe!

And you idiot if i didbreak the law my children would be removed. That is called incarcerated. Wow try to keep up here

1. Seeking asylum is not a crime.
2. Not all crimes, especially nonviolent crimes, result in incarceration.
3. Wow try to keep up here.

Sorry but if you wanna hang on to your kids you gotta fllow the rules. Just ask all the people residing in jail…even the ones in wheelchairs. Now go talk to ypur family joe….your illegal family waiting for ice to catch up with them. You are of course one of the illegals we are discussing

Seeking asylum does NOT involve crossing the border illegally. To legally seek asylum you have to wait at the border to be processed legally. As soon as you cross the river, you are breaking the law. 

Try to keep up.

Every US citizen that breaks the law and is required to go through the judicial process does, in fact, become separated from their children in the exact same manner. If, as a single father, I was to break the law with my children in tow, they would remove those children from my autopsy and place them with child protective services while I went through the judicial process. Only after going through that process would I ever have the opportunity to be reunited with my children. The children would most likely be placed with relatives while I was in police custody. These immigrants are being subjected to the same exact process as US citizens. Why is that a problem? Or are you saying it’s also inhumane for us to remove the right of custody of US children from US citizens that break the law?

No, chron, you’re wrong. The last time you got a ticket for a vehicle violation were you arrested and your children placed in foster care? Immigration violations sre in the same class as speeding or changing a lane without signaling, a misdemeanor.

Not the second attempt at entry, that’s a felony!

They ALWAYS Do, idiot, lol! Hahaha haha! You just Disproved your whole side’s argument! Way to go, lol!

Did you get them back yet? Or are they still a few thousand miles away? (FYI, these kids are being shipped off to FL, NY, NJ, etc). Or did they just lose them through careless recordkeeping after they took them from you?

And yet the above article very clearly says that is not the case. Parents are being deported without their children or a clear idea when they will be returned.

EVERY US citizen that breaks the law and goes through the judicial process is, in fact, separated from their children in the exact same manner. The “undocumented immigrants” or whatever you want to call them, are, in fact, being subjected to the same exact process as any other person that is required to go through the judicial process. If, as a single father, I was to commit a crime with my children in tow, the police would take those children from me and put them into the custody of child protective services, until I either was acquitted or finished my sentencing after being found guilty and permitted under the law to keep custody of those children. Why should non-us citizens be granted a different process when they break the law?

“If, as a single father, I was to commit a crime with my children in tow, the police would take those children from me and put them into the custody of child protective services…”

No they wouldn’t. Not for a misdemeanor.

Good heavens learn to spell and show that you have a cogent argument you didn’t swipe from Alex Jones. Keep up.

If gringos kill people, they lie that it’s political persecution and set ups and try to claim that the system was unfair. Seen one of these cases in the Nicaraguan town where I live. Some gringos project their lack of respect for the law on other nationalities. I have to provide references to rent a house and show my residency card because so many of my fellow US citizens have been abusers of various kinds.

Poor little you boo hoo

Bull*hit…totalcrap

I have to provide references in the US too, is that because so many beaners are abusing the system?

Nope, no racism there, chron.

So you agree with us that illegals doing that in the US would be wrong? !

None of what you said actually happens. None.

Read the news. You will get a tourof the shelter….way better than any section 8 housing. Illegal kids are treated better

InfoWars and Breitbart are not news outlets.

It was also on the cbs evening news bud

We have a grave problem. But the solution can *NEVER* BE INHUMAN or IMMORAL. 

In addition, as with any mass of people, there are going to be problem behaviors, but as someone who has taught these very children for 27 years, I can guarantee you that the vast majority of them have better and more civilized family and social values and behavior than an equivalent group of US children. 

I say if we want to take care of our own first, we couldn’t do better than by modeling charity for each other.

You make a very good point but our own citizens should be first…or at least A..priority

Hear, hear yodrez. Well said.

So how far back does your ancestry go..?You have a right? Or is it a matter of “I got my right to hell with the rest of you illegals”. Shame on you,

Not ashamed at all bud

you have to have a conscience to be ashamed.

I do have one. And it keeps me from using my kids as bargining chips and breaking the law unlime the illegals

Proof of this, beyond your own ignorance and racism? Or do you just love to hate those you don’t even know?

Do you ever watch the news? Or read the comments on stories on illegals? Try it before dumping on me might open your mind….doubt that tho.

Why don’t they seek asylum at the US Consulate in Honduras instead of walking across Mexico and crossing illegally?

You fought for the last 20 YEARS this has been in force??! Don’t mske me laugh !

I feel like this article, among others of similar content, completely omit a huge part of the story. I’ve worked in other countries legally as well and processed immigration documents for my wife and gone through the process with my son. We worked hard and paid a lot of money and had to be patient to do things the legal and correct way. 

I’ve also known plenty of illegal immigrants and they usually have more money than most people because they’re not paying any sort of taxes. If they are paying taxes it’s by stealing someone’s ID… which gets americans thrown in jail but not illegal immigrants. 

For example: being placed with the aunt that is here illegally. Yes, she was allowed here on a student visa to study, but stays and works illegally. That’s a crime. She needs to go back to her home country. She should be deported. Why is the article somehow suggesting that it’s ok to do this? Clearly this woman has no problem with immigrating by any means necessary. 

I also found it funny that there’s an issue with Trump even though this long went on during Obama’s administration. 

In the end, why would you put your kids through this situation? I’ve worked in another country and had the option of working illegally, but it would have been a ton of trouble for my family, so I didn’t do it. 

Are people really that gullible to think that all of these people are seeking asylum when they could do so in other countries before they make the expensive trip to the USA? 

at the end of the day, these people have no legal right to be here. California and other states enable illegal immigration and Americans dont seem to understand that we as Americans cant simply immigrate to other countries. 

I also dont understand how the media is twisting the facts here: You get caught committing a crime, you go to jail and you cant take your kids with you. that’s true for all Americans

A lot of Americans just immigrate to other countries and overstay their absolutely easy to get tourist visas. The largest percentage of undocumented aliens in Australia aren’t Asians but US citizens.

What an evil mother ****** Trump is.

And his supporters.

Stfu trump was elected by the grass roots of this country. And we want to stop the invasion at the border which he is working on. Daca brats get deported and stop illegal entry

Comrade Trump was elected by fewer votes than the other candidate, with the direct illegel help of Russia and the illegal help of the FBI.

Haaaa…haaaa you real have sucked down the kool aid. MAGA!!!

Are you a Russian troll?

No you flipping idiot i am a legal US citizen who wants to stop the invasion of drug dealers drunk drivers and gang members crawling across our border. And i am in a wheelchair cause a drucken illegal hit me. Never did time cause he ran to mexifornia

I’m glad I live in a country that doesn’t hold me guilty for what the three gringos in my community who ended up in jail here did (one murdered a Nicaraguan citizen).

Well considering how many illegals kill legal citizens here not surprised. I was lucky i didn’t die. But since you like how you are treated in your country stay there ok?

How many do kill citizens? Have you investigated this? Or do you just “know” this?

I eatchthe news. And yes i know. I am one of the hundreds hit by a drunk illegal

There have been thousands of citizen of the US killed, murdered, robbed and assaulted by illegal immigrants. I can get the numbers if you like.

Carmen’s waiting for your answer. How many?

Bud i know from 1st hand experience so stfu. I nearly died after being hit by a drunk illegal. I surrendered my legs. And read the news ever? I am not the only one

Sorry about your legs.
If we got rid of all the “illegals” we’d have no more traffic fatalities, right.

What bud…no more nasty cracks

Well, it would be a start. Most of them are driving without licenses and insurance, so that would be a very good start. 

I don’t want to hear your ignorant rants, either. I am a person who befriended an illegal family in the state of Michigan. This family was a very responsible family for the most part, she working and he doing various jobs. I hired him to work on my house, for he was a skilled carpenter. I told him my favor was predicated on him and his family seeking to become LEGAL citizens as soon as we could create the path. I told him to learn English, but he had been in the hispanic community in the shadows so long that he didn’t feel he had to. His family all did so, with him excepted. 

I spent thousands on that family, and I mean more than a few thousand. I bought them a mobile home outright, and he fixed it up nicely so that they lived rather nicely there. I bought them an air conditioner that they could not afford. I fixed his truck and had it fixed when he ran it off a slick road in the winter – at a cost of hundreds of dollars. 

I had to move away from that area, and now the family has split up. He has gone somewhere in the states, under the radar, still illegal and still unable to speak English. The mother and two of the children returned to Mexico and can now come to the US legally if they desire. One child, old enough to stay, married and stayed in Michigan. 

So I don’t want to hear your nonsense about how callous we are to advocate that the border be tightly closed and new processes established. I know that many of the other Hispanics that came with my hispanic friends crowd were essentially criminals, and they are still shucking and jiving in the area. 

This needs to stop, and the answer is to assure that all immigrants come here legally. Speed up the process in every way you can, I say. But do NOT allow this mass invasion of welfare clients to overrun out country.

And now we discover why you are so bitter.

I’m sorry that you are in a wheelchair but blaming a whole race of people for the terrible act that befell you will not heal you.

No you are mistaken. I blame the one person not the race. But we just can’t let people come in unmonitored it isnt safe. And i am not bitter i am rich. I don’t have alot pf money but am rich in other ways

Finally! I knew there had to be a significant reason behind your anger and insulting name-calling!

First, I’m really sorry that this happened to you. I can’t imagine your frustration and fury. 

Second, if you’d only give yourself a little break from that frustration for a few moments, you’ll realize that one person’s unforgivable behavior doesn’t justify condemning his entire race. 

Third, all the rage you feel towards him is keeping you completely tied up by focusing on this asshole. Wouldn’t it be wonderful to be able to enjoy the good in people for a while?

Fourth, for all the schoolyard name-callers here: in all your life, have you ever had someone stop you mid-rant and say “You know, now I see the light; I can’t thank you enough for screaming at me. Now I see things your way.

Thanks but really i am not bitter towards anyone but the guy responsible. You just gotta play the hand you are dealt….be it here or mexico.

Not bitter, not generalizing, but all them drunk illegals gotta go!

Only the ones who think it is ok to drive drunk and leave Americans for dead. Scr*w you buddy

No evidence at all of Russian collusion with the Trump campaign. And the FBI was totally AGAINST Trump, as the emails clearly show. And they then went to work with Mueller!

Troll. Be gone, you have no power here.

Oh brother are YOU wrong…have the poer of repeated win winwin and guess what? WIN

Ah, that familiar Democrat word. Why should anyone believe you, the person with a vile and putrid mouth? And heart, I suspect. You will yell out your faux outrage against Trump, then go on and start to kill babies wholesale. Now, THERE’S consistency, eh?

Here’s the problem. We have a porous border. We have adults claiming that a group of minors are their own children, but there’s no documentation. While many people focus on the separation, let’s look at the increasing number of Human Trafficking cases involving minors. While a parents from El Salvador, Honduras or Guatemala may send their teenaged son or daughter to El Norte for safety, there’s no guarantee that the coyotes or adults accompanying them haven’t already abused and subjugated those same minors into a sordid world of human and child exploitation. We’ve read about the rape trees in the more frontier areas and it’s not a huge leap to be very concerned that with pot now being legalized and therefore less profitable to cartels, that seeking to lure families into sending their children here for sordid purposes could occur for reasons of providing a new lucrative “product” in the form of virtual slaves and playthings for the debauched. That is why, without documentation, the courts have to make sure that the children are really part of that family and not some child bought or kidnapped. Would you expect the government to endanger children by simply turning a blind eye to the possibility of exploitation when it’s in the headlines almost every day.

Then there are the laments from many on the arduous nature of the journey-riding atop trains with children in tow. If that is truly as dangerous and exhausting as claimed, which if it’s as told sounds horrible, why do they not remain in Mexico, where they share a common language and would be more easily able to find work? Surely Mexico wants to be seen as an evolved and developed modern nation-yet instead of reaching out to help these refugees, Mexico sends them to us-where they struggle to find work, and their children are an economic drag on education and public health facilities along the border. The number of ER’s closed for lack of payment is epic along the border. Since they choose not to stay in evolved Mexico and Canada similarly bans those without documentation, I can only believe that they come here for free stuff that we take for granted which are paid for via taxes.

“you have made the choice to bring your child over illegally. And this is what’s going to happen.”
That is the number 1 quote that everyone needs to remember.
Do not put your kids in this position and you won’t have them taken away. We need to take the kids back and turn them over to their home government. It is not the responsibility of the American taxpayer to allow these families to stay together.

We could also change our policy to: do not speed or we will execute you; or do not jaywalk or we will execute you and those things would drastically change too, but we are better people than that.

The United States signed The Universal Declaration of Human Rights which binds us to allow any person to seek asylum (seeking is not obtaining). The Comrade Trump administration is violating that agreement (one of many treaties and agreements that he has violated).

…to be executed? You don’t have a clue about the various messes in Central America, do you?

It’s not the asylum seekers and their innocent children who we need fear, it’s the hate-filled, ingnorant xenophobes! If we forfeit our Democracy it won’t be because of immigrants, legal or not, it will be lost when thes hateful barstool kluxers and wanna-be Nazis’ are met with indifference!

The parents know they are taking a chance when they bring their children to the border of a foreign nation without a visa. If they have truly been facing dangerous persecution, then this is a minor and temporary inconvenience. Otherwise, they rightfully face deportation and should never have come.

Trying to understand this… A parent becomes an illegal alien by ignoring the US immigration laws. They purposely cross the border illegally exposing their children to extreme dangers.

Please help meunderstand understand why these people aren’t charged with child endangerment?

WHERE is Mexico ???

Mexico makes getting a tourist visa as hard as the US does (probably due to US pressure) but doesn’t charge for it. Mexico has fifty percent of its original territory occupied by the US.

Oh, please … Why bother to answer ??? Seriously .. WHY?

Occupied? Cute. Let’s use your logic. The people who sold me my car just came to take it back saying I was only occupying it.

“WHERE is Mexico ???”

you’re soaking in it.

No. No I’m not. The landscapers are mostly from El Salvador and Guatemala. The Mexicans refuse toaddress work with them. They consider them to be low-class.

Trump is an idiot. He should ignore the laws and give instant citizenship as Democrats ask.

Why? Because 80% of legal Hispanic Americans vote Republican. Abortion and all those issues. 

Under the current GOP “oppress immigrants” plan, illegals do vote Democrat when they go to polls in poor neighborhoods. Few polsters there opposes another ballot. Its all about getting the important “don’t ask-don’t tell” for illegals laws and aid programs. 

So GOP – do you want political ideological control of government …or do you just want cheap domestic help? 

Maybe you should believe your own economists who tell you legal work force and consumers leads to — increased profits for big corps, national economic growth, and world economic sway.

Similarly Democrats should not want to win this issue. 80% of that huge influx of newly legal immigrants will vote GOP.

Its the illegal crowd and their supports who weigh in solidly on Democrat ticket — albeit only a fraction of them can slip into polls in liberal cities (CA cities are already yours without them) and poorer neighborhoods. mainly helpful in broad popular votes not district counts.

John: “…illegals do vote Democrat when they go to polls…”

Some lies never die.

“Illegals do vote Democrat.”

Ha. And therein lies the problem. How the @!#@ are non-citizens voting in our elections?

I had to stop reading this, I was crying so hard. This is so incredibly unconscionable, in every way. Criminalizing the poor, the needy, the ones who can’t defend themselves, and people are pumping their fists and saying “GET OUT OF MY COUNTRY!” This is pure evil, and I am SICK TO DEATH of people saying “This is a Christian nation!” when we only seem to care about children if they are embryos. I am so sick of the false morality, the narrative of “they are stealing our jobs”…..Immigrants are being unfairly targeted as the source of all of our problems, when in fact, its much much higher up. And also, SHUT YOUR MOUTH with your “I am a Christian” garbage once and FOR ALL if you are for this. You are an abomination to Jesus, and to all peaceful people.

Jesus preached that we should follow laws.

But Jesus preached about helping strangers (the principal of hospitality) and about not abusing children even more so.

He also preached that we each take consequences for our own actions.
Look, this addition exists because some idiot district Court judge in the 9th circuit made the ruling. She wanted this to be a political Fortuna. Schumer just refused to take legislative action to fix this. These kids are being used as political pawns and it should not happen. How about we change our laws.

Jesus said that even heaven had a gate and not all would enter there. There are laws and we are to respect them.

GOP voters are generally in favour, with about a third showing evidence of empathy.

https://www.thedailybeast.com/poll-republicans-approve-of-trumps-family-separation-policy?ref=home

Wow some of you need to come to the border and pay for all the needs of these people. WE do not kno if they are just wanting to get across the border by making up stories. We cant actually check any of them out. I agree with what someone else said that most of them are using their child to get across the border. So what did they expect? The United States can NOT save every child in the entire world just because…..Stay in the country you were born in and make it great.

You spent a lot of word to simply say: “I’ve got mine so eff you.”

We didn’t say we were Christians. We said these hate-filled bigots are NOT.

Tell me again how it is not the dame as nazi germany? Next step gaz chamber i guess

So they don’t even have the courage to directly tell these parents or kids what is happening.

I no longer recognize this country. I don’t recognize the government as legitimate, and I don’t recognize my fellow Americans screaming at me that this is ‘the law’

I don’t know what is wrong with this country but it is morally diseased and not worth preserving anymore.

Can’t do the time? Don’t do the crime. Our border shouldn’t be a joke. 

I agree that families should be kept together – as they’re immediately deported.

That would be an improvement over the current situation.

Are immigrants from other countries that seek asylum treated the same ?

Who isn’t? Oh. You mean the ones who do it through legal channels?

“So if you cross any other way besides the bridge, we’re prosecuting you.”

There you go folks, it’s not difficult. If you get turned away at the bridge because they are over capacity and then decide to make a border break -well, there you go go – consequences.

Stop making this mess out to be something it is not. Congress needs to fix this and us continuing to ignore the border problems won’t do that in the least.

Emigrants can apply for asylum at any US Consulate. These people didn’t even need to trek across Mexico with their children in tow only to be separated at the border. Makes you wonder why they were counseled to do it that way, doesn’t it? Almost as if they were paraded across Mexico so that all eyes would be on them. 

In any case, the message going out now is if you are caught crossing illegally, you will be charged criminally. If you are caught crossing illegally with children, you will be charged with a criminal offence and your children will be housed separately. 

Why not just apply for asylum at the closest US Consulate? Or, is there some reason this spectacle was created?

Because the media wants to distract from liberal failures in bringing down Trump in other ways (i.e., the IG report)? Anything to re-stoke the fires of outrage is the key!

“Squirrel!”

Doesn’t matter that this has been going on for half a decade or longer. It is more valuable as a crisis now.

Saul Alinsky ring a bell?

People always seem to forget that there is no RIGHT to immigrate into a country. You have a natural right to EMIGRATE from your country of residence, but that does not give you free access to whatever country you want, their laws and policies be [email protected]!$ed. 

People complaining about how much it costs to apply for a visa…any idea how much these people will pay coyotes to get them across the border? Visas are much cheaper.

The detention of illegals and their children in the manner described in this article was started in 2013 by the Obama presidency. There are hundreds of news articles with images that show this has been going on for a long time, and is not new at all.

chet: “The detention of illegals and their children in the manner described in this article was started in 2013 by the Obama presidency.”

Good job chet, only two incorrect statements in that sentence – the policy did not start with President Obama and he did not have a policy of putting children in concentration camps.

(Bold emphasis is mine)
“In April, U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions ordered prosecutors along the border to “adopt immediately a zero-tolerance policy” for illegal border crossings. That included prosecuting parents traveling with their children as well as people who subsequently attempted to request asylum.

White House officials have repeatedly acknowledged that under that new policy, they separate all families who cross the border. Sessions has described it as deterrence.

U.S. Customs and Border Protection explains on its site and in a flyer that border-crossing families will be separated.

The policy is unique to the Trump administration. Previous administrations did not, as a general principle, separate all families crossing the U.S. border illegally. And the current administration could choose to end this practice and release families together from detention at any time.

https://www.npr.org/2018/06/19/621065383/what-we-know-family-separation-and-zero-tolerance-at-the-border

welcome to the new american century

This is how Europe ended up with open borders in last decade or so:
* Like previous decades legitimate asylum seekers showed up and were granted asylum. 

* Via the internet and mobile phones word got out about the benefits available to those granted asylum.

* The migrant workers who previously came to work illegally started claiming asylum. 

* As some EU citizens starting started challenging the more outlandish stories they were dismissed in the media, and by politicians, as bigots and those interviewing asylum seekers continued to believe all the stories told.

* When occasionally a claimant exhausted their appeals and were scheduled to be deported they would sometimes just move to a neighboring country and start the process all over again. 

* When governments started restricting benefits for single males suddenly a lot of manly looking 16 and 17 year old ‘children’ started claiming asylum. 

* As many citizens of Europe were appalled at the staggering numbers of migrants showing up the media stated a campaign to hide the true nature of the migrants, for example cropping a photo to only show the one woman and her children in a group of hundreds of male migrants. 

* Raising objections were met with media reports of professional asylum charity workers quoting the heartbreaking stories of migrants, who just happened to always say the most ‘insightful’ things.

* In 2015 the floodgates opened and by the end of 2017 3.5 million people were registered as first time asylum seekers. 

* During all those years mainstream politicians, EU official, media members and celebrity elites would not speak out against the unfettered immigration because the would be publicly confronted with a story about a tragedy a migrant child on their journey (which unfortunately did happen regularly). The answer was always to encourage more children to take the dangerous journey my continuing to keep the borders open. 

* The same tactic of silencing debate with emotional hyperbole is now being used to try and hinder enforcement of immigration laws.

JJ CN = troll. Ignore.

They are NOT seeking asylum or they would be at the facilities that process such cases at the border crossing. They are wanting to illegally enter our country. And why not seek asylum in Mexico, our good ally and partner in trade and the NAFTA? Why are they not staying in Mexico, that lovely democratic country that surely would not persecute these people? Or seek asylum in Cuba — or Brazil – or Japan – or China – or any number of 1,000 countries that they could do so? 

Ah, because they know our system can be gamed and they can live out their lives at the expense of the American workers and taxpayers. They get free food and supplies, free health care, free shelter [air-conditioned, no less, and likely something they have never had], free educational services and in summary get to exist without cost in the US. Can I as a citizen do the same? Of course not! Nor would I ever be so crass, lazy and dishonest to do so.

But the secret is that Hillary Clinton has a contract with the “re-location” centers to take custody of the kids after 5 days and she takes the good looking and young ones and flies them to Putin who sells them to Arab sex traders in exchange for donations to the “Clinton Crime Family Foundation Slush Fund” See, her “donations” dried up when her “pay for play” scheme fell on it’s face when she lost. The ones she doesn’t sell, her family just eat.

The would be illegals will soon get the message and stop coming. They’ve created this horrible situation for themselves. We cannot take the whole populations of Mexico and Central American countries which is where we were headed.

You make four claims here. Can you substantiate any of them, or are they all just your unfounded opinion?

Asking for a friend.

Notice that the asylum seekers claiming they are fleeing atrocities is a storyline which has no photo journalism reflecting such atrocities exist.

Maybe because they don’t have free reds in those countries?

Are you seriously suggesting that there aren’t human rights violations happening in this world dictatorships?

What rock do you live under?

Oh, College Station, makes sense.

Asylum, eh? Tell me how that is defined in law. I don’t think one is a thousand would qualify for legal asylum. Indeed, they know it too, and are apt to make stupid decisions to come in illegally. 

Why is Mexico not giving them asylum? Why not Columbia? Why not Brazil? Why not any South American nation? Somehow this looks like a scam on the US, with people looking for a meal ticket rather than any legitimate asylum.

By Robert Moore

By Michael Hardy

By Leif Reigstad

By Robert Moore

By Robert Moore

By Robert Moore

By Andy Langer

By Doyin Oyeniyi

By Austin Corona

By Tim Taliaferro

By Leif Reigstad

By Leif Reigstad

By Texas Monthly

By Dan Solomon

By R.G. Ratcliffe

By Robert Moore

By David Courtney

By Daniel Vaughn

By Dan Solomon

By Texas Monthly

By Texas Monthly

By Dan Solomon

By Dan Solomon

By Andy Langer

We report on vital issues from politics to education, as well as being the indispensable authority on the Texas scene, covering everything from music to cultural events with insightful recommendations.

A daily digest of Texas news, the latest from Texas Monthly, plus a monthly message from our editors.

Copyright © 2018. All Rights Reserved.