
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

06/21/2018 07:20 AM EDT

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

In the end, there was no big ugly. No deal emerged to tie together the outstanding issues. Nobody compromised. There wasn’t a bargain, petit or grand. As the sun set on the shortest night of the year, members of the state Assembly and Senate debated and passed bills and then went home, leaving major legislation for some future day.


Story Continued Below

The immediate casualty was New York City’s system of 140 speed cameras, whose authorization will expire next month. City Hall says the cameras are a critical part of the “Vision Zero” initiative and have helped reduce speeding, and thereby deaths from vehicle-pedestrian collisions. Sen. Simcha Felder of Brooklyn first hamstrung the speed camera bill, then it was caught up in leveraging attempts that involved non-controversial local fiscal bills. There was hope that Gov. Andrew Cuomo would cobble together an omnibus bill with the fiscal measures, speed cameras and maybe some other proposals. Even though the governor was in his Capitol office suite below the legislative chambers on Wednesday, he spent his time doing TV interviews about the separation of immigrant families detained while illegally entering the United States.

Cuomo’s disengagement was one of several reasons the legislative session ended with such a whimper. Lawmakers and lobbyists also pointed to the unsettled state Senate, where the absence of Republican Tom Croci made it difficult for GOP leaders to pass posturing bills and negotiate with any kind of force. Democrats who dominate the Assembly, feeling confident their brethren could win control of the Senate after November, decided to stand firm. Cuomo said nothing, and around midnight, everyone just went home.

IT’S THURSDAY. Happy first day of summer. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? Still in Albany, with no announced public schedule.

WHERE’S BlLL? In Texas. This morning, he’s visiting the Tornillo Migrant Children’s Facility, and afterwards, he’ll hold a media availability with the United States Conference of Mayors. 

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “OK, FINE, I’LL FIX IT”— Daily News: “NOW FREE YOUR HOSTAGES!”— See Them

More Tabloids: — Newsday: “TRUMP HALTS BORDER SEPARATIONS”— El Diario New York: “Da marcha atrás” —TRANSLATION: “Backs Down” See Them

The Free Papers:— AM New York: “TRUMP HALTS BORDER SEPARATIONS”— Metro New York: ”THE GREAT REUNITER?” — See Them

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 2 col., above the fold: “IN RETREAT, TRUMP HALTS SEPARATING MIGRANT FAMILIES”— 2 col., above the fold: “Economic Surge Gives President More Firepower in Trade Battle”— 2 col., above the fold: “Whites a Minority in the U.S.? The Transition Is Accelerating”— 4 col., below the fold: “U.N. Report Left Out Horrific Details on Syria Chemical Attacks”—  Wall Street Journal: — 5 col., above the fold: “Trump Halts Family Separation” — 3 col., above the fold: “Amazon Rises as One of D.C.’s Most Powerful Players”— 2 col., below the fold: “Retirees Grow, Workforce Shrinks in Strain for U.S.”— See Them

WANNA GRAB A BEER? Jimmy’s in Buffalo tonight, and would love to catch up. Drop a note.

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

PROTESTERS CONVENE AT LAGUARDIA, AS MIGRANT CHILDREN ARRIVE — New York Times’s John Surico: “Immigration activists shuttled from terminal to terminal at La Guardia Airport in New York late Wednesday night, after news spread on social media that children who had been separated from their parents at the United States-Mexico border might be arriving on flights. Hours earlier, President Trump had signed an executive order saying that the policy of separating immigrant children and parents would stop, but in New York hundreds of children had already arrived to be placed in shelters or foster care. The protesters held signs at security gates that read “Bienvenidos a New York,” and “Te amamos.” And they sang protest songs like “We Shall Overcome,” in English and Spanish, that reverberated through the otherwise largely empty airport.” Read it here 

— VIDEO: Seven young boys, who appeared to be migrant children, arrived at LaGuardia late Wednesday, wearing black hoodies

CHILD MIGRANT CRISIS COMES TO NYC — City accuses feds of withholding information — POLITICO New York’s Gloria Pazmino: More than three hundred children have been separated from their families at the border, sent thousands of miles away to New York City and placed into foster care as a result of President Donald Trump’s immigration policies, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Wednesday. In total, 350 children — including a 9-month-old baby — have been sent to a social services facility in northern Manhattan for processing after crossing the country’s southern border since May, with 239 still at the site. Many of them have come bearing evidence of their stay in detention facilities: lice, bed bugs, chickenpox and exhaustion. Despite the grim details, it took the city of New York weeks to find out it had been serving as a final destination for the migrant children — a result of what de Blasio said is the federal government’s refusal to share information about the children." Read more here 

— “ICE detention of unaccompanied minors in New York is up more than 500%, city says” — Daily News’s Jillian Jorgensen: “More than 450 child immigrants who arrived in New York as unaccompanied minors after crossing the border have been detained by Immigration and Customs Enforcement between last October and March — many for no reason other than they turned 18, the Daily News has learned. It’s a phenomenon city officials first noticed when the teens started disappearing from schools." Read it here. 

 — “‘THERE DOESN’T SEEM TO BE A METHOD FOR THIS’”—Gothamist’s Jake Offenhartz: The children “are believed to be staying at some of the eleven local foster agencies that collect more than $100 million from the federal government to house immigrant youth. On Wednesday, two leaders of those organizations spoke with Gothamist, on the condition of anonymity because contractees are prohibited from talking to press. Both sources stressed that the foster services were working toward the children's best interests, and that they were aghast at the federal government’s decision to take children from their parents…’In theory, you would think that the government would be sending kids to New York who might have a sponsor in the northeast, but that's not always how it works,’ one source told Gothamist. ‘There doesn't seem to be a method for this. We get a phone call from ORR and they say, 'Hey, we're arriving at JFK. We have three kids with us.’”Read it here. 

— Cuomo Op/Ed in the Times: “This order is no solution at all. It still leaves open the long-term detention of immigrant children, which would clearly violate federal law. Moreover, you can’t un-abuse the more than 2,300 children who have been separated from their parents at the border with the swipe of a pen. The administration’s family separation policy has already done potentially irreparable harm to those children who were used as pawns in the president’s political agenda. And the order includes no plan to reunite these children with their parents, something that should be done as quickly as possible.”

TEACHERS WIN PAID LEAVE — AM New York’s Lisa Colangelo: “New York City public school teachers will now get six weeks of paid parental leave at their full salary under an agreement the city and the teacher’s union announced Wednesday. Beginning Sept. 4, 2018, educators can take the leave for the birth of a child as well as the adoption or fostering of a child under the age of 6. The agreement comes after the United Federation of Teachers waged an aggressive public campaign urging City Hall to extend the benefit to its 120,000 members.” Read it here. 

The Price Tag — NYT’s Liz Harris and J. David Goodman: “The deal comes after pressure from the United Federation of Teachers, a group that has been a political ally of Mr. de Blasio and has a membership that is 77 percent female. The policy applies to the union’s 120,000 members, which include social workers, guidance counselors and teachers. A petition by members demanding that the union negotiate for paid leave got tens of thousands of signatures last year. The city said it would contribute $51 million a year to the union to help fund the new benefit, and estimated that 4,000 people a year would take the leave. To help cover the cost, the city will extend the union’s contract by two and a half months, which would delay raises for its employees.” Read it here. 

REMEMBER THE LADIES — Curbed’s Ameena Walker: ”In efforts to honor women that have made a significant impact on the history of New York City, Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration has assembled an advisory panel that will commission public artwork that honors local women and women’s groups. The panel that will helm the effort called “She Built NYC,” is being assembled in part by First Lady Chirlane McCray, Deputy Mayor Alicia Glen, and the Department of Cultural Affairs. To kick things off, the city will launch an open call for nominations where New Yorkers can submit their ideas on how to honor historical New York women who have been deceased for at least 20 years or events involving women that have taken place at least 20 years ago...Nominations can be submitted to women.nyc between now and August 1.” Read it here. 

SHELTER SKELTER — City still struggling with rental assistance for the homeless, by POLITICO's Brendan Cheney: "Homeless New Yorkers looking to use rental assistance vouchers to move out of city shelters are still struggling with discrimination by landlords, a scarcity of funding and a perpetually tight housing market, according to interviews with care providers and city officials. While providers have applauded de Blasio for expanding voucher funding early in his administration, a number of factors are making it difficult for qualifying adults and families to use the vouchers to find apartments, causing clients to spend longer times in shelter than necessary. That is contributing to record numbers of New Yorkers in shelter amid an intractable homelessness crisis in New York City. 'So that's the question, are they staying [in shelter] longer than they need to?' said Christine Quinn, the former Council Speaker who currently heads Women in Need, a nonprofit shelter provider for women and children. 'In many cases, the answer is yes.'" Read more here.

— City officials urge mayor to boost homeless housing, by POLITICO's Sam Raskin: “A slew of New York City elected officials have signed on to a letter urging Mayor Bill de Blasio to step up his commitment to combating homelessness by doubling the amount of affordable units apportioned to the city's homeless population. '[W]ith a record 63,000 people — including nearly 24,000 children — sleeping in shelters each night, it is clear that more must be done,' reads the letter, signed by potential 2021 mayoral candidates Comptroller Scott Stringer, Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams and Public Advocate Letitia James, along with 32 Council members.” Read more here

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— SUBWAYS LITERALLY CRUMBLING NOW — New York Post’s Danielle Furfaro: “A straphanger was injured Wednesday afternoon when a chunk of the ceiling collapsed onto the Borough Hall subway station platform in Brooklyn. The plaster rained down on the Manhattan-bound 4-and-5 platform just before 4 p.m. as several passengers were waiting for trains. Pictures on social media show a light dangling above plaster and concrete chunks on the platform. The injured man, initially identified as a woman by MTA officials, was hit on the shoulder and declined medical ­attention. The incident was the latest black eye for a system that has been slowly crumbling for years.” Read more here

— DEVELOPERS’ CONNECTION TO CUOMO — Newsday’s John Riley: “The SUNY official on trial for allegedly rigging bids to favor donors to Cuomo on upstate economic development projects was advised about one successful developer’s ‘connections to AC,’ according to an email disclosed in federal court in Manhattan on Wednesday. SUNY high-tech-development guru Alain Kaloyeros couldn’t even remember who Buffalo builder Louis P. Ciminelli was, asking ‘Who is he?’ in a May 1, 2013, exchange with lobbyist and ex-Cuomo aide Todd Howe, the $25,000-a-month adviser Kaloyeros hired to help gain Cuomo’s trust. ‘The Buffalo Developer per our discussion about AC and his connection to AC,’ Howe responded. ‘Oh s***,’ Kaloyeros wrote back. ‘Senior moment.’ Kaloyeros and Ciminelli are charged with rigging bids for nearly $1 billion in Cuomo’s signature ‘Buffalo Billions’ tech-centered initiative to revive upstate, along with Steven Aiello and Joseph Gerardi, principals in Syracuse’s COR Development. Ciminelli won $750 million in state-funded projects, and COR more than $100 million.” Read more here

— “The charge is they wrongfully obtained the contract,” Cuomo said in an NY1 interview when asked about the charge. “That’s what the trial is about. We’ll find out if they are right or wrong. The law’s the law. If they’re wrong, they should pay the full penalty of breaking the law.”

— BUT HIS EMAILS — POLITICO’s Laura Nahmias: The practice of flouting New York’s transparency laws and regulations is so widespread among state government officials that there was nothing suspicious about the former head of SUNY Polytechnic Institute, Alain Kaloyeros, using his private email to evade reporters’ scrutiny. So goes one line of defense Kaloyeros’ attorney, Reid Weingarten, offered up in federal court this week, as his client goes on trial in a bid-rigging scandal that ensnared a top lobbyist close to the Cuomo administration as well as three upstate developers who were major donors to the governor’s campaigns. “You will learn that there is a New York state law called FOIL, Freedom of Information Law,” Weingarten told jurors Monday during opening arguments. Evading it, he said, “was almost sport in New York state government.” Kaloyeros’ trial, like that of former senior Cuomo aide Joe Percoco earlier this year, is showing the myriad ways Cuomo administration officials have circumvented laws requiring records be preserved, and communications handed over for public scrutiny. The trials have shown that, outside of federal prosecutors issuing subpoenas for those records, there’s almost no recourse when state officials destroy or refuse to release records to the citizens who pay their salaries. Read more here

— ”New York’s revenge-porn bill dies after 11th-hour campaign by Google” — New York Post’s Kirstan Conley and Gabrielle Fonrouge: “The proposal — which has languished in Albany since its introduction in 2013 and was recently taken up again after a Post exposé — would have made nonconsensual dissemination of sexually explicit images a misdemeanor punishable by up to a year in jail.” Read it here 

TRUMP’S NEW YORK, RUDY’S LOUISIANA — POLITICO’s Alex Isenstadt: “Rudy Giuliani’s love life is causing trouble for the White House. In a move that blindsided the West Wing and sent Hill Republicans into a tizzy, the president’s personal attorney is throwing his support behind an obscure House candidate in Louisiana trying to take out incumbent GOP Rep. Clay Higgins. But the bizarre tale of Giuliani’s interest in an off-the-radar congressional race only begins there. It turns out the ex-New York mayor’s new girlfriend, GOP fundraiser Jennifer LeBlanc, is working for the Republican challenger in the race, Josh Guillory. LeBlanc had been on Higgins’ payroll until late last year when she abruptly parted ways with the congressman.

— "We have a National Enquirer-type situation going on down in Louisiana's 3rd Congressional District," said state Attorney General Jeff Landry, a Higgins backer who hails from the area. Giuliani’s involvement, Landry added, is “ridiculous.” The former mayor’s foray into the race has infuriated senior party officials, who are convinced Giuliani is acting at his girlfriend’s behest. Read it here 

2018 MIDTERMS: DOUGLAS FEIDEN in Our Town, “Fireworks on the East Side”: “As the Democratic Congressional primary nears, Maloney and Patel battle over their records and the future”. http://bit.ly/2MaYGXA 

BLOOMBERG JUMPS INTO MIDTERMS — New York Times’s Alexander Burns: “Michael R. Bloomberg, the billionaire former mayor of New York City, has decided to throw his political clout and personal fortune behind the Democratic campaign to take control of the House of Representatives this year, directing aides to spend tens of millions of dollars in an effort to expel Republicans from power. Mr. Bloomberg — a political independent who has championed left-of-center policies on gun control, immigration and the environment — has approved a plan to pour at least $80 million into the 2018 election, with the bulk of that money going to support Democratic congressional candidates, advisers to Mr. Bloomberg said. By siding so emphatically with one party, Mr. Bloomberg has the potential to upend the financial dynamics of the midterm campaign, which have appeared to favor Republicans up to this point. Facing intense opposition to President Trump and conservative policies, Republicans have been counting on a strong economy and heavily funded outside groups to give them a political advantage in key races, especially in affluent suburbs where it is expensive to run television ads.” Read it here 

SOCIAL DATA: 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Mike Allen, celebrating in Nice at Cannes (h/ts Jonathan Karl, Geoff Morrell and Blain Rethmeier) ... Campbell Matthews, communications manager at Lyft (h/t Ryan Williams) ... Dave Marcus ... Chris Francescani, reporter at ABC News … Elizabeth Williamson, feature writer in the NYT’s D.C. bureau … Daniel J. Ahn ... Tanya Singer, former general manager of Bloomberg Politics ... WSJ’s Laura Meckler ... early Trump aide Sam Nunberg, now a public affairs consultant based in NYC, is 37 ... NYT’s Elizabeth Dias … Lloyd Green ... investigative reporter Dan Wagner (h/t Tim Burger) ... Shara Mohtadi, senior advisor at the N.Y. State Energy Research and Development Authority ...

CONGRATS –Morning Consult’s Kyle Dropp, UN’s Megan Carroll, LinkedIn’s Nicole Isaac, Paulson &amp; Company’s Andrew Klaber and LFPI’s Roland du Luart are among those who have been chosen as 2018 Young Leaders by the French-American Foundation. Full list

SPOTTED:Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao speaking at the sixth annual Forbes Women’s Summit held in NYC – What she said

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

COVERING PRUITT: Slate's Isaac Chotiner talked to Eric Lipton, who has been reporting on EPA administrator Scott Pruitt for the New York Times, about juggling both major regulatory changes alongside the string of ethical scandals. Lipton said the Times is “trying to do both, but it's actually quite hard to do both.”

- “The ethics story is so nonstop and so competitive, it’s a very competitive story,” Lipton continued. “You have more news outlets writing about it than about environmental policy because it's sexier. It's sort of like the Mueller investigation, whereas the environmental policy stuff is more complicated and nuanced. That’s the hardest part about this, because really the thing that matters the most is: What are the toxic chemicals in the paint stripper that you got at your Home Depot or Lowe’s that might kill you and how are they changing the regulations on those things?”

JOURNALISTS STRUCK BY SCHMIDT LEAVING GOP: Steve Schmidt, a veteran of the George W. Bush White House who later ran John McCain’s presidential campaign, has ripped President Trump on MSNBC. Still, journalists who have tangled with the hard-charging Republican operative were floored by his announcement Tuesday that he was quitting the party because it's "become a danger to our democracy and values."

- “It’s hard to overstate how remarkable this is from the man who fiercely managed the 2008 presidential campaign for the Republicans,” tweeted the New York Times's Mike Shear. “Steve was once as committed to the GOP as anyone I've ever met. It is a commentary on the difference a decade makes.”

- The Times’ Jim Rutenberg, who profiled Schmidt during the McCain campaign, tweeted: “Wouldn’t have been able to imagine Steve’s renunciation coming back then, no way - wouldn’t believe it if you went back in time and told me.”

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

CITY SUES LANDLORDS FOR RENTAL DISCRIMINATION — New York Times’s Nikita Stewart: “Last year, the city created a unit to combat such violations, and on Wednesday, the unit took its first legal action, filing lawsuits against the manager of Seaview Estates, a complex on Staten Island, and a real estate broker who rented apartments in two Bronx buildings. In the lawsuit against the property management company, the city says that investigators called about leasing apartments at the Staten Island complex and were repeatedly told that vouchers were not accepted. In the Bronx case, investigators found that ads by the broker representing two buildings explicitly advertised that vouchers were not accepted, according to the lawsuit against the broker. The city attached the ads to the lawsuit.” Read it here. 

LAW AND ORDER — "RSA sues tenant leader Mike McKee for $40M claiming defamation," by The Real Deal's Will Parker: “The Rent Stabilization Association, a landlord group that is one of the biggest lobbying and campaign spenders in New York State, filed suit against tenant leader Michael McKee on Wednesday alleging he defamed RSA in statements about its 2010 campaign contributions. RSA alleges that at a City Council meeting in May, McKee testified that RSA had 'promised' $150,000 contribution to three state senators if they agreed to vote down two tenant-friendly bills that had managed to get to the floor in Albany eight years ago. In addition to McKee, the suit includes the Metropolitan Council on Housing, the Real Rent Reform Campaign and TenantsPAC, where McKee is treasurer, as defendants, on the basis that McKee was speaking on their behalf. RSA seeks $40 million damages, claiming McKee intended ‘to expose RSA to public contempt, ridicule, aversion, disgrace, hatred, distrust and contempt.’” Read the story here

CELEBS MOVING TO NYC’S ‘SECRET SUBURB’ — New York Post’s Jennifer Gould Keil: “Scarlett Johansson, the 'Avengers' and 'Lost in Translation' star who currently portrays Ivanka Trump on 'Saturday Night Live,' might be ditching the East End for Snedens Landing, NY, a low-profile enclave in Rockland County that has attracted celebrity residents including Björk, Bill Murray and Diane Sawyer. In 2014, ScarJo picked up a stunning $2.2 million property in Amagansett, near her pal Gwyneth Paltrow and Paltrow’s mom, Blythe Danner. But lately, Johannson, who has been stepping out publicly with her boyfriend, SNL’s Colin Jost, has eyed properties in Snedens Landing — specifically, our spies say, on Washington Spring Road.” Read it here 

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— Two small central New York communities are considering measures to restrict short term rentals, aimed at AirBnB.

— The Erie County DA investigated but will not be filing criminal charges in claims of abuse against a Buffalo priest.

— Voters in most of the 16 school districts statewide that had to vote again on their budgets passed them on Tuesday, according to data from a statewide association. But voters in East Ramapo rejected the budget there.

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

The Brooklyn Nets traded Timofey Mozgov and some inconsequential draft picks (Billy King got rid of the important ones years ago) for center Dwight Howard. This serves two purposes. It makes the Nets dramatically better next year. And it opens cap space when Howard’s deal expires after the 2018-19 season. Huge coup of a trade here for Sean Marks.

Yankees 7, Mariners 5: Rookie Jonathan Loaisiga got knocked out in the fourth inning. No matter, the comeback from 5-0 ensued, completed by a Giancarlo Stanton walkoff home run.

The day ahead: matinee in Denver for the Mets. The Yankees host the Mariners. And it is NBA Draft day! The Knicks hold picks 9 and 37. The Nets choose at 29, 40 and 45.

#UpstateAmerica: An emu on the loose roamed the Albany area.

#ZooYork: Seven swans are missing from the lake in Prospect Park. Some suspect fowl play. 

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC