Congressman Beto O'Rourke, who hopes to replace Ted Cruz in the US Senate this fall, is one of several Texas and El Paso leaders participating in a march to the just-opened tent city at the US/Mexico border in Tornillo, Texas, where children have already been imprisoned "placed." 


 The protest against the Trump family separation policy was streamed live on Facebook; here's a copy. Unfortunately, it got all choppy near the end, so some of the speeches cut in and out: 


Oh, hey, Congressman Joe Kennedy III, of Massachussetts, was there, too! Hope he had sunscreen, not just chapstick.










At the march, O'Rourke said,


O'Rourke added that while the Trump administration has carried cruel immigration policy "to its most inhumane, logical conclusion," it's not solely one party's problem: as the ACLU's Lee Gelernt has explained, ICE began morphing into a  rogue paramilitary agency well before Trump and we all need to end it. 


Yesterday, US Rep. Will Hurd, a Republican whose district includes the Tornillo port of entry, said he's disappointed in the Trump administration's lack of transparency on the family separation policy. He also told the El Paso Times the Tornillo facility could be expanded to as many as 4,000 beds, which he said was "just absolutely nuts."


The tents each hold 20 children, and federal regulations require one adult be on hand for each 10 children. While each tent is equipped with an air conditioning unit, a tent is not where any child should be on Father's Day. 


At the moment, according to the El Paso Times, the tents are being used to house unaccompanied teens who crossed the border by themselves, to make room in more permanent shelters for younger kids taken from their parents. The teens in the tents have been brought in from youth shelters across the country. 


Yes, that's the logic of the New Cruelty: Pretend that it's somehow less outrageous to cram the tent city at the border full of other, older kids, so Trump spokespeople can smugly say on TV that the facility isn't holding younger children who were freshly taken from their parents. At least, not necessarily on Father's Day.


They would like us to pretend that's not crazy. 


For his part, Rep. Hurd, who apparently has at least minimal political survival instincts, condemns the familiy separation policy: 


As far as we can tell, that bipartisanship doesn't appear to have extended to this morning's march. Maybe Hurd is working on finding co-sponsors for a House version of S. 3036, Dianne Feinstein's bill to end family separation?


 Someone ought to ask him about that. 


Happy Father's Day to all you Wonkers. Organize. Make Noise. Elect Democrats. 


Shut this fucker down. 


Follow Doktor Zoom on Twitter


Yr Wonkette is fueled by reader donations and incandescent rage. Please click here to convert some of the latter into text. 


[El Paso Times / Beto O'Rourke on Facebook / El Paso Times / Why Is This Happening?]


	Doktor Zoom's real name is Marty Kelley, and he lives in the wilds of Boise, Idaho. He is not a medical doctor, but does have a 
	real PhD in Rhetoric. You should definitely donate some money to this little mommyblog where he has finally found acceptance and cat pictures. He is on maternity leave until 2033. Here is his Twitter, also. His quest to avoid prolixity is not going so great.


It's all fun and games until Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez uses her democratic socialism to redistribute all the other districts in America TO HERSELF.

Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who won the Democratic primary in NY-14 by committing SOCIALISM SORCERY, has won another primary, because apparently she thinks she is entitled to do SOCIALISM REDISTRIBUTION of all the primaries in the whole American land TO HERSELF. Well, Wonkette has one word for that and it is PFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFT!

OK we are kidding. But she did win another primary in a district she isn't even running to represent. It is New York's 15th district, which is next door to the 14th. She didn't win the Democratic primary though, but rather the Reform Party's primary, and she won it by collecting NINE WRITE-IN VOTES. She even beat the incumbent, Democratic Rep. Jose Serrano! 

Paula White says Jesus wasn't a refugee like those gross brown migrant children. Paula White doesn't actually know shit about the Bible.

Have you heard of our friend, Jesus? He is just this dude who walks with us and talks with us and loves us just as we are without one plea, and oh yeah, almost forgot, HE DIED TO WASH AWAY YOUR MASTURBATION SINS. He is also allegedly friends with Donald Trump's "spiritual advisor" Paula White, a TV preacher, who had some thoughts to share after visiting one of Trump's jails for migrant brown children. First of all, she says the baby jails are super nice and have granite countertops and everything. 

Also:

©2018  by Commie Girl Industries, Inc