Welcome! 

News Feed Item

Customer exposure is doubling with the launch of a second mobile briefing center

RESTON, Va., Oct. 9, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- GTL today announced the debut of a second Technology in Motion motor coach, expanding an already successful nationwide bus tour.




"In April of this year, GTL launched Technology in Motion as a mobile customer briefing program that allows us to showcase our entire solution portfolio at a customer site or conference," said Garth Johnson, Senior Vice President of Operations at GTL. "The customer feedback and the impact were so great that we got to work on a second vehicle shortly after the introduction of the first. Now, only six months after launching our initial Technology in Motion motor coach (TIM1), GTL is excited to launch another bus."


"Our mobile technology center has left a lasting impression on our customers, offering them an immersive experience and changing how we do business," said Jon Walker, Executive Vice President of Sales at GTL. "Not only can we demonstrate each individual product and service on board Technology in Motion, but we have the opportunity to highlight the interoperability between the diverse elements of GTL's broad portfolio that combine to become our customized solutions."


Other than being five feet longer (total length: 45 feet), the new Technology in Motion motor coach has been outfitted with the same innovative technology and demonstration equipment as the original bus, allowing GTL to bring this incredible hands-on experience to twice as many customers. During a typical tour stop, professionals from GTL will demonstrate a range of services, including inmate calling and messaging, inmate tablets and applications, visitation management, investigative and intelligence solutions, cashless payment services, and an industry-leading jail management system.


The second Technology in Motion bus (TIM2) made its inaugural appearance at a private customer briefing last week in Nashville on the same day that TIM1 appeared at the New Jersey County Jail Wardens Association conference in Atlantic City. From the outset, GTL's newly expanded program proved it can have double the customer reach by hosting a pair of concurrent tour stops in different cities.

Not to be overshadowed, TIM1 has been an enormous success on the trade show circuit and has also supported GTL account teams conducting on-site demonstrations at customer facilities. The original vehicle has hosted more than 2,500 customer personnel in the first six months, making more than 50 tour stops and traveling more than 25,000 miles.


Between now and the end of 2017, TIM1 will be touring in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic, and Southeast regions of the country, while TIM2 will make stops in the Midwest, Mountain States, Southwest, and West. To learn more about the tour, visit www.gtl.net/technologyinmotion.


About GTLGTL leads the fields of correctional technology, education, and government payment services with visionary solutions and customized products that integrate seamlessly to deliver security, financial value, and operational efficiencies while aiding inmate rehabilitation and reducing recidivism rates. With the recent acquisition of Telmate, GTL has strengthened its suite of solutions for the corrections industry and expanded its community corrections portfolio with Telmate Guardian, a smartphone-based GPS monitoring solution. As a trusted industry leader, GTL provides services to over 2 million inmates in more than 2,500 correctional facilities in the United States and Canada, including 33 U.S. departments of corrections, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Prisons, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and many large city/county/provincial facilities. GTL is headquartered in Reston, Virginia, with an employee presence throughout North America. To learn more about GTL, please visit www.gtl.net or social media sites on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and YouTube.


About ConnectNetworkGTL's ConnectNetwork is the one-stop resource for friends and family members to connect with their incarcerated loved ones. Friends and family can deposit money into an inmate's accounts, schedule and conduct video visits, and send messages. To learn more about ConnectNetwork, please visit www.connectnetwork.com or social media sites on Facebook and Twitter.


Press Contact: Vinnie Mascarenhas703-955-3894vinnie.mascare[email protected]




View original content with multimedia:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/gtl-expands-technology-in-motion-tour-300533196.html


SOURCE GTL


Published October 9, 2017 
Copyright © 2017 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2007 PR Newswire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of PRNewswire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of PRNewswire. PRNewswire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





