associate sponsors

Football takes France's immigrants from the streets of Paris to the stadiums of Russia








By Reade Levinson, Yeganeh Torbati and Kristina Cooke

(Reuters) - One child stopped eating and fell into a depression. Another who could previously walk on his own now asks his mother to carry him everywhere. A third child started biting other children.

 These are the experiences of children who have spent just three weeks at a temporary family immigration detention at the South Texas Family Detention Center in Dilley, Texas, attorneys and volunteers who work at the centre told Reuters.

The Dilley site is one of only three in the United States designed to hold parents and children together in immigration detention. Some of those who have visited the centre say such cases illustrate the emotional problems that can arise from holding families in detention.

"No child or family unit with a child should ever be in detention," said Alan Shapiro, co-founder of Terra Firma, which promotes immigrant children's health. He said he has seen children at several facilities show developmental delays and become anxious and withdrawn.

The Dilley facility has playrooms, indoor gym equipment, toys, books and other amenities to provide "a safe and appropriate environment" for immigrant mothers and children, said Amanda Gilchrist, a spokeswoman for private prison company CoreCivic .

Immigration and Customs Enforcement, which provides medical and mental health care at Dilley, said they take "very seriously the health, safety and welfare of those in our care."

President Donald Trump issued an executive order on Wednesday aimed at ending his controversial policy of separating children from parents caught entering the country illegally. Under the order, which is likely to be challenged in court, families will now be detained together for the duration of their criminal and immigration proceedings. The latter can take months or even years to complete.

Holding families indefinitely could create a new logistical headache for the Trump administration. Immigrant families are currently housed in facilities in Pennsylvania and Texas that have a total capacity of about 3,300 beds, according to ICE. Those are now at 79 percent capacity, ICE said.

Given the numbers of families crossing the border illegally, the government will quickly run out of beds at those facilities, the only ones in the country set up to house families. Last month, U.S. Border Patrol arrested more than 9,400 family members crossing the southern border illegally.

(For a graphic of current family detention facilities, click here: https://tmsnrt.rs/2Ia5W3y)

Wednesday's order directs the Pentagon to "take all legally available measures" to provide facilities available to house immigrant families, including constructing new facilities if necessary.

The Department of Health and Human Services has already completed assessments of three facilities in Texas - Fort Bliss, Goodfellow Air Force base, and Dyess Air Force base - as potential areas to house migrants. It was due to carry out a formal assessment of Little Rock Air Force base in Jacksonville, Arkansas on Thursday, said Lieutenant Colonel Jamie Davis, a Pentagon spokesman.

DANGERS OF RUSHING

Michelle Brané of the Women's Refugee Commission, a New York based advocacy group, said that while the Texas and Pennsylvania facilities are not currently full, "if they do start sending everybody there, they will fill up."

She said temporary facilities could be set up at military bases "fairly quickly" but noted that a previous attempt by the Obama administration to rush the construction of a family detention centre had resulted in a facility that was "not even close to being compliant" with child standards.

It could take up to three months for the government or its private sector contractors to build proper facilities that are safe, healthy and provide necessary services to detained families, said Daniel Stageman, a scholar on immigration detention at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York.

A spokeswoman for GEO Group , which operates the Karnes family detention centre in Texas, said their company works to "provide a safe and humane environment for those in our care."

The executive director of the Berks County Residential Center, the family detention centre in Pennsylvania, did not respond to a request for comment.

Attorneys and medical professionals who have spent time at such facilities say even short-term detention can traumatize vulnerable children.

A 2016 report by a Department of Homeland Security advisory committee strongly recommended the government discontinue the "general use" of family detention, citing insufficient access to legal counsel, medical and mental health care.

A June 2017 DHS inspector general's report, however, found that the family detention facilities were "clean, well-organised, and efficiently run," based on unannounced spot inspections in July 2016.

Attorney Katy Murdza, an attorney who volunteers five days a week at Dilley, said the mental strains of detention were already apparent among families who had been detained at the facility for the past three weeks.

"We see 2-year olds picking up phones from the wall and saying, 'Dad? Dad?' They see a male guard and ask where their dad is," she said.

(Reporting by Reade Levinson in New York, Yeganeh Torbati in Washington, and Kristina Cooke in San Francisco. Additional reporting by Idrees Ali in Washington.; Editing by Ross Colvin)

This story has not been edited by Firstpost staff and is generated by auto-feed.

                       Updated Date: Jun 22, 2018 05:05 AM
                                            

Heat-stable drug could save thousands from post-childbirth bleeding: WHO

U.N. aviation agency approves standards to kickstart emissions deal

U.S. judge orders agency to ease release of some migrant children

No Live Matches

At rally in Punjab's Muktsar district, Narendra Modi says farmers are relieved after MSP hike, but Congress losing sleep

Ease of doing business rankings: Why World Bank should take note of Maharashtra, Delhi missing from top 10 in DIPP's index

Bastar development offensive: Geedam lives on to tell another tale, this time of an education city and not of Maoist violence

Wimbledon 2018: Rafael Nadal beats Juan Martin Del Potro in five-set epic, sets up semis clash with Novak Djokovic

Rajinikanth-Akshay Kumar's 2.0 gets 29 November release: Why it may benefit from non-festive opening

Highlights, England vs Croatia, FIFA World Cup 2018:  इंग्लैंड को हराकर फाइनल में पहुंची क्रोएशिया

बुराड़ी कांड: परिवार के 10 सदस्यों की फाइनल पोस्टमार्टम रिपोर्ट आई, नारायणी देवी की मौत पर सस्पेंस

कैसे कह दूं कि मेरा देश महान, जब सेल्फी के चक्कर में इंसानियत होती है शर्मसार

बिहार: शराबबंदी कानून में नरमी का प्रस्ताव, कैबिनेट ने दी मंजूरी

एडल्टरी कानून पर सुनवाई: विवाहेत्तर संबंधों के लिए सिर्फ पुरुषों को सजा देने के पक्ष में केंद्र सरकार

India in England, 3 T20I Series, 2018

ENG Vs IND

 India beat England by 7 wickets

T20I Tri-Series in Zimbabwe, 2018

AUS Vs PAK

 Pakistan beat Australia by 6 wickets

India in England, 3 T20I Series, 2018

ENG Vs IND

 England beat India by 5 wickets

T20I Tri-Series in Zimbabwe, 2018

ZIM Vs AUS

 Australia beat Zimbabwe by 5 wickets

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

NED Vs PNGW

 Papua New Guinea Women beat Netherlands Women by 44 runs

New Zealand Women in England, 3 ODI Series, 2018

ENGW Vs NZW

 England Women beat New Zealand Women by 123 runs

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

UAEW Vs BANW

 Bangladesh Women beat United Arab Emirates Women by 8 wickets

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

UGAW vs NED - Jul 12th, 2018, 03:30 PM IST

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

IREW vs PNGW - Jul 12th, 2018, 03:30 PM IST

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

THAW vs UAEW - Jul 12th, 2018, 07:30 PM IST

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

BANW vs SCO - Jul 12th, 2018, 07:30 PM IST

New Zealand Women in England, 3 ODI Series, 2018

ENGW vs NZW - Jul 13th, 2018, 06:30 PM IST

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

TBC vs TBC - Jul 14th, 2018, 03:30 PM IST

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

TBC vs TBC - Jul 14th, 2018, 03:30 PM IST

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

TBC vs TBC - Jul 14th, 2018, 07:30 PM IST

ICC Women's World Twenty20 Qualifier, 2018

TBC vs TBC - Jul 14th, 2018, 07:30 PM IST

New Zealand Women in Australia, 3 T20I Series, 2018

AUSW vs NZW - Sep 29th, 2018, 02:20 AM IST

Copyright © 2018. Firstpost - All Rights Reserved.


            Terms of use
            Privacy
        