


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Former Sheriff Joe Arpaio has lost a bid to disqualify a judge from the racial profiling lawsuit that led to a criminal case against the sheriff.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Former sheriff Joe Arpaio
(Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

Former Sheriff Joe Arpaio has lost a bid to get a judge disqualified from a racial profiling lawsuit that ultimately discredited his immigration patrols and led to a criminal case against the lawman.


U.S. District Judge G. Murray Snow on Tuesday rejected the request that Arpaio and his former second-in-command Jerry Sheridan made days after Arpaio was defeated in last year's election.


Six months before Arpaio's defeat, the judge found Arpaio and Sheridan to be in civil contempt of court for defying a court order to stop the sheriff's traffic patrols that targeted immigrants.


Snow asked prosecutors to pursue a criminal contempt charge against Arpaio.


Another federal judge filed such charge against Arpaio and found him guilty.


But Arpaio was spared a possible jail sentence when President Donald Trump pardoned his conviction.


READ MORE:


Arpaio hits snag in bid to remove conviction from record


Tent City jail to become rehabilitation center, possible state corrections facility


Roberts: Joe Arpaio says he may run for Senate but only if you send him cash ASAP


5 ways President Donald Trump's pardon of Joe Arpaio will be felt for years to come


 


 


 
