
                                                            Politico

Shia Kapos' must-read rundown of political news in the Land of Lincoln

Get the Illinois Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

07/09/2018 07:18 AM EDT

By Shia Kapos (skapos@politico.com; @shiakapos) with Kristen East (keast@politico; @kristenicoleast)

Good Monday morning and thanks for reading. I sprained my ankle dancing at the annual Greek festival Saturday, which gave me plenty of time to soak up all the news Sunday with my leg propped up and feta cheese crumbling all over my computer.


Story Continued Below

TODAY’S TALKER: Illinois governor profits off ICE detention center contracts, by POLITICO’s Natasha Korecki: Gov. Bruce Rauner this year reported turning a profit from a health care group that services U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention centers, including facilities that hold immigrant families with children. In his most recent statement of economic interests, the multi-millionaire Republican governor disclosed earnings from a private equity fund that owns Correct Care Solutions, a for-profit health care provider that has millions of dollars in government contracts with jails and prisons across the country, including immigrant detention centers. Story here

WORD WAR: I bet Governor Bruce Rauner and Democratic candidate J.B. Pritzker are good at word games. Consider these ads that use some clever word play to make their point.

The governor launches a new statewide ad today that takes aim at J.B. Pritzker’s relationship with House Speaker and fellow Democrat Mike Madigan.

We got a first look at the ad, titled “Madigan’s Candidate.”

It uses Pritzker’s primary campaign opponents to needle him. Daniel Biss calls Pritzker “Madigan’s candidate” and Chris Kennedy says Pritzker is the “poster child for pay-to-play politics in our state.” Biss and Kennedy appear in various clips talking to TV reporters during the contentious primary race. They have since gone on to endorse Pritzker.

They “echo what Governor Rauner has been saying for a year: Pritzker is Madigan’s hand-picked candidate,” the Rauner campaign said in releasing the ad.

Worth noting that Rauner’s primary opponent, Jeanne Ives, hasn’t yet endorsed him. The governor does have support from other Republican lawmakers who want the governor “to tie Madigan around Pritzker’s neck,” as one state legislator told me.

Pritzker’s new ad focuses on the governor’s recent comments about downstate Illinois. Rauner can be heard in an interview talking about “how difficult” it is to keep businesses in southern Illinois. His comments have irked residents there, and Pritzker’s taking note. You can see the ad here.

DELEGATION

DURBIN RIPS WHITE HOUSE: Illinois Sen. Dick Durbin called the White House process of removing children from their parents at the border and then being unable to reunite them “a convergence of cruelty and incompetence.” 

Speaking on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” Durbin said: “Hearts and prayers are with those boys in Thailand. I hope our hearts and prayers are also with thousands of children, toddlers, and infants removed from their parents by the Trump administration under zero tolerance. They're trapped in a bureaucratic cave too, so let's not forget them.”

Durbin also had choice words about how Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has handled U.S. Supreme Court nominees. Durbin pointed to the hypocrisy of McConnell refusing to meet with former President Barack Obama’s nominee before elections and then pushing for Justice Anthony Kennedy’s replacement before this year’s voting.

“Senator McConnell invented this new rule and wouldn't even consider a meeting with (Illinois native) Merrick Garland. And now he's saying we have to hurry through here and get this done before the election. Totally inconsistent.”

See the full interview here.

CAMPAIGNS

BIG MONEY TO RAOUL: Chicago businessman Michael Sacks has donated $100,000 to Kwame Raoul’s campaign for state attorney general.

Sacks has stayed out of the race until now. That’s because he had good relationships with a number of primary candidates—attorney Jesse Ruiz, Highland Park Mayor Nancy Rotering, attorney Sharon Fairley and Raoul. I hear he told all of them that he was going to stay out of the Democratic primary and just support whoever won.

PRITZKER LENDS A HAND: Democratic gubernatorial candidate J.B. Pritzker dumped $2 million into Democratic Assembly races, according to the state Board of Elections. He gave $1 million to the Democratic Majority, a political action committee that works to elect Democrats to the state House; $500,000 to the Senate Democratic Victory Fund, which elects Dems to the state Senate; and $500,000 to the Illinois Democratic Heartland Committee, which elects down-state Dems to the state Senate.

TAKING NAMES

He’s all smiles: Norwegian American Hospital Foundation, the philanthropic arm of the hospital, raised $320,000 at its recent fundraiser. Among the 400-plus guests was Cook County Commissioner Luis Arroyo Jr. "I was born in this hospital and now, here I am, elected to the area," Arroyo told me. "It puts a smile on my face knowing I can advocate for the hospital where I was born.” The hospital serves residents of Humboldt Park, West Town and surrounding neighborhoods. The fundraiser will support the expansion of a care program that integrates behavioral health services in the community with primary healthcare at the hospital.

STATE

— The Illinois town where Trump’s tariffs have provided jobs, and a sigh of relief, by Chicago Tribune’s Samantha Bomkamp: For more than 100 years, Granite City has defined itself as a hardworking mill town, a place where young people eager to cement a solid financial future without a college degree have to look no further than the dirt and iron and fire of the local steel plant, which stretches over 2 square miles. The opportunity afforded by the plant came to a halt at the end of 2015, when the plant idled production, laying off 2,000 people. But the first blast furnace now has been restarted and U.S. Steel is filling 800 jobs at the mill, a result of the steep tariffs that President Donald Trump announced on imported steel and aluminum earlier this year. Story here 

— How Illinois retirement program works (and is it a good idea?), by the Daily Herald’s Bob: Susnjara: About 1.2 million Illinois residents will have money automatically deducted from their paychecks for a retirement savings plan through a new state program being phased in 3½ years after becoming law -- a move the state treasurer says could reduce use of food stamps, Medicaid and other publicly funded resources. Story here

— Stick to your guns, but don’t stick out your tongue at rule of law, by Belleville News-Democrat Editorial Board: “We totally get and sympathize with the ‘gun sanctuary’ movement — Springfield lawmakers need to get the message about tinkering with Second Amendment rights. But just like the ‘sanctuary city’ movement in which municipal authorities refuse to help federal immigration authorities, leaders in ‘gun sanctuaries’ need to halt before their thoughts turn to actions. There are 26 of Illinois' 102 counties that passed ‘gun sanctuary’ resolutions, including Monroe County. Twelve are about to do so. Two are asking their voters, including Madison County.” Story here 

— One year, $5 billion later, are Illinois finances better off? by Belleville News-Democrat Editorial Board: Story here 

CHICAGO

— CTA deal tops agenda as Emanuel heads to Asia amid trade war between U.S. and China, by Chicago Tribune’s Gregory Pratt: Mayor Rahm Emanuel is going to Asia this week, where a contingent of city officials plan to meet with business leaders amid a trade war between the U.S. and China. At the top of Emanuel’s agenda is visiting a Chinese business that has a $1.3 billion contract with the CTA to manufacture train cars on the South Side. Story here 

— Fact-check: Rahm Emanuel wrong again on Chicago jobs, by Better Government Association’s Kiannah Sepeda-Miller: Emanuel said the city is experiencing its “highest employment since 1950,” a variation of a claim he made in January about Chicago’s private-sector employment hitting the highest level in city history. But Chicago has a much smaller population these days than it did in the post-war era, so it stands to reason that jobs numbers would shrink over the decades as well. And they have. Still, the city’s employment picture these days is indisputably brighter than it was just a few years ago. Story here 

— The Special Olympics legacy: How it all began in Chicago, by Chicago Sun-Times’ Francesca Gattuso: An idea to hold a simple track-and-field event at Soldier Field sparked an athletic flame that continues to burn 50 years later. The roots of Special Olympics were planted in Chicago and have sprouted into a global community providing a platform to 5 million intellectually disabled children and adults throughout 172 countries to train and compete in more than 30 sports. This July marks Special Olympics’ 50th anniversary, highlighting not only the achievements of the world’s largest sports organization for the intellectually disabled, but also the societal transitions marked by the athletes’ accomplishments. Story here 

— ‘Rogue’ transmission on Chicago police radio said to be portion of Hitler speech, by Chicago Tribune’s Gregory Pratt: An unauthorized audio transmission over Chicago police radio frequencies Wednesday night seems to be a partial rebroadcast of an Adolf Hitler speech from a 1935 Nazi propaganda film, an expert said. Based on numerous key words in the fragmented transmission, the audio seems to be from a Hitler speech in Leni Riefenstahl's film “Triumph of the Will,” said Imke Meyer, a professor of Germanic studies at the University of Illinois at Chicago. Story here 

— Rahm to Rauner: ‘Delete your account’ after tweeting your disappointment over the Dan Ryan shutdown, by Block Club Chicago’s Lee Edwards: Thousands of demonstrators marched onto — and then shut down — the Dan Ryan Expressway on Saturday to draw attention to the daily violence on Chicago’s South and West sides. The event ignited a Twitter feud between Mayor Rahm Emanuel and Gov. Bruce Rauner. The peaceful protest led to the takeover of the northbound side of the Dan Ryan, even though State Police tried in vain to keep some lanes open. The shutdown drew the ire of the governor, who tweeted the shutdown was “unacceptable” and that he was “disappointed in the Mayor.” Emanuel quickly responded on Twitter: “It was a peaceful protest. Delete your account.’” Story here 

— Curbless Depression-era streets prompted Chicago alderman’s vote against Obama Presidential Center, by Chicago Tribune’s Gregory Pratt: For a roughly two-block stretch of South Damen Avenue, starting at 73rd Street, instead of curbs separating the sidewalks from the street there are only dull grooves that flood when heavy rains come. Fixing the streets is not an easy or inexpensive task because of how they were built following the Great Depression — without curbs, gutters or sewers — and there are no plans to replace them, the city said. … So when it came time last month for the City Council to authorize the proposed Obama Presidential Center, which will cost nearly $175 million for infrastructure and roadwork in state money, first-term 17th Ward Ald. David Moore cast the sole dissenting vote. Moore said he did it to make a point. Story here 

AROUND THE COLLARS

— Both local parties see state, national issues as leverage, by The State Journal-Register’s Bernard Schoenburg: As local parties gear up for the fall campaign season, Sangamon County Democrats are hoping to use state and national politics -- specifically, Gov. Bruce Rauner and President Donald Trump -- to motivate their supporters in the coming months. Story here

NATION

— ‘The Super Bowl of politics’: Trump’s team readies for Supreme Court battle, by POLITICO’s Christopher Cadelago: Story here

— Surge of female candidates sparks an explosion of color, POLITICO’s Didi Martinez: Story here

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ...New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ...Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v …ILLINOIS PLAYBOOK http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX 

Want to make an impact? POLITICO Illinois has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Land of Lincoln. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: [jshapiro@politico.com] jshapiro@politico.com



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC