Here’s how TheWrap ended up in a fake ticket scandal on Sunday

WWE.com

WWE “Backlash” is in the books, and the co-branded May pay-per-view event set the table for an interesting “Raw” tonight and “SmackDown Live” on Tuesday. But before millions watch this week’s flagship shows on USA Network, TheWrap‘s got 7 things that no WWE Network subscriber caught at Sunday’s show.

We attended the Newark, N.J., pay-per-view event courtesy of some pretty killer tickets that didn’t come without controversy — more on that later, though. Before this writer admits to his role in a phony ticket scandal, we’ve got half-a-dozen other things one had to be in the house and (possibly) on the floor to see.

Find out how Bobby Roode got under the ring, which Superstars interacted the most with the Prudential Center crowd, and what lines were the roughest to navigate at The Rock. (No, not that The Rock — we’re referring to the Pru Center’s nickname.)

Also Read: WWE Wrestler Kane Wins Republican Mayoral Primary in Knoxville

1. That Concerned Ref Was All for the Cameras
You know that very concerned ref who consoles the beaten-up loser after each match? Yeah, he’s not all that worried — until cued to be.


Savvy wrestling fans know that the earpiece-wearing ref distributes key information — like timing — to the wrestlers throughout the match, but the man in stripes isn’t done after the “1, 2, 3” count. The referee also must be in position to check on the “injured” wrestler when the director wants to switch shots from the victor celebrating to his or her victim suffering.

After all, it’s really just a (very good) TV show.


Also Read: WWE's Braun Strowman Hurls Shane McMahon Through Announce Table From Ring (Video)

2. Bobby Roode Is the Man in Black
WWE Superstar Bobby Roode’s ring entrance Sunday was a little less “Glorious” than his usual strut down the ramp.

As Elias was hastily escorted to the ring in the dark arena for his comedy-relief skit on Sunday night, security surrounded another man dressed in all black with a hood pulled low over his head. That fella turned out to be Roode, who popped out from under the ring to deliver a Glorious DDT, seemingly out of nowhere.

And then the weird conga line thing happened.

Also Read: Titus O'Neil Trips and Totally Eats It in WWE 'Greatest Royal Rumble' Match Entrance Fail (Video)

3. But Do You Really “Want Enzo”?
OK, so you probably heard some of these on TV, but there was a weird number of chants for ex-WWE Superstar Enzo Amore — mostly during former tag team partner Big Cass’ match against Daniel Bryan.

It’s not unusual for a live crowd to troll Vince McMahon &amp; Co. with calls for former stars (yes, there were also “CM Punk” chants Sunday night in Newark), but considering that Enzo (né Eric Arndt) was fired earlier this year after being accused of rape, those calling for Amore were making gigantic asses of themselves. (Arndt has denied the accusations.)

The man who was canned while Cruiserweight Champion is from New Jersey, which means geography explains some of the noise — but not the ignorance.

Also Read: WWE 'Greatest Royal Rumble': Roman Reigns Spears Brock Lesnar Through Steel Cage Wall (Video)

4. Snaking Merch Lines
At most sporting events, the lines for an arena’s entrances, its bathrooms and beers are the most egregious — but that wasn’t the case in Newark.

The WWE’s “PG Era” attracts families, and kids prefer merchandise over booze. The line to buy (overpriced) t-shirts, championship belts and “Money in the Bank” briefcases resembled the U.S. Customs line at JFK.

Last night, we traded in the Dos Equis for good old-fashioned American Bud Light. At least there was no wait for the cold ones — or for the urinals after drinking a (responsible) number of those cold ones.

Also Read: WWE 'Greatest Royal Rumble': Watch This Atrocious Jeff Hardy-Jinder Mahal Fail (Video)

5. Roman Is for the Kids!
The WWE Universe has a strange relationship with Roman Reigns. The adults boo the hell out of him for a few reasons: 1) He’s been pushed relentlessly to replace John Cena as the face of the company, 2) Your girlfriend finds him very attractive, 3) Reigns kept the SHIELD attire, crowd entrance and song after the fan-favorite faction disbanded, and 4) He’s not the best technical wrestler.

None of that bothers the kids (or secure adults who understand where they are). After Reigns dropped Samoa Joe in last night’s main event and the cameras cut off, the polarizing Superstar took photos with a number of children at ringside — more than anyone else was willing or able to.

Save your booing for someone else, guys.

Also Read: WWE Superstar Shakeup 2018: 42 Wrestlers You'll Now Only See on 'SmackDown Live' (Photos)

6. Jeff Hardy’s Art Includes Autographs
Seated on the entrance ramp, one is up close and personal to the comings and goings of each Superstar. The only high-five we personally got was from Jeff Hardy, who also stopped on the way back to sign a young girl’s poster board by us. It was the lone autograph we witnessed.

To be fair to the whole locker room, a live televised show is not really the time or place for autographs. On the way to the ring, it’s pure business. On their way back up, the losing wrestler has to hold what hurts and limp backstage, while the winner poses for the WWE Network cameras before hitting the showers. And if it’s a “heel” (the wrestling term for a baddie) who wins, he or she can’t break character to interact with the fans.

Plus, the WWE producers do a nice job keeping these long shows moving between the action, so it’s not quite a meet-and-greet opportunity.

Also Read: Dwayne Johnson's 'Fighting With My Family' Pushed to 2019

7. Fake Tix — Hey, It’s Still Newark
Here’s some free advice: Never buy tickets from a scalper on the streets of Newark, New Jersey.

While the Prudential Center is a fine venue and the area around the home to the NHL’s New Jersey Devils is developing nicely, the city of Newark itself can still be a dicey place. Plus, the business of live sporting events extends well beyond the official box office.

We experienced that firsthand, missing the very beginning to The Miz and Seth Rollins’ excellent opening match to sort out a fake ticket problem. Long story short, our stubs were the legit ones, and the (ejected) squatters in our rightful seats learned an expensive and unfortunate lesson that likely made them Ticketmaster customers for life. Shoutout to the professional Prudential Center security team who worked it all out quickly, correctly and kindly.

We all just lived through another WWE Superstar Shakeup, and if your head is still spinning, we're here to help: TheWrap has tracked down where all 96 main roster wrestlers now work.  

Readers can check out our "SmackDown Live" gallery tomorrow, though for this one, it's important to point out that we did not include the Cruiserweights. After all, the "Monday Night Raw" guests have their own show, "205 Live," and none of them would compete on "SmackDown" anyway.  

In our tallies, we only counted regular in-ring wrestlers, so no managers or agents or wives or escorts, etc. -- even if they step between the ropes once or twice a year. Though we listed the obvious and current stables and tag teams together, we counted wrestlers individually in our number.  

Authors of Pain: Akam and Rezar  

NXT alums are gigantic and scary. Prediction? Painnn.  




Also Read: Bruno Sammartino, WWE Legend, Dies at 82

Alexa Bliss  

Miss Bliss doesn't have the belt anymore, but she's got a rematch with Nia Jax.  




Also Read: Paige Named WWE ‘SmackDown Live’ GM After Daniel Bryan’s Return to the Ring

Alicia Fox  

Crazy like a Fox, sure, but a key part of the women's evolution.  




Also Read: Brock Lesnar Re-Signs With WWE After Shocking WrestleMania Win

Titus Worldwide: Titus O'Neill, Apollo and Dana Brooke  

With statistician Brooke at their sides, there's not much O'Neill and Apollo can't do. (Except win, they don't do a ton of that.)  




Also Read: Dwayne Johnson Lays the Smack Down in ‘Fighting With My Family’ First Look (Video)

Baron Corbin  

The "lone wolf" looks to tear through the packed "Raw" locker room.  




Also Read: WWE WrestleMania 34: 9 Things You Didn’t See on TV

Bayley  

Who needs a hug? Better that than a Bayley-to-Belly suplex.  




Also Read: The Undertaker Returns to WWE to Face John Cena at WrestleMania 34 (Video)

The Big Show  

Yeah, Big Show is still on the roster, and he could still knock you out cold with one punch.  




Also Read: WWE’s Paul Heyman Talks Post-WrestleMania Plans, Ronda Rousey

The Miztourage: Bo Dallas and Curtis Axel  

Though they'll probably have to drop the name since The Miz was drafted to "SmackDown."  




Also Read: ‘Andre the Giant’ HBO Doc Couldn’t Fit This Story About WWE Legend Nearly Drowning 2 Rivals

Bobby Roode  

A "glorious" new addition to "Monday Night Raw."  




Also Read: CAA Joins WWE Rights Sale: Is Ari Emanuel’s UFC Ownership a Conflict? (Exclusive)

Braun Strowman  

Anyone stupid enough to step to "the monster among men" is gonna get these hands.  




Also Read: Ring of Honor’s Tenille Dashwood on Why So Many Wrestlers Are Using Their Real Names Now

Bray Wyatt and Matt Hardy  

An unlikely pairing, especially considering Wyatt's real-life brother Bo Dallas is also on "Raw." Hardy's real brother Jeff Hardy is on "SmackDown" as the United States Champion. 




Also Read: Here’s Everything WWE Superstar John Cena Does in a Day (Video)

Brock Lesnar (with Paul Heyman)  

Ladies and gentleman, his name is Brock Lesnar, and he's still the Universal Champion.  




Also Read: WWE Hall of Famer ‘Luscious’ Johnny Valiant Dies at 71

Chad Gable  

Recently split from new tag team partner Shelton Benjamin, Gable is either here to feud with or re-team with fellow American Alpha alum Jason Jordan. Probably both, eventually. 




Also Read: ‘Total Bellas’ Sets Season 3 Premiere Date, (Elbow) Drops Trailer Drenched in John Cena’s Tears (Video)

Curt Hawkins  

Hawkins never wins, and he never knows when to quit.  




Also Read: The Evolution of John Cena, from WWE’s Doctor of Thuganomics to ‘Blockers’ (Photos)

The Revival: Scott Dawson and Dash Wilder  

An old-school tag team that seems to get buried more than pushed.  




Also Read: #ICYMI: Watch WWE Exec Stephanie McMahon Slam Ronda Rousey Through a Table on ‘Raw’ (Video)

Dean Ambrose  

The Ambrose Asylum will re-open for business on "Raw" once the former SHIELD member returns from injury.  




Also Read: New WWE Hall of Famer Bubba Ray Dudley Reveals How Much Money Indie Wrestlers Can Make

Dolph Ziggler and Drew McIntyre  

Ziggler has returned to steal the show, and he's brought a (very large) friend.  




Also Read: Watch New WWE Star Ronda Rousey in Epically Awkward ESPN Interview (Video)

Elias  

WWE stands for "Walk With Elias." We're not sure if there's a RAW acronym.  




Also Read: WWE’s Paul Heyman to Star in and Co-Produce TV Series With Roy Bank’s Banca Studio (Exclusive)

Ember Moon  

The Eclipse is a top-notch finisher, and the main roster women's division is finding that out.  




Also Read: Nickelodeon Kids’ Choice Awards: 13 Things You Didn’t See on TV

Breezango: Tyler Breeze and Fandango  

Yeah, they're silly -- but they just picked up a huge win against The Bar last Monday.  




Also Read: John Cena on Why He Looks Up to Dwayne Johnson: ‘He’s an Anomaly’

Finn Balor (pictured as The Demon)  

The Balor Club is for everyone, and we're all for Finn Balor.  




Also Read: Hulk Hogan in Talks With WWE to ‘Help Others Learn From His Mistakes’

Goldust  

Cody Rhodes has left WWE and Dusty Rhodes has passed, but Dustin is still here.  




Also Read: Ex-WWE Writer Vince Russo Loses PodcastOne Gig in Feud With Wrestling Blogger (Video)

Heath Slater and Rhyno  

Heath's got kids, and Rhyno, well he recently ran for congress and lost.  




Also Read: Daniel Bryan’s Return to WWE Competition Hands ‘SmackDown Live’ Its Top Rating in Almost a Year

Jason Jordan  

See Gable, Chad. Also let's hope that upon Jordan's return he's no longer the storyline son of Kurt Angle.  That was dumb.  




Also Read: ‘Yes! Movement’ Takes Over Twitter After Daniel Bryan Is Cleared for WWE Action

Jinder Mahal (with the Singh Brothers)  

Jinder Mahal doesn't come in peace anymore.  




Also Read: Charlotte Flair Says Ronda Rousey Signing With WWE Raises ‘Everyone’s Game’ (Video)

John Cena  

Do we really need to write a caption about John Cena? You know who he is, your mom knows who he is.  




Also Read: Daniel Bryan Medically Cleared by WWE to Wrestle Again – Just in Time for WrestleMania 34

Kane  

Another wrestler-turned-politician. You know, if voters can get past the fact that Kane is a demon from Hell.  




Also Read: WWE ‘Raw': Watch Brock Lesnar Beat the Hell Out of Roman Reigns With a Steel Chair (Video)

Kevin Owens and Sami Zayn  

Fired from "SmackDown Live," these two had nowhere else to go.  




Also Read: WWE Changes Name of ‘Fabulous Moolah Battle Royal’ After Public Backlash (Exclusive)

The Ascension: Konnor and Viktor  

Another popular tag team from their NXT days that haven't had any success on the main roster.  




Also Read: ‘Fabulous Moolah Battle Royal': Petition for WWE to Change Match Name Approaches Signature Goal

The Riott Squad: Ruby Riott, Sarah Logan and Liv Morgan  

With Paige's retirement from in-ring activity, the Riott Squad is now one better than Absolution, its "SmackDown" stable counterpart.  




Also Read: Kid Rock’s WWE Hall of Fame Induction Has Fans Wrestling With Disappointment

Mickie James  

Yes, she's still going, a fact that saved Alexa Bliss' butt more than a few times during her run as champ.  




Also Read: WWE Is ‘Investigating’ Superstar Jeff Hardy After DWI Arrest

Mike Kanellis  

The truth is, you won't see much of Mike Kanellis on "Raw." Maybe at house shows ...  




Also Read: WWE Legend Ric Flair Signs on for Feature Film Acting Debut (Exclusive)

Mojo Rawley  

The original "Hype Bro" has been more hype than substance since winning the Andre the Giant Battle Royal in 2017.  




Also Read: WWE Superstar Charlotte Flair Marvels at How Dad Ric Is ’69 and Cooler Than Me!’ (Video)

Natalya  

The best there was, the best there is, and the best there ever will be? Nah, but she's a pro.  




Also Read: WWE Investigating Sexual Harassment Accusations Against Jonathan Coachman From His Time at ESPN

Nia Jax

It's hard to see anyone on this "Raw" roster not named Ronda Rousey taking the title off of Nia Jax -- but they'll sure try.  




Also Read: How Fox Can Wrestle WWE ‘Raw’ Rights From USA Network

No Way Jose  

He dances, he wrestles, you get it.  




Also Read: WWE’s Kane, The Undertaker Reunite at ‘Glenn Jacobs for Mayor’ Campaign Stop (Photos)

Roman Reigns  

With or without a title, "Raw" is the Big Dog's yard -- whether the WWE Universe likes it or not.  




Also Read: Former WWE Diva Sunny Arrested on ‘Fugitive From Justice’ Charges

Ronda Rousey  

No fakers here. "Rowdy" Ronda Rousey proved at WrestleMania 34 that she can go in the ring -- it's that whole talking thing the UFC import must master.  




Also Read: Watch Ronda Rousey Slam Triple H Into a Table After Signing WWE Contract (Video)

Sasha Banks  

"The Boss" has turned her back on Bayley, and now her eyes are on Nia Jax's prize.  




Also Read: WWE to Announce ‘WrestleMania’ Return to New Jersey’s MetLife Stadium in 2019

Seth Rollins  

A healthy Seth "Freakin'" Rollins can really BURN IT DOWN, and he's got the Intercontinental Championship to prove it.  




Also Read: Elias Will Play Guitar in the Elimination Chamber Pod – If WWE Lets Him

Zack Ryder  

Remember Zack Ryder? Well, he remembers former partner Mojo Rawley, and they're both here ...  




Also Read: ‘Double J’ Jeff Jarrett Struts Into WWE Hall of Fame: Watch Him Nail Gary Coleman With a Guitar (Video)

Check back tomorrow for our "SmackDown Live" gallery.  




Also Read: New WWE Champ Jinder Mahal on Resurrecting the Classic Villain: ‘It Always Works’

You won’t see any of these guys and girls on “SmackDown Live” anymore

We all just lived through another WWE Superstar Shakeup, and if your head is still spinning, we're here to help: TheWrap has tracked down where all 96 main roster wrestlers now work.  

Readers can check out our "SmackDown Live" gallery tomorrow, though for this one, it's important to point out that we did not include the Cruiserweights. After all, the "Monday Night Raw" guests have their own show, "205 Live," and none of them would compete on "SmackDown" anyway.  

In our tallies, we only counted regular in-ring wrestlers, so no managers or agents or wives or escorts, etc. -- even if they step between the ropes once or twice a year. Though we listed the obvious and current stables and tag teams together, we counted wrestlers individually in our number.  