


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The latest Suffolk University/USA Today Network poll says the Democratic nominee holds a double-digit lead before next week's election

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Kim Guadagno (R) faces Phil Murphy (D) to succeed Chris Christie (R).
    NorthJersey.com

Former President Barack Obama campaigns for Phil Murphy, the Democratic nominee for governor, in Newark on Oct. 19.
(Photo: Viorel Florescu/northjersey.com)

Phil Murphy holds a 16-point lead over Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno in the governor's race, maintaining his commanding position heading into the final week of the campaign, according to a Suffolk University/USA Today Network poll. 


With so little time left until the Nov. 7 election, Guadagno faces "a lot of headwinds" to overcome the double-digit deficit, poll director David Paleologos said. She has been unable to gather significant support from undecided voters in the past month, and her boss, Gov. Chris Christie, remains an unpopular figure, Paleologos said. 


Murphy, the Democratic Party nominee, has the support of 49 percent of likely voters, while the Republican lieutenant governor has 33 percent, according to the poll. That's a smaller lead than he had in the Suffolk poll last month — with 44 percent to Guadagno's 25 percent — but the number of undecided voters has also been cut in half. In September, there were 24 percent of likely voters who were undecided; now it is 12 percent, and Guadagno trails Murphy by double digits. 


"The opportunity for Guadagno has diminished considerably," Paleologos said in an interview. "In September it was a long shot, [but] there was a lot more wiggle room," he added. "Sure, the race has narrowed a little bit, but the undecided has dropped a lot." 


READ MORE: Murphy and Guadagno take different paths to get out the vote


POLLING: Murphy leads Guadagno by 20 points, new poll says


As the race stands according to this poll, Guadagno's path to victory means she must hold on to the support of Republican voters, win over the remaining undecided voters and steal every vote for third-party candidates, of which there are five, Paleologos said. 


"She's got three monumental tasks ahead," he said. 


Murphy, meanwhile, has to hold on to his party base, Paleologos said. He has led by double digits in all public polling in the race and holds a 14.6 percent lead in a RealClear Politics analysis of polls. Because of that, Paleologos said he views Murphy as having "the teen title for the Democratic Party in 2017."


A former banking executive, finance chairman of the Democratic National Committee and U.S. ambassador to Germany, Murphy has called in an all-star team of Democrats to help him rally support ahead of the election. High-profile names of Democratic administrations past such as Bill Clinton, Joe Biden, Al Gore, Eric Holder and John Kerry have all campaigned in New Jersey in recent weeks.


But the poll said the endorsement of former President Barack Obama last week made no difference to 52 percent of likely voters, while 28 percent said they would be more likely to vote for Murphy. 


READ MORE: Bill Clinton knocks Guadagno's immigration ad, strategy


READ MORE: Obama, campaigning for Murphy, urges voters to send message 'rejecting a politics of fear'


Guadagno has not had such star support from her own party, and the two most identifiable Republicans in New Jersey are deeply unpopular. Trump has a 31 percent approval rating in the Suffolk poll, and Christie's approval rating dropped from 16 percent in the September survey to 14 percent now. 


Guadagno has dismissed the accuracy of public polls and insisted that her internal surveys show a much tighter contest. Paleologos declined to respond her campaign's general criticism, but said that "time will tell" their accuracy. 


The Suffolk University/USA Today Network poll was conducted between Oct. 25 and 28 among 500 likely voters. It has a margin of error of 4.4 percentage points.


 
