Welcome! 

News Feed Item




Excella,
a pioneer in Agile technology solutions in the D.C. area, announced it
was awarded a Blanket Purchase Agreement (BPA) to provide Agile coaching
to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to enable the
successful implementation of its next generation web-based applications.
The Services for Enabling Agile Delivery (SEAD) BPA extends over five
years and has a total ceiling value of up to $300 million. Excella will
provide hands-on expert coaching that will enable Agile delivery across
DHS and its components.




“This award will drive DHS’ adoption of Agile principles and practices
to further modernize its digital strategy,” said Dave Neumann,
Partner at Excella. “Our industry-recognized Agile thought leaders
create powerful solutions for federal agencies, and are excited to
partner with DHS leaders to create transformative applications that
uphold the agency’s charge to keep the homeland secure.”




The Excella Team will provide enterprise, technical, and process
coaching services to increase agility throughout the organization and
create a culture of continuous improvement. Excella’s Agile Coaches will
also take a non-prescriptive approach to their coaching efforts while
drawing on their extensive expertise using Scrum, Kanban, Extreme
Programming (XP), Lean, Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe), LeSS (Large Scale
Scrum), [email protected], as well as DevOps and DevSecOps, to deliver custom
solutions.




Excella’s Agile Coaches have delivered successful solutions for U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), U.S. Census Bureau, the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), and the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG).
Excella’s Agile thought leaders are featured at international and
national conferences and events, including Agile2018, and regularly host
events and training at the firm’s headquarters in Arlington, VA.



About Excella




Excella is an Agile technology firm and transformative partner to
Washington, DC’s leading organizations. Since 2002, federal agencies,
prominent brands and trailblazing non-profits have turned to Excella to
transform bold ideas into elegant technology solutions. We believe
technology exists to solve challenges and evolve thinking – we help
organizations harness this power to make real progress. Learn more at www.excella.com.










View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180523005986/en/


Published May 23, 2018 
Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





