EDITION

Getty photographer and Pulitzer Prize winner John Moore has taken some of the most iconic photos to emerge from the US-Mexico border, including one of an asylum-seeking young girl crying at a detention center as Border Patrol agents questioned her mother before separating them.

Moore shared what it’s like taking pictures of detained immigrant families at the border, many of whom are now  being separated as part of President Donald Trump’s “zero tolerance” immigration policy.

“As a father myself, it was very difficult for me to see these families detained, knowing that they would soon be split up,” he told Getty’s blog Foto. “I could see on their faces that they had no idea what was about to happen.”

Moore said he doubted many of the families coming to the border knew about the Trump administration’s new immigration policy to separate families that cross the border.

“Most of these families were scared, to various degrees,” Moore told Foto. “I doubt any of them had ever done anything like this before – flee their home countries with their children, travelling thousands of miles through dangerous conditions to seek political asylum in the United States, many arriving in the dead of night.”

Border agents appear to have a feeling of “resignation” about implementing and enforcing the new immigration policy, according to Moore.

“Generally speaking, agents find the bureaucracy of processing so many asylum seekers tedious,” Moore said. “Once families cross the Rio Grande from Mexico into Texas, they seek out Border Patrol agents and then turn themselves in. I’d say that many agents do have some compassion for them, but they don’t think that the US should be responsible for accepting them.”

In the instance of the young girl crying as her mother was questioned by border patrol agents, Moore said that she is two years old and from Honduras. The mother told him they had been travelling for a month to get to the US border and apply for asylum.

When the mother set her daughter down so that she could be searched and the young girl began to cry, Moore admitted that he “was almost overcome with emotion myself.”

Site highlights each day to your inbox.

Follow Business Insider Australia on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Instagram.

Tesla 'whistleblower' files tip with the SEC

England is already in an amazing position for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar

The Australian dollar's been hosed

11 photos show how close Merkel was with Obama, and how different things are with Trump

Buying 'Access' To A Major Airport's Security System Apparently Costs Just $13

Updates On Black Adam, Quantum And Woody, And More

The Dummy That Ruined Your Childhood Is Back In The First Goosebumps 2: Haunted Halloween Trailer

Thai Boys Were Reportedly Sedated And In A Semi-Conscious State During Rescue

Spec Shootout: Microsoft Surface Go Vs iPad Vs Galaxy Tab S3

This Year's Banned Pokémon Anime Episode

Fine Art: Boss Fight

What Could Possibly Be Scarier Than A Smarter Hulk?

Hump Day Deals: Free Android Apps, 25% Off eBay, Cheap Dell Laptops

ACCC Has A Plan To Make Electricity Cheaper

Help Teens De-Stress With These 'Getting Things Done' Hacks 

If Words Hurt, It's Because You Let Them 