
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

12/18/2017 07:15 AM EST

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj) 

Good Monday morning!


Story Continued Below

To make a slight modification to an Amy Winehouse lyric, what kind of duckery is this?

Luckily, Slick Rick isn’t playing tomorrow, because I’d have to miss the gig (he will be in New York next Friday, though). Today the Legislature is at it again, and what we're calling the Get Dana Redd a Better Pension Act of 2017, which sailed through the Senate’s budget committee with absolutely no debate last week, is up for a vote in the full Senate and in the Assembly Appropriations Committee. There are dozens of other bills up that we reporters will have to pay some attention to. 

We’re also staring down a giant subsidy for nuclear power on Wednesday, and all kinds of things before Phil Murphy takes power, ending the Sweeney/Norcross and Christie alliance that has been so fruitful.

If you want to hear more about lame duckery, I was on WNYC to talk about it Saturday. 

WHERE’S CHRISTIE? No public schedule

WHERE’S MURPHY? 11 am personnel announcement at transition headquarters in Trenton

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: State Sen. Ronald Rice, former legislative candidate Christopher Gagliardi, ImpactNJ’s Cullen McAuliffe

QUOTE OF THE DAY:  “Your brother, you better get him out of here. He is a predator. He is a menace to our city. And if you know, you taught us best. If you see something, you say something. I learned that from you, Ras Baraka. So I’ve seen something, I heard something and I’m saying something. I’m speaking for every person, every female, every male that can’t come forward and are afraid to come forward." — Former Newark employee Dannisha Clyburn, who accuses Obalaji Baraka of sexually assaulting her

WHAT TRENTON MADE

BECAUSE CHRISTIE NEVER SAID ANYTHING BAD ABOUT CORZINE AFTER NOVEMBER 2009 — “Christie miffed after successor poses next to cutout photo of him on New Jersey beach,” by The Record’s Dustin Racioppi: “Gov. Chris Christie isn’t amused about his successor’s latest photo-op in New Jersey. Christie said it ‘doesn’t matter’ to him personally that Democratic governor-elect Phil Murphy posed with a cutout of the now-famous image of the Republican governor lounging on the beach, but he is disappointed by it and the message it sends to the public … ‘I think someone’s got to remind him that the campaign is over. It’s disappointing because we’ve been so open and so welcoming to him, and not playing politics at all,’ Christie said Friday night … ‘I just think it sends a really terrible message to people about, if you say you want to bring people together and do all the rest of that, then what you should want to do is focus on the future and not be looking at the past,’ Christie said.” Read the report

—“Murphy laughs off Beachgate photo flap, foes pan pic as 'tacky'” Read the report

BLAME IT ON AMTRAK — “Christie allies at NJ Transit got promotions, raises as agency struggled to fund its operations,” by The Record’s Curtis Tate: “NJ Transit hired or promoted 10 employees connected to Gov. Chris Christie's administration as it hemorrhaged staff needed to operate safely and reliably, The Record and NorthJersey.com found after reviewing months of legislative testimony, court documents and state employee salary data. The jobs at the nation's third largest public-transit agency all came with raises — some bumps as high as $70,000 — and ranged from the agency's chief of staff to positions in charge of planning and procurement to those managing Superstorm Sandy resilience projects. They include a chief of compliance who makes more than her ousted predecessor and a deputy executive director who made more than the interim executive director at the time. One, Jared Pilosio, was a protege of David Wildstein, the admitted mastermind of the Bridgegate lane closures at the George Washington Bridge. Wildstein pleaded guilty and cooperated with prosecutors, leading to the conviction of two other Christie aides. The salary bumps range from $13,000 to as high as $70,000. The median salary for a state worker in 2016 was $72,953, according to the state Civil Service Commission. All but one of the 10 employees with Christie connections wound up making more than $100,000 at NJ Transit. Most of the promotions occurred since 2014.” Read the report

—“Former Christie intern now manages $1.3 billion in NJ Transit Sandy projects” Read the report

DONNY DONE — “Ex-Gov. resigns from hospital board amid questions about friend's 'low-show' job,” by NJ Advance Media’s Susan K. Livio: “Former Gov. Donald DiFrancesco said Sunday he will step down at the end of the month as board chairman of New Jersey's only public acute-care hospital, amid revelations he had promoted a friend to serve as his assistant in a ‘low-show’ six-figure job. Gov. Chris Christie accepted DiFrancesco's resignation as chairman of University Hospital in Newark, Christie's spokesman Brian Murray said. NJ Advance Media on Monday reported that DiFrancesco had recommended attorney Jill Cooperman for a legal position at the hospital in 2013, shortly after he became chairman.” Read the report

WHERE WAS JOE D? — “Phil Murphy leads N.J. delegation to hurricane-ravaged Puerto Rico,” by NJ Advance Media’s Matt Arco: “Gov.-elect Phil Murphy will land in storm-ravaged Puerto Rico Friday to lead a nearly two-dozen New Jersey delegation to the island that was ravaged by Hurricane Maria in September. Murphy and the state's future first lady, Tammy Murphy, are scheduled to meet with Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rossello. They also plan to tour a shelter and get briefed on the recovery effort. ‘With the nation's third-largest Puerto Rican population, hundreds of thousands of New Jerseyans have family and other loved ones on the island living in Maria's aftermath,’ Murphy said in a statement. ‘We are going to send a clear message that we have not forgotten our fellow countrymen.’” Read the report

MEDICAL EXAMINER STILL HASN’T DECLARED MURPHY’S RELATIONSHIP WITH SWEENEY DEAD EVEN THOUGH IT’S OBVIOUS TO EVERYONE — “Murphy calls for 'wholesale reform' of medical examiner system,” by NJ Advance Media’s Stephen Stirling: “Gov.-elect Phil Murphy joined other legislators in calling for a complete overhaul of New Jersey's medical examiner system, after an NJ Advance Media investigation revealed decades of dysfunction had left it one of the worst in the nation. The 18-month investigation, published Thursday, revealed years of underfunding and mismanagement had led to lost body parts, potentially innocent people sitting in jail and possible crimes not being investigated. Families also face months-long wait times to learn how their loved ones died and the state turns away two-thirds of the cases referred to them for review. ‘The results of this investigation are shocking and appalling,’ Murphy said, before departing for a relief mission to Puerto Rico. ‘I will never accept a process that allows for mistakes that send innocent people to jail, let criminals go free, and deny the loved ones of those who have passed the truth about what happened. Wholesale reform of our medical examiner system is needed.’” Read the report

—“You're dead in New Jersey. See how well your death would be investigated.” Read the report

DEMS: ‘SKIP ROCKS’ — “Coughlin picks former assemblyman as majority's executive director,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “A lobbyist and former assemblyman will lead the Democratic majority’s staff in the lower house, incoming Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin announced Friday. Anthony ‘Skip’ Cimino, most recently of the Kaufman Zita Group, will be the Assembly Democrats’ executive director. ‘I am proud that someone with Skip’s experience in the public and private sectors will lead the Assembly Majority Office during this critical time,’ Coughlin said in a statement announcing the hire. ‘Skip’s depth of knowledge will be a tremendous asset for our caucus and for our state.’ Democrats netted two more seats in the Assembly in last month’s election, increasing their majority to 54 of 80 seats. Coughlin then ousted Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto, who will relinquish the top post in the lower house in January. Cimino will replace Prieto loyalist Mary Messenger.” Read the report

—State Sen. Raymond Lesniak and former Gob. Jon Corzine were honored at Kean University for the 10th anniversary of New Jersey abolishing the death penalty. Lesniak posted a video here. 

—"Opinion: Supersize deductions to cope with higher minimum wage" Read the column

—“PSEG chairman: Electricity bill hike is real, if N.J.'s nuclear power shuts down | Opinion” Read the op-ed

CARTOON BREAK — “Murphy wants all of us to get high - all the time,” by Drew Sheneman See the cartoon

THE TRUMP ERA

WE’RE STILL SCREWED — “Historic tax reform vote lined up with GOP bill finalized,” by POLITICO's Brian Faler, Seung Min Kim and Colin Wilhelm: Republicans unveiled on Friday their final, compromise plan to rewrite the tax code, putting them on the brink of a historic victory in Congress that’s sure to reverberate into next year’s elections. The legislation would cut both business and individual taxes as part of the biggest tax revamp in 30 years. It is poised to be carved into law next week when Congress sends it to President Donald Trump for his signature. House Speaker Paul Ryan told Republican lawmakers on a phone call that the House will vote on the plan Tuesday, before the Senate, according to a person on the call. Under the bill, a long-standing deduction for state and local taxes would be capped at $10,000 for property taxes plus either sales or income taxes.” Read the report

FRELINGHUYSEN THREATENS TO SEND LETTERS TO EMPLOYERS OF ALL WHO VOTED AGAINST HIM — “Frelinghuysen has lots of power in D.C. But his pro-Trump votes could cost him big in N.J.,” by NJ Advnace Media’s Jonathan D. Salant: “It was supposed to be a game-changer for New Jersey, a state so long absent from having any real power on Capitol Hill. After waiting for years, Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen had finally ascended to the chairmanship of the House Appropriations Committee, a panel that truly wields clout because it doles out dollars. But the big job could cost him dearly back home in New Jersey. Frelinghuysen's power has ironically weakened him politically as House Republicans have passed unpopular legislation that could hurt New Jersey on health care, taxes and other issues.” Read the report

BOOKER TO LAY LOW AT NEWARK WATERSHED MEETING BECAUSE NO ONE WOULD LOOK FOR HIM THERE — “Police beef up Sen. Cory Booker's security following death threat,” by ABC’s Rex Sakamoto: “Police in Newark, New Jersey are stepping up their protection of Sen. Cory Booker after he and his family received a death threat, Newark mayor Ras Baraka said in a statement Saturday. ‘The Newark Police Division has been notified by the United States Capitol Police (USCP) regarding a threat on the life of New Jersey Senator Cory Booker and his family members,’ Baraka said. ‘As a result, members of the Police Division’s Executive Protection Unit have been assigned to provide security at the Senator’s residence in Newark.’” Read the report

—“Booker doubles down on call for Trump's resignation, citing 'cultural shift' on harassment” Read the report

—“Julie &amp; Mike untangle dreaded tax plan; GOP's Roy Moore puzzle; Trump's attacks on Russia probe” Read the report

—“Rep. Josh Gottheimer hosts federal tax reform summit for local mayors” Read the report

LOCAL

NEWARK — “Former Newark employee alleges she was sexually assaulted by mayor's older brother,” by TAPIntoNewark’s Elana Knopp: “A former City of Newark employee has come forward with allegations of sexual assault against Obalaji Baraka, the older brother of Newark Mayor Ras Baraka. Dannisha Clyburn, 38—known by many as Queen Hatari—claimed in an exclusive TAPinto Newark interview that she was touched inappropriately and without her consent by Obalaji Baraka in 2013. She claims he attempted to assault her again in 2015. The allegations come on the heels of a December 9 Facebook video posted by Clyburn in which she addresses members of the Baraka administration, his family members and allies. Clyburn, a Newark native, said on the video she was speaking for women and girls in the city who were afraid to speak out about what she called a pattern of inappropriate behavior. ‘There are some other girls that are afraid,’ Clyburn said in the Dec. 9 video.” Read the report

HUDSON COUNTY — “Federal report cites poor treatment of immigration detainees at Hudson County jail,” by The Record’s Monsy Alvarado: “he Hudson County jail, where an undocumented immigrant was detained before he died in custody in June, was among four immigration detention facilities that were found to have exposed detainees to inhumane treatment, denied them prompt medical care and served them food that had not been properly handled, according to an inspection report released Thursday. Those violations were among several cited in a 19-page report, prepared by the Department of Homeland Security's Office of Inspector General, that was based on interviews with immigration detainees and staff members at five detention centers across the United States, as well as a review of documents. The inspections found that at some facilities, medical care was delayed and not properly documented, detainees had inadequate access to hygienic supplies like toilet paper and toothpaste, and inmates were served spoiled or moldy food.” Read the report

DONALD PAYNE JR. TO ENDORSE GUARDIAN CONGRESSIONAL CANDIDACY BECAUSE BOWTIES — “Exit interview with Atlantic City Mayor Don Guardian: ‘I was the adult in the room’,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Amy S. Rosenberg: “After four tumultuous years, the bow-tied, cerebral, gay Republican Don Guardian, perhaps the unlikeliest of Atlantic City mayors, will leave office Jan. 1, to be replaced by Democratic Councilman Frank Gilliam, who defeated him in a close election. During his one term, five casinos closed, the city teetered on the edge of bankruptcy, and a hostile Gov. Christie executed a takeover. Still, Guardian never stopped smiling, except maybe when he was talking about Christie. He accused his mayoral opponent of exploiting improperly obtained absentee ballots, but was unable to get traction, even after hiring a private investigator. He voted for Hillary Clinton. He’s contemplating running for the congressional seat being vacated by Rep. Frank LoBiondo and also is looking to work in the new Murphy administration — on municipal issues. Despite being turned out after one term, Guardian says he still feels the love of his adopted city — even from residents who he says ‘We’re giving out turkeys in front of the [Police Athletic League] on a cold day. and people were saying they loved me,’ Guardian recalled in an impromptu sit-down in his office. ‘And I said, `You took the 30 dollars and voted for the other guy. And now I’m here to give you a turkey. You love me, but that didn’t turn into a vote. It did turn into $30, which I know you needed, and here’s a turkey, which I know you need too.’ It was just ironic, and that’s just Atlantic City.” Read the report

HOBROKEN — “How Hoboken SantaCon descended into a drunken violent day,” by NJ Advance Media: “Hoboken may have welcomed its final Santacon this weekend after more than a dozen arrests and reports of bar fights across the Mile Square City. Mayor-elect Ravi Bhalla tweeted that SantaCon isn't welcome in Hoboken and that he would review options. "We shouldn't have to subsidize a few bars getting rich off our tax dollars!" Hoboken Police Chief Ken Ferrante posted a running commentary, underpinned with growing disgust, as the day got out of hand.” Read the report

EFFORT UNDERWAY TO GET MOE OR LARRY TO RUN — “Censure fallout: Monmouth GOP chairman says Curley shouldn't get party backing in 2018,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Susanne Cervenka: “Monmouth County GOP chairman Shaun Golden says the county party shouldn't back Freeholder John Curley for re-election in 2018 because of a sexual harassment investigation that led to last week's censure vote, according to a letter that went out to some county Republicans. In the undated letter, Golden repeated the accusations against Curley made in last week's censure vote, which included using profane terms toward women and homosexual employees, making sexual comments including one about a female elected official in front of county employees and publicly criticizing county employees in front of other employees. ‘Although John has done good works during his tenure as a public servant, we cannot stand for, ignore or condone this reprehensible behavior,’ Golden's letter said.” Read the report

WHO’S VAAD? — “Lakewood Vaad: Fraud amnesty applicants made mistakes, face stiff penalties,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Stacy Barchenger: “Just two days after the close of an amnesty program for welfare cheats in Ocean County, the Orthodox Jewish community's council of leaders touted the perks for taxpayers. If even a fraction of Lakewood residents participated, that would mean ‘millions of dollars may have been recovered for the taxpayers,’ reads a statement from the Lakewood Vaad, a group of businessmen and rabbis that advocates for the Orthodox community. The state comptroller has yet to release details about the number of participants and how much money was recovered through the amnesty program, though that information is expected to become publicly available soon. The deadline to apply was Tuesday. The Vaad statement acknowledges some people did apply and says not all purposefully misled the government.” Read the report

—“Lakewood housing: Where is the 40-year-old contract giving Meir Hertz power?” Read the report

—“3rd candidate announces he's in Trenton mayoral race” Read the report

—“Newark's crime decline and old-school policing | Di Ionno” Read the column

—“20 years of Joe D? 5 challenges Dem power broker faces in reelection bid” Read the report

—“Camden has a new development czar, and he feels the stars are finally aligning for the city” Read the report

—“N.J. town votes 3-2 to extend ban on bear hunting’ Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

ROOM FOR ONE MORE AT THE RUTGERS FOOD SCIENCE DEPARTMENT? — “NJ imam to be ‘retrained’ after hoping, in sermon, that all Jews die,” by The Times of Israel: “A New Jersey imam will reportedly be sent for 'retraining' after expressing hope in a sermon last week that all Jews would be killed and previously blaming a deadly Sinai terror attack on Jews. Last week, Sheikh Aymen Elkasaby gave sermons at the Islamic Center of Jersey City in which he called for ‘Allah to wreak vengeance’ on the ‘Jewish oppressors’ of the Temple Mount and to “kill them down to the very last one,” according to translations provided by the Middle East Media Research Institute.” Read the report 

NORCROSSED OUT — “Proposed $2 billion merger of South Jersey hospitals nixed,” by NJ Advance Media’s Bill Duhart: “Cooper University Health Care announced Friday its planned $2 billion acquisition of South Jersey hospitals, including Lourdes Health Systems, will not go forward. ‘Our team has invested thousands of hours and millions of dollars in reviewing the proposed transaction,’ Cooper CEO Adrienne Kirby said. ‘Based upon this review, unfortunately, we will not be able to consummate the contemplated transaction. We are all disappointed, but did not make this decision lightly.’ The deal included Trinity Health's New Jersey assets, including Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center, Lourdes Medical Center of Burlington, and St. Francis Medical Center in Trenton.” Read the report

DO NOT READ IF EATING BREAKFAST — “Cadavers in the ballroom: Doctors practice their craft in America’s favorite hotels,” by Reuters’ Elizabeth Culliford: “In October, doctors practiced on human torsos in a ballroom of the Hyatt Regency Jersey City on the Hudson in New Jersey. A Reuters reporter witnessed one participant holding out his arm and asking event attendants whether there was soap or a sanitary wipe in the room so he could clean himself. Told there weren’t, he left the ballroom, arm still outstretched … At the conference at the Hyatt in Jersey City, plastic and other floor covering lay only in the areas just beneath the gurneys that held body parts. Elsewhere in the room, carpet was exposed. New Jersey health officials don’t regulate these workshops.” Read the report

*EXCEPT FOR CARS WITH POLICE UNION PLATES — “N.J. traffic tickets: Windshield, license plate tickets on the rise,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Mike Davis: “Is there a little pine tree air freshener hanging from your rear view mirror? Does the piece of plastic around your license plate proclaim you the "No. 1 New York Mets fan"? Don't be surprised if a police officer slaps you with a traffic ticket for either. Over the last two years, the number of violations issued in New Jersey over the state's license plate and windshield obstruction laws have increased by 8 percent.” Read the report

—“Here's how many bears were killed in the 2017 hunt” Read the report

—“These hero police officers took down the NYC pipe bomb explosion suspect” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC