
                                                            Politico

POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington 

Get the Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.


            By ANNA PALMER (anna@politico.com; @apalmerdc), JAKE SHERMAN (sherman@politico.com; @JakeSherman) and  DANIEL LIPPMAN (daniel@politico.com; @dlippman)

10/23/2017 06:32 AM EDT

Good Monday morning. SPOTTED -- BARACK OBAMA playing golf yesterday with Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors, golfer Jordan Spieth and Under Armour CEO Kevin Plank in Dallas. Curry and Spieth are two of the highest-profile athletes sponsored by Under Armour. Obama headed to Dallas after raising money in College Station, Texas, for the spate of hurricanes that hit the U.S. in the past few months. 

TRUMP AND PENCE CALL INTO HOUSE GOP CONFERENCE CALL … RACHAEL BADE: “Trump to House GOP: Pass budget bill so we can get tax reform”: “President Donald Trump had a tough message for House Republicans on Sunday: Get to work on tax reform and pass the Senate budget immediately -- or face a bloodbath in 2018. … Trump’s presence on the call highlights the sensitivity of this week's budget vote for House Republicans. Backing the Senate bill would require House Republicans to endorse a budget that is not balanced over 10 years, adds $1.5 trillion to the federal deficit through tax cuts, and does not include spending reductions the House had incorporated in its own earlier draft of the budget. … 


Story Continued Below

“On the call Sunday, Ryan said passing the Senate budget would allow the House to potentially clear a tax bill before Thanksgiving. He said they need to move the tax package to the Senate by then if they want any hope of passing tax cuts by the end of the year, his long-stated goal. … Trump also predicted the package would get some support from Senate Democrats, whom he’s hosted at the White House recently. But Trump promised the group he’s ultimately on their team: ‘I’m a Republican inside-out and backwards,’ one person recounted him saying.” http://politi.co/2y0cilI 

-- READ BETWEEN THE LINES: Yes, this could help save a week or so in the tax reform process. No, it does not mean that tax reform -- writing and passing a rewrite of the tax code -- will be an easy process. 

-- JONATHAN SWAN of Axios reports that Republicans “are currently exploring not cutting the income tax rate for people who earn $1 million or more per year.” http://bit.ly/2yIojva Multiple Republicans have even suggested to us the tax rate could go from 39.6% to 40% for top earners. It's tough to separate hyperbole from reality, so take this with a grain of salt. If it happened, it would would strip Democrats of a talking point, and could help with revenue. On the other hand, Republicans would be raising a tax rate. We doubt it will happen, but it does give a sense of where the debate is.

**SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/2lQswbh

ATTN. MR. PRESIDENT -- JOHN MCCAIN last night on C-SPAN: “One aspect of the conflict, by the way, that I will never, ever countenance is that we drafted the lowest-income level of America and the highest-income level found a doctor that would say that they had a bone spur. That is wrong. That is wrong. If we’re going to ask every American to serve, every American should serve.” http://bit.ly/2gvQmUu (h/t @kylegriffin1) 

BUT, BUT, BUT -- “Graham and Trump become buds after campaign of insults,” by Burgess Everett and Josh Dawsey: “[Lindsey] Graham is transforming himself from one of Trump’s fiercest critics to his chief congressional translator, talking to the president sometimes multiple times in a day. He insists Trump is ‘growing into the job’ and becoming more somber, a far different figure than who Graham once railed against as a long-shot presidential candidate. A White House official said that Graham’s alliance with Trump ‘is one of the best we have on the Hill.’ How long this will last is anyone’s guess: Graham is known as one of the more blunt-spoken senators, and it might just be a matter of time before he whacks the president and Trump hits back.” http://politi.co/2hYiMqG

QUOTE OF THE DAY, from Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), in a Phil Rucker, Sean Sullivan and Paul Kane piece on Trump's negotiation skills: “'I think the Democrats are crazy to not try and deal with him directly,' he said. 'Seven years ago, he was a Democrat. It doesn’t take any brains to realize that he’d be open.'" http://wapo.st/2h083fB 

SIREN -- “Democrats’ early money haul stuns GOP,” by Elena Schneider: “Democratic candidates are reporting historic early fundraising totals, alarming GOP strategists and raising the prospect that 2018 could feature the most expansive House battlefield in years. Animated by opposition to President Donald Trump and the Republican congressional majorities, at least 162 Democratic candidates in 82 GOP-held districts have raised over $100,000 so far this year, according to a POLITICO analysis of the latest FEC data. That’s about four times as many candidates as House Democrats had at this point before the 2016 or 2014 elections, and it’s more than twice as many as Republicans had running at this point eight years ago, on the eve of capturing the House in the 2010 wave election.

 “Nearly three dozen Republican incumbents were outraised by Democratic challengers in the third quarter of this year – a stunning figure. Nine GOP incumbents already trail a Democratic opponent in cash on hand, increasing the likelihood that many veteran incumbents will face tough opposition for the first time in years. The Democrats’ fundraising success, especially from a glut of candidates who have never run for office before, is unsettling to those charged with protecting the GOP majority. ‘That’s something that should get every Republican’s attention in Washington,’ said Jason Roe, a Republican strategist who works on House races. ‘These first-timers are printing money.’” http://politi.co/2gwEou0

WARNING -- “U.S. Preparing to Put Nuclear Bombers Back on 24-Hour Alert,” by Defense One’s Marcus Weisgerber at Barksdale Air Force Base, Louisiana: “The U.S. Air Force is preparing to put nuclear-armed bombers back on 24-hour ready alert, a status not seen since the Cold War ended in 1991. That means the long-dormant concrete pads at the ends of this base’s 11,000-foot runway -- dubbed the ‘Christmas tree’ for their angular markings -- could once again find several B-52s parked on them, laden with nuclear weapons and set to take off at a moment’s notice.” http://bit.ly/2yGVCOW

AP’S ANDY TAYLOR: “Senate presses ahead on $36.5B disaster relief package”: “The Senate is pushing ahead on a $36.5 billion hurricane relief package that would give Puerto Rico a much-needed infusion of cash. The measure also would replenish rapidly dwindling emergency disaster accounts and provide $16 billion to permit the financially troubled federal flood insurance program to pay an influx of Harvey-related claims. But it rejects requests from the powerful Texas and Florida congressional delegations for additional money to rebuild after hurricanes Harvey and Irma.” http://bit.ly/2xfznwn

-- M.I.A. -- NYT A1, “Still Waiting for FEMA in Texas and Florida After Hurricanes,” by Manny Fernandez, Lizette Alvarez and Ron Nixon: “According to interviews with dozens of storm victims, one of the busiest hurricane seasons in years has overwhelmed federal disaster officials. As a result, the government’s response in the two biggest affected states — Texas and Florida — has been scattershot: effective in dealing with immediate needs, but unreliable and at times inadequate in handling the aftermath, as thousands of people face unusually long delays in getting basic disaster assistance. ... People who call [FEMA’s] help line at 1-800-621-FEMA have waited on hold for two, three or four hours before they even speak to a FEMA representative.” http://nyti.ms/2gvpiEL

BIG NEWS ON K STREET -- “Mueller Now Investigating Democratic Lobbyist Tony Podesta,” by NBC’s Tom Winter and Julia Ainsley: “Tony Podesta and the Podesta Group are now the subjects of a federal investigation being led by Special Counsel Robert Mueller, three sources with knowledge of the matter told NBC News. The probe of Podesta and his Democratic-leaning lobbying firm grew out of Mueller's inquiry into the finances of former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort, according to the sources. … Manafort had organized a public relations campaign for a non-profit called the European Centre for a Modern Ukraine (ECMU). Podesta’s company was one of many firms that worked on the campaign, which promoted Ukraine’s image in the West.

“The sources said the investigation into Podesta and his company began as more of a fact-finding mission about the ECMU and Manafort’s role in the campaign, but has now morphed into a criminal inquiry into whether the firm violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act, known as FARA.” http://nbcnews.to/2zJVr42

WAR REPORT -- NYT A1, “A Newly Assertive C.I.A. Expands Its Taliban Hunt in Afghanistan,” by Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Eric Schmitt and Adam Goldman: “The C.I.A. is expanding its covert operations in Afghanistan, sending small teams of highly experienced officers and contractors alongside Afghan forces to hunt and kill Taliban militants across the country, according to two senior American officials, the latest sign of the agency’s increasingly integral role in President Trump’s counterterrorism strategy. The assignment marks a shift for the C.I.A. in the country, where it had primarily been focused on defeating Al Qaeda and helping the Afghan intelligence service. The C.I.A. has traditionally been resistant to an open-ended campaign against the Taliban, the primary militant group in Afghanistan, believing it was a waste of the agency’s time and money and would put officers at greater risk as they embark more frequently on missions.” http://nyti.ms/2yHJrS7

IF YOU READ ONE THING – “The Family That Built an Empire of Pain: The Sackler dynasty’s ruthless marketing of painkillers has generated billions of dollars—and millions of addicts,” by The New Yorker’s Patrick Radden Keefe: “While the Sacklers are interviewed regularly on the subject of their generosity, they almost never speak publicly about the family business, Purdue Pharma—a privately held company, based in Stamford, Connecticut, that developed the prescription painkiller OxyContin. Upon its release, in 1995, OxyContin was hailed as a medical breakthrough, a long-lasting narcotic that could help patients suffering from moderate to severe pain. The drug became a blockbuster, and has reportedly generated some thirty-five billion dollars in revenue for Purdue. But OxyContin is a controversial drug ...

“Since 1999, two hundred thousand Americans have died from overdoses related to OxyContin and other prescription opioids. ... The truth was that the dangers of OxyContin were intrinsic to the drug— and Purdue knew it. ... Almost immediately after OxyContin’s release, there were signs that people were abusing it in rural areas like Maine and Appalachia. ... The company did not pull the drug from shelves, however, or acknowledge that it was addictive.” http://bit.ly/2yHA9Fu ... Photo portfolio by Philip Montgomery with text by Margaret Talbot on the opioid epidemic in Montgomery County, Ohio http://bit.ly/2ztQjQD

THE BANNON/BREITBART NEXUS -- “Steve Bannon’s return blurs the line between Breitbart News and his political operation,” by USA Today’s Eliza Collins: “Michael Grimm, a former congressman who went to prison for tax evasion, came to Washington, D.C., earlier this month seeking Bannon’s support in his run for his old congressional seat. [Matt] Boyle sat in with Bannon and his allies for the meeting, according to Grimm aide Michael Caputo, who also attended. ... Boyle ‘didn’t ask questions, but as the meeting turned from “Who are you and should we support you?” to “OK we’re going to support you. What are we gonna to do for you?” he got more involved in the discussions,’ Caputo said. ‘It seemed to me like he gained interest and he said, “Look, this is something that fits into our editorial direction. How can we work together?”” https://usat.ly/2zJaMlo

-- “National Democrats are jittery about Va. governor’s race,” by WaPo’s Dave Weigel and Ed O’Keefe in Las Vegas: “The [DNC] gathered here over the past week with one worry on every activist’s mind: We’d better not lose the Virginia governor’s race. It’s a surprising case of the jitters over a place that hasn’t elected a Republican to statewide office in eight years — and that voted resoundingly against Donald Trump last year. But nationally, Democrats haven’t won a marquee race since losing the presidency. They lag Republicans in fundraising. A loss for Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam against Republican Ed Gillespie on Nov. 7 could stir doubts about message and strategy just as the party is gearing up nationally for next year’s all-important midterm elections.” http://wapo.st/2l9DYia

THE ADMINISTRATION -- “White and male: broader bureaucracy mirrors Trump cabinet’s profile,” by Reuters’ Jason Lange: “[R]ecently available government data on the ethnic and gender make-up of the broader Trump administration shows that with over 1,000 mid-level political jobs filled by mid-year the appointees look much like the top leadership: mostly white and male. [OPM] numbers analyzed by Reuters show that 88 percent of such appointees were non-Hispanic white and 62 percent were men. By comparison, in the final year of Barack Obama’s Democratic administration, non-Hispanic whites made up 67 percent of that group and men accounted for 47 percent - closer to what the U.S. population looks like.” http://reut.rs/2hYD8jw

-- “Trump voting commission criticized for lack of transparency,” by AP’s Christina A. Cassidy: “President Donald Trump’s advisory commission on election integrity has integrity questions of its own -- with some of its own members raising concerns about its openness. This past week, two members fired off letters to commission staff complaining about a lack of information about the panel’s agenda and demanding answers about its activities. That comes as Democratic U.S. senators are requesting a government investigation of the commission for ignoring formal requests from Congress. The criticism from the commissioners was remarkable because it came from insiders — the very people who are supposed to be privy to its internal discussions and plans.” http://bit.ly/2yBQa0Q

RUSSIA UPDATE -- “Hopes Dim for Congressional Russia Inquiries as Parties Clash,” by NYT’s Nick Fandos: “All three committees looking into Russian interference — one in the House, two in the Senate — have run into problems, from insufficient staffing to fights over when the committees should wrap up their investigations. The Senate Judiciary Committee’s inquiry has barely started, delayed in part by negotiations over the scope of the investigation. Leaders of the Senate Intelligence Committee, while maintaining bipartisan comity, have sought to tamp down expectations about what they might find. Nine months into the Trump administration, any notion that Capitol Hill would provide a comprehensive, authoritative and bipartisan accounting of the extraordinary efforts of a hostile power to disrupt American democracy appears to be dwindling.” http://nyti.ms/2gwK9b2

-- SUSAN GLASSER: “‘This Myth About the Great and Horrible Putin’”: “What if we’re wrong about Vladimir Putin? To read the U.S. coverage these days about the Russian president, you’d think he’s 10 feet tall, a puppetmaster who merely has to yank the strings of his hacker army in the Kremlin to make democracy-loving Americans quake over their iPhones, an unfettered colossus at home prepared to challenge the United States on many fronts abroad.

“There’s just one problem with this view: Virtually all of the smartest Russia hands I know and many Russians themselves disagree with it. Many fear, in fact, that by building Putin up, the Americans he disdains have given the Russian leader exactly the fearsome geopolitical reputation he craves. Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who was Russia’s richest man until he was jailed for a decade by Putin, stripped of his company and eventually forced into exile, calls it ‘this myth about the Great and Horrible Putin.’” http://politi.co/2z0Vrzv ... Transcript http://politi.co/2yIs6He 

 2020 WATCH -- “Trump-aligned super PAC to hold fundraising meeting in Texas Tuesday,” by Alex Isenstadt: “President Donald Trump’s political operation will accelerate its planning for the 2018 and 2020 elections this week, with a group of deep-pocketed donors gathering in Texas to plot the path forward, according to four people involved in planning the event. Oilman T. Boone Pickens will host Trump’s financial backers at his Mesa Vista ranch on Tuesday. The group of two dozen contributors, which will include Republican bundler Roy Bailey and businessman Tommy Hicks, will lay out plans to raise money for the Trump-aligned America First Action super PAC. ... Those involved in the group include energy executive Harold Hamm, real estate investor Jim Wilson, businessman Doug Deason and investor Jim Lee.” http://politi.co/2l8lwqh

TRUMP’S MONDAY -- Trump is meeting with Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong and will have a working lunch with him. The two will give joint statements. This afternoon, Trump will present the Medal of Honor to Gary Rose, a combat medic who served in the Vietnam war (backstory from USA Today: https://usat.ly/2yFzhzD).

-- DEPT OF CORRECTIONS: Yesterday's Playbook said Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong was spotted dining Saturday night with K.T. McFarland, who is awaiting confirmation to become U.S. ambassador to Singapore. Our tipster was incorrect; McFarland was not at the dinner. We apologize for the error.

THE JUICE … 

-- FIRST IN PLAYBOOK: MAX ROSE, a Democrat who is running for his party’s nomination in the 11th district of New York, is up with a bio spot directed by Jim Margolis and Anson Kaye of GMMB. Rose is a veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan and received the Bronze Star and Purple Heart for his service. The video includes war footage. Rose, a former healthcare executive, raised $320,000 in two months.

 WHY YOU SHOULD CARE: Sure, the Staten Island and southern Brooklyn anchored district is held by a Republican, and the shiny object at the moment is the Republican-on-Republican primary between Michael Grimm and Rep. Dan Donovan. But the district is only an R+3 -- meaning it votes for Republicans by an average of three points. That’s completely winnable by a Democrat in a good year for the party. In fact, Democrat Michael McMahon held the seat before Grimm. McMahon is now the district attorney for Richmond County, which includes this congressional district. TREND ALERT: It’s another example of Democrats running veterans and touting their experience in the military. 2:50 video http://bit.ly/2gw6vtj

-- Paul Steinhauser (@steinhauserNH1): “NEW: In an intv. with me minutes ago in NH, @BernieSanders said he would run for re-election in #2018 as an independent #NHPolitics #fitn” http://bit.ly/2gCFtEh

SPORTS BLINK -- “Justin Timberlake invited back to Super Bowl halftime show” – AP: “Justin Timberlake has finally been invited back to the Super Bowl halftime show, 14 years after the ‘wardrobe malfunction’ with Janet Jackson caused a national controversy. The NFL announced Sunday night that Timberlake will headline the Super Bowl halftime show Feb. 4 in Minnesota. ... [H]e sang ‘Rock Your Body’ with Jackson in 2004 in Houston. That performance concluded with Timberlake ripping her costume to reveal her right breast bare except for a nipple shield.” http://bit.ly/2la0TKg


                            PHOTO DU JOUR: President Donald Trump departs Trump National Golf Club, on Oct. 22 in Sterling, Va. | Andrew Harnik/AP Photo

BOSTON GLOBE’S VICKY MCGRANE: “Elizabeth Warren starts warming up to the media”: “It was a high-profile hearing with a financial bigwig whose firm had wronged millions of consumers, a made-for-You Tube moment, as Senator Elizabeth Warren made him squirm from her perch on the Senate Banking Committee. Then the Massachusetts Democrat made a surprising move. She met with reporters.

“In what would have been routine for most of her colleagues, she took questions in the hallway outside the hearing room where she’d just been grilling former Equifax CEO Richard Smith. For Warren it was an exceedingly rare event. So rare, in fact, that her office had to announce it was happening by e-mail first. CNBC carried the informal press conference live. Those few minutes in the hallway earlier this month are part of a subtle but noteworthy shift in strategy for the liberal firebrand.” http://bit.ly/2yIlQRn 

JASON ZENGERLE in GQ, “Chris Christie’s Last Fight”: “Christie insists that he and Trump have no problems with each other -- that, in fact, they’ve been friends for years -- and it’s obviously important to him that people know he views himself and the businessman turned president as peers. ... Christie says of Trump: ‘He gets mad at me at times, he yells at me at times, but he respects me.’ Christie adds that he often yells back at Trump, although ‘less now that he’s president.’ Indeed, it’s conventional wisdom among political insiders that Christie’s problem isn’t so much with Trump as it is with Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, whose father Christie sent to prison when Christie was a federal prosecutor.

“Even on that score, Christie downplays any friction. ‘There’s a lot of history there, not between me and him but between me and his father,’ Christie says, ‘and Jared has continued to tell me that he holds no grudge against me, so I have to take him at his word.’ As for who has torpedoed him repeatedly in TrumpWorld, Christie is as philosophical as he is fatalistic. ‘When you’re as prominent a person as I’ve been, there’s more than one person shooting at you all the time,’ he says. ‘So unless you see it, you don’t necessarily know which bullet hit you.’” http://bit.ly/2yCPKax

JOSH GERSTEIN and RENUKA RAYASAM: “Teen in immigration detention takes abortion fight to full appeals court”: “Lawyers for an undocumented 17-year-old girl in a federally funded shelter in Texas are asking the full bench of a federal appeals court in Washington to permit her to have an abortion immediately despite resistance from the Trump administration. Attorneys with the American Civil Liberties Union moved Sunday night to escalate the legal fight to the full D.C. Circuit after a three-judge panel issued a 2-1 decision Friday trying to forestall a definitive ruling in the case. That panel gave authorities until the end of the month to try to find the teen an adult sponsor, who could then help her get an abortion if she still desires one.” http://politi.co/2hYiXSL

BUSINESS BURST -- “At Fidelity, New Fallout From Claims of Sexual Harassment, Bullying,” by WSJ’s Sarah Krouse and Kirsten Grind: “Fidelity Investments is moving to address long-simmering problems with workplace conduct following allegations of sexual harassment and bullying that led to the ouster of some high-profile employees at the mutual-fund giant. ... Multiple employees have complained to superiors and the company’s human-resources department about sexual harassment and other abusive behavior by portfolio managers at the equity division ... Those complaints have alleged disparaging remarks about appearance and sexual innuendo toward women, as well as bullying of both genders.” http://on.wsj.com/2h1htaJ

SPOTTED: Sens. Dean Heller (R-Nev.) and Catherine Cortez Masto (D-Nev.) both on the 1:10 p.m. American flight from Las Vegas to DCA Sunday ... Sen. Pat Leahy (D-Vt.) at the observation platform at the start of the Marine Corps Marathon on Sunday morning – pic http://bit.ly/2gDuxGr. Colin Reed and Lizzy Guyton ran the marathon; Zeke Miller ran the 10K.

ABOUT LAST NIGHT – SPOTTED last night at the Kennedy Center for the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor honoring David Letterman (WaPo write-up of the event http://wapo.st/2xZjRcF): VA Secretary David Shulkin, Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.) and Susan Blumenthal, Sen. Al Franken (D-Minn.), Sen. Mark Warner (D-Va.), Bill Murray, Jimmy Kimmel, Steve Martin, Amy Schumer, Panama Amb. Emanuel Gonzalez-Revilla, Australian Amb. Joe Hockey, Robert and Elena Allbritton, Tim Keating, Alan Fleishman, Vicki Kennedy, Heather Podesta, Adrienne Arsht, Amb. Stuart Bernstein, Matt and Abby Echols, Jim Messina, Capricia Marshall, David Rubenstein, Jay Dunn, Missy Edwards, Patrick Steel, Alexis Williams, Bob Costa, Mark and Sally Ein ...

… Linda Douglass and former Amb. John Phillips, Jake and Jennifer Tapper, Anita and Tim McBride, Susan Rice, Valerie Jarrett, Amanda Eversole, Robert Leduc, Emanuel and Luciana Gonzalez-Revilla, Eddie Vedder, Kevin Smith, Norm Macdonald, John Mulaney, Paul Shaffer, Martin Short, Thurgood Marshall Jr., Dalton Delan, Ted and Annette Lerner, Neil Chatterjee. 

--PICS by Dan Swartz -- Letterman and Paul Shaffer being interviewed on the red carpet http://bit.ly/2gxGM3F ... VA Secretary Shulkin arriving http://bit.ly/2z1gQIJ ... The after-party tent http://bit.ly/2yBBizk 

TRANSITIONS – FIRST IN PLAYBOOK: RUTH GUERRA has joined CLS Strategies as a managing director. She was previously communications director for the American Action Network and Congressional Leadership Fund and is the former director of Hispanic media at the RNC. ... Courtney Alexander has been promoted to communications director for both AAN and CLF. She previously was press secretary at those organizations.

BOBBY MORAN, VP and general manager of POLITICO, recently married BECCA SMITH, director of product development at Xometry, a tech startup in the manufacturing industry. The wedding was held in Sperryville, Virginia, at the Inn at Mount Vernon Farm. The couple met at POLITICO, where Becca used to work. Pics http://bit.ly/2zHodlO ... http://bit.ly/2yHFwoc … The couple on their honeymoon on the Amalfi coast  http://bit.ly/2h0aXB9

BIRTHWEEK (was yesterday): Ian Jannetta, press secretary for Sen. Heitkamp (D-N.D.) (hat tip: Abbie McDonough) ... (was Wednesday): BuzzFeed’s Darren Sands

BIRTHDAY OF THE DAY: Brian Ross, ABC News chief investigative correspondent, is 69. A fun fact about Brian: “In a close competition with David Muir, I was able to win the ‘Best Dancer’ trophy at a recent Diane Sawyer holiday party. She called me the ‘investigative Fred Astaire.’” Read his Playbook Plus Q&amp;A: http://politi.co/2xZiWUN 

BIRTHDAYS: Simon Rosenberg, founder of New Democrat Network, is 54 … former Sen. Mel Martinez (R-Fla.) is 71 ... Linda Thomas, director of Amazon Stories … community activist Martin Luther King III is 6-0 ... Lauren Morello, Americas bureau chief at Nature ... Carole Brand ... Karen Hobert Flynn, president at Common Cause ... Nicole Streeter, general counsel of the D.C. Public Charter School Board (h/ts Jon Haber) ... Jason Neal … Malia Rulon Herman ... The Hill’s Ellen Mitchell ... Politico’s Jackie Heinz and Richard Robinson ... James Kotecki, principal at the Kotecki Group and a Politico alum … Rachel Shabad, digital producer at Well &amp; Lighthouse ... R Street’s Caroline Kitchens (h/t David Bahr) ... Ani Chkhikvadze ... Sarah Smith ... USAID’s Sally Rey Parkinson ... Thumbtack’s Kellyn Blossom ... Kinsey Casey … Meghan Mitchum, WeWork’s head of enterprise security (h/t Kam Mumtaz) ... Sandy Maisel, political scientist at Colby College, is 72 ... Richard Rubenstein ... Corey Wilson, executive director of comms at Condé Nast ...

... Allison Preiss, managing director of comms at the Center for American Progress and former press secretary for Sens. Dodd and Brown and the Senate HELP Committee (h/ts Daniella Leger and Caren Auchman) ... Emma Racila ... Anne Filipic, president of Enroll America … NYT television reporter John Koblin ... Jennifer Paolino Romano ... GPG’s Peter Benton-Sullivan ... Conrad Lucas, chairman of the West Virginia Republican Party ... Pat Cleary ... National Law Journal’s Ryan Barber ... Darcy Spencer ... Leif Noren, chairman of CRC Public Relations (h/t Garrett Ventry) … Joe Hansard … Ken Kurson, former editor of N.Y. Observer … Rod Cory … Jacob Alperin-Sheriff ... Jessica Hoy … Sheena Tahilramani, co-founder of SVN PR ... Ekmel Gecer ... Moe Vela ... Politico Europe’s Saim Saeed … Jesus Martinez ... Halli Casser-Jayne … Annika Lichtenbaum ... Janice Enright … Carmela Isabella … Benjamin Gold (h/ts Teresa Vilmain)

****** A message from Delta Air Lines: At Delta Air Lines, we’re proud to support the causes that shape our world by giving back to the communities where we live, work, and serve. We’re committed to donating 1% of our net profits to key charities and nonprofit organizations as we strive to truly make a difference in D.C. and throughout our global communities. 

Our goal is to positively impact the world through continued investments in our current partners as well as contributions to our new partners. Our donations support education, promote health and wellness, and salute our armed service members and veterans. 

We contributed over $40 million in 2017 to charities and nonprofits around the world, and we look forward to continuing our support for many years to come. 

For more information about Delta, visit www.delta.com. ******

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ... Playbook Power Briefing  http://politi.co/2xuOiqh … New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... London Playbook  http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC