We might not have been separating children from their parents, but we MAYBE, POSSIBLY, were torturing them physically and emotionally, according to the ACLU.




	Here are some of the abuse claims alleged in the documents obtained by the ACLU.




	From ACLU San Diego:




	Physical abuse? Check. Psychological abuse? Check. Sexual abuse? Check. Child abuse, lack of care, and neglect? Check check check. All of these various abuses and tortures are very reminiscent of abuses and torture we have doled out to whichever group of brown people Americans of the day are afraid of. Some of the facilities the children are sent to after initial processing have extensive histories of abuse. Kinda like plantations, internment camps, and Indian schools, if you get my drift.




	From AP:




	Remember Abu-Ghraib prison where inmates were humiliated and tortured in various ways? Those victims ALSO had bags placed on their heads, were stripped of clothing, and at times were strapped down.














	What the holy fuck?? Didn't we outlaw torture?? What horrifying crime was this child accused of that made it necessary to lock him in a place where torture seems commonplace? Even Hannibal Lecter, WHO ACTUALLY ATE PEOPLE, was allowed to have a tiny mask that just muzzled him so he couldn't EAT MORE PEOPLE. I highly doubt these kids are psychopathic murderers who use their high IQs to lure staff into helping them escape so they can eat human livers with fava beans and nice Chianti. Right?




	CBS News reports that many of the children were sent to this facility after having been accused of participating in violent gangs, like MS-13, the boogeyman the Trump administration has been using to justify his immigration crackdown. But according to Kelsey Wong, who works at the facility, this appears to be some major bullshit.




	Even more complaints of abuse are alleged within the report released by the ACLU, with some children being held at the Shiloh Treatment Center in Texas describing being medicated against their will.




	From the Texas Tribune:




	Oh, "vitamins." Victims described being medicated until they became dizzy, disoriented, and often confused. Even in heavily medicated states, they recall the abuse from staff members, with some of that abuse resulting in serious injuries.



	It is possible that the children were being medicated to ensure that they would be quiet and malleable, making it easier for staff members to control. Regardless of their intentions, abusing medication and forcing people to be medicated against their will simply to make them easy to control is abuse.




	Forensic psychiatrist Mark. J. Mills has looked over the medical documents and court filings.




	Rep Sheila Jackson Lee has called for the closure of the Shiloh facility before, back in 2014 when allegations of abuse were revealed by the Houston Chronicle. The abuse at Shiloh goes back years, and a sister facility called Daystar Residential Inc was shut down in 2011 after a restraint death was ruled a Homicide. Shiloh itself has a history of deaths under similar circumstances. Shiloh, Daystar, and the now defunct Behavior Training Research Facility are all sister facilities run by the same group. With Daystar and the Behavior Training Research Facility now closed, why is Shiloh still licensed to operate, and why are migrant children being sent there? Why are ANY children being sent there?


[GQ/My Plain View/Texas Tribune/NBC News/WaPo/CBS News/AP/ACLU San Diego/]


	Wonderbitch is an extremely literate and angry black woman who likes to write things about many things. You can find her dishing out hot takes on Twitter @bravenakblog, or pretending to finish up her History Degree in her spare time.


It's all fun and games until Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez uses her democratic socialism to redistribute all the other districts in America TO HERSELF.

Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who won the Democratic primary in NY-14 by committing SOCIALISM SORCERY, has won another primary, because apparently she thinks she is entitled to do SOCIALISM REDISTRIBUTION of all the primaries in the whole American land TO HERSELF. Well, Wonkette has one word for that and it is PFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFT!

OK we are kidding. But she did win another primary in a district she isn't even running to represent. It is New York's 15th district, which is next door to the 14th. She didn't win the Democratic primary though, but rather the Reform Party's primary, and she won it by collecting NINE WRITE-IN VOTES. She even beat the incumbent, Democratic Rep. Jose Serrano! 

Paula White says Jesus wasn't a refugee like those gross brown migrant children. Paula White doesn't actually know shit about the Bible.

Have you heard of our friend, Jesus? He is just this dude who walks with us and talks with us and loves us just as we are without one plea, and oh yeah, almost forgot, HE DIED TO WASH AWAY YOUR MASTURBATION SINS. He is also allegedly friends with Donald Trump's "spiritual advisor" Paula White, a TV preacher, who had some thoughts to share after visiting one of Trump's jails for migrant brown children. First of all, she says the baby jails are super nice and have granite countertops and everything. 

Also:

©2018  by Commie Girl Industries, Inc