
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

04/11/2018 07:22 AM EDT

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

City Hall is heading for something new in Mayor Bill de Blasio’s second term: a budget fight. Speaker Corey Johnson unveiled a litany of priorities he said the progressive mayor should be happy to support, including subsidized Metrocards for New Yorkers in need. “The mayor is ideologically a left-of-center progressive and I think this issue should be in his wheelhouse,” Johnson said. “This aligns with many more policies that he has talked about in making our city more affordable, fair and equal — especially for those who are struggling to make ends meet.”


Story Continued Below

And as our colleague Gloria Pazmino explains, Johnson “in the past few months has been working to strike a balance between his relationship with Gov. Andrew Cuomo and de Blasio — who both openly quarrel on with each other.” There’s a request for more NYCHA funding, as well as a commitment to send $418 million to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority for subway repairs.

De Blasio, who’s charged with counting the dollars, was unenthused.

IT’S WEDNESDAY. Standardized testing for school kids starts today. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S BlLL? Delivering remarks at 32BJ SEIU’s Residential Contract Rally at 82nd Street and Park Avenue.

WHERE’S ANDREW? Making an announcement on Long Island and also speaking at the 32BJ rally.

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “THE SOCIAL NITWIT”— Daily News: “ANTI TRUST ME!”— See Them 

More Tabloids: — Newsday: “SINGH’S FINANCES ‘NOT GOOD’”— El Diario New York: “Como cerrar la brecha?”—TRANSLATION: “How to close the gap?” See Them

The Free Papers: — AM New York: “FIX FACEBOOK”— Metro New York: “FARE $HAKE”— See Them

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 2 col., above the fold: “TARGET OF RAIDS WAS MONEY PAID TO HUSH WOMEN”— 3 col., above the fold: “Wary Lawmakers Question Facebook’s Founder”— 1 col., above the fold: “U.S. Considers More Intensity for Syria Strike”— 4 col., below the fold: “Groped by Fans, Pro Cheerleaders Say Bosses Have Advice: Smile”— Wall Street Journal: — 1 col., above the fold: “Trump Asserts Power to Fire Mueller”— 4 col., above the fold: “Zuckerberg and Senators Face Off” See Them

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “You can ask in whatever dramatic tone you want, but when I am lobbied by a lobbyist I disclose it; a city lobbyist lobbying me on any matter I disclose it,” — de Blasio to a reporter Tuesday, when asked why he’d failed to disclose a meeting with top lobbyist James Capalino and nine of his clients on his public lobbying disclosures website. 

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— SENATE DEMS REUNIFY, BUT TECHNICAL CHALLENGES REMAIN — POLITICO’s Bill Mahoney: Democrats in the state Senate will submit a sheet of paper Monday saying that the eight members who currently belong to the breakaway IDC are now members of the mainline Democratic conference. The paperwork is a way to get around complicated Senate rules that attempt to prohibit the dissolution of the IDC without Republican approval. The conference will still be on the books for the time being, but will have zero members. But even after that parliamentary procedure is conducted, there are still some important technical details that seemingly have yet to be worked out a week after the Senate Democrats announced their reunification. For one, the three conferences still need to work out a plan to force the IDC to significantly trim its budget going forward. And in one area that could have significant ramifications in this fall’s elections, the IDC isn’t saying whether it has figured out a way to legally continue to spend the massive war chest it has amassed. Read more here 

— A PROPOSED BAN ON SALARY QUESTIONS — Times Union’s Dave Lombardo: “Cuomo is proposing legislation that would ban questions to prospective employees about their salary history in order to bridge the gender wage gap in New York.Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul, who served as co-chair for the state’s review of the gender wage gap. The announcement stems from a new report commissioned last year by the governor to review the causes and economic impact of the gender pay gap and identify policy solutions to end it. A main recommendation of the report was to prohibit questions about salary histories in order to halt the compounding nature of the gender pay gap. ‘By banning salary history, we can break the weight of this unfair, unequal cycle and work to achieve fair pay for all women in this state,’ said Cuomo in a statement. Last year the governor signed two executive orders that prohibited state entities from evaluating candidates based on their wage history and required state contractors to disclose data on the gender, race and ethnicity of employees. The proposed legislation would expand the prohibition on wage history questions to private employers. Women in New York earn the equivalent of 89 cents to each dollar earned by men, according to the report by the state Department of Labor. This gap is the narrowest in the country.” Read more here 

— CITIZEN ACTION BOOSTS NIXON IN WFP — POLITICO’s Jimmy Vielkind: Citizen Action of New York, a statewide progressive group and major player in the Working Families Party, announced its endorsement of Cynthia Nixon’s gubernatorial bid. Citizen Action Executive Director Karen Scharff, a co-chair of the influential third party, said the endorsement of Nixon and New York City Council Member Jumaane Williams for lieutenant governor are a reflection of dissatisfaction with Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat whom Scharff backed in 2014. WFP leaders will meet Saturday afternoon in Albany to discuss the gubernatorial primary between Cuomo, who is seeking a third term, and Nixon, an actor who starred in “Sex and the City.” Williams is challenging Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul, a former congresswoman from Erie County. The party’s convention, at which members of the state committee will select its statewide ticket, is scheduled for May 19 in Harlem. Cuomo’s team has been lobbying WFP members for several months, POLITICO reported, and is hoping leaders of organized labor will help the governor once again win the WFP nomination. Read more here

— Alexis Grenell in the Daily News: “Somehow, despite the fact that women represent 54% of the Democratic primary vote in New York, male politicians still tend to treat them as special-interest voters. In 2014, Cuomo invented an entire party to pander to them, called the Women’s Equality Party, which promptly endorsed him over his female opponent. In turn, the governor sent pink postcards exclusively to female voters about equal pay while driving around the state in a pink-accented RV to pink-ballooned rallies in a patronizing display of how a man thinks one talks to women.”

— Nixon hired Monica Barnes and Elana Leopold as fund-raisers.

— Eric B. and Rakim brought Nixon out at their concert at Irving Plaza. 

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

NYCHA FALLOUT— “Anatomy of a de Blasio Appointee’s Resignation”— Crain’s Will Bredderman: “ We've seen this movie before. Shola Olatoye, chairwoman of the New York City Housing Authority, is stepping down in the wake of a spate of negative news reports and increasingly bitter political recriminations. Political observers may have felt a creeping sensation of déjà vu at the departure: It resembled the premature exits of other appointees of Mayor Bill de Blasio, including Department of Corrections Commissioner Joseph Ponte in 2017, and Administration for Children's Services Commissioner Gladys Carrion the year prior, and top homelessness overseers before that.” Read it here 

MR. FIX-IT— New York Times’s William Neuman and J. David Goodman: “Like an aging Hollywood action star, Stanley Brezenoff — a veteran’s veteran of government service — keeps coming back for more. His latest film: “Nycha Fixer.” The plot: A salty old-timer comes out of retirement (again) to save a floundering city agency for a mayor who has nowhere else to turn. Mayor Bill de Blasio introduced the 80-year-old Mr. Brezenoff on Tuesday as the interim chairman of the New York City Housing Authority. He will eventually take the place of Shola Olatoye who, at 43, is almost half his age and is departing after four years as the authority’s chairwoman. 

— Since he became mayor in 2014, Mr. de Blasio has repeatedly leaned on Mr. Brezenoff’s skills and reputation. Mr. Brezenoff worked with Robert Linn, the commissioner of Labor Relations, early in Mr. de Blasio’s tenure, when the city was without contracts for virtually all of its labor unions. He also served as a special adviser to Anthony Shorris, Mr. de Blasio’s former first deputy mayor. In 2015, Mr. de Blasio appointed him as the chairman of the Board of Correction, which monitors the city jail system. In November 2016, Mr. de Blasio named Mr. Brezenoff interim head of the financially troubled Health and Hospitals Corporation, where he served until September. And now Mr. de Blasio has tapped him again to take over the housing authority, a vast archipelago of complexes with about 400,000 residents which is struggling with financial woes and management scandals, including missed lead paint inspections and failing heating systems.” https://goo.gl/1AX1xG 

STRAW MEN — New York Post’s Lorena Mongelli, Yoav Gonen and Bruce Golding: ”A former employee of crooked restaurateur Harendra Singh testified Tuesday that he attended a fund-raiser for Bill de Blasio at the request of his boss — who later paid him back for a $1,500 campaign contribution. The account partially corroborates previous testimony from Singh, who claims de Blasio encouraged him to make illegal, “straw” donations to himself and political pals. Paul Evwiehor, who was a maitre d’ and general manager at Singh’s now-defunct Water’s Edge restaurant in Queens, said he handed over a check during one of two fund-raisers at the eatery for which de Blasio wasn’t charged. “[Singh] was going to refund me … I got a refund a week later,” he told jurors at the corruption trial of former Nassau County Executive Ed Mangano in Central Islip federal court. Evwiehor didn’t give a date for the donation, but city Campaign Finance Board records show he made two contributions to de Blasio’s 2013 mayoral campaign: $1,500 on Dec. 21, 2011, and $2,475 on Aug. 17, 2013.” https://goo.gl/kvunN5

— WATCHING THE WATCHMEN — Daily News’s Greg Smith: “The city investigations chief has appointed a former prosecutor to independently investigate claims he overstepped his authority to fire a special school watchdog at the Department of Investigations. Commissioner Mark Peters appointed James McGovern last week as an acting deputy commissioner “for the purpose of independently investigating the claims,” DOI said in a statement released Tuesday. Anastasia Coleman, ex-Special Commissioner of Investigations for the schools, says Peters tried to force her to report to him. When she resisted, he fired her. She filed a whistleblower complaint with Corporation Counsel Zachary Carter, but on Friday Peters — stating that DOI is empowered to investigate all whistleblower claims involving city employees — appointed McGovern.” https://goo.gl/XAFvg1

AN 'EXTREME REACTION' — "As Tests Begin, Chancellor Comes Out Against 'Opt Out,'" by The New York Times' Elizabeth Harris: "New York City's school chancellor Richard A. Carranza will be the first to tell you that he has a lot to learn. Since taking over at the education department last week, he has answered most questions about current challenges or longstanding policies by saying that he is still learning, still studying, still listening. He has, however, taken a stand on one controversial topic: He does not believe children should skip the New York State tests administered each year to third through eighth graders. In an interview with NY1 last week, Mr. Carranza called the decision to refuse to take the tests an 'extreme reaction,' and seemed to echo many of the sentiments of the test's supporters." More here.

TRUMP’S NEW YORK 

BERMAN RECUSES HIMSELF — Wall Street Journal’s Erica Orden and Nicole Hong: “The interim Manhattan U.S. attorney, Geoffrey Berman, recused himself from his office’s investigation into President Donald Trump’s longtime lawyer, Michael Cohen, according to people familiar with the matter, leaving the highly sensitive probe in the hands of his deputy. The deputy U.S. attorney, Robert Khuzami, whom Mr. Berman hired upon taking office in January, previously worked as a partner at law firm Kirkland &amp; Ellis LLP and led the enforcement division of the Securities and Exchange Commission during the Obama administration. He also spent 12 years as a Manhattan federal prosecutor, including as chief of the securities fraud unit. It is unclear why Mr. Berman stepped back from the Cohen matter, but some legal experts have suggested that Mr. Berman’s involvement could have appeared improper, given his potential nomination by Mr. Trump to a permanent job in the post…

Even with Mr. Berman’s recusal, the investigation of Mr. Cohen, a broad inquiry that includes questions about a payment he made to a former porn star shortly before the 2016 election to conceal her alleged affair with Mr. Trump, has escalated the uncertainty around the leadership of one of the most prestigious prosecutors’ offices in the nation. Mr. Berman holds the job as a temporary post—with a term that ends early next month. With the expiration date approaching, the White House had been facing a deadline to nominate someone permanent to occupy the position.” Read it here. 

TRUMP, HIS LAWYER, AND THE TAXI BOSSES — BuzzFeed’s Anthony Cormier, John Templon, Chris McDaniel and Jason Leopold: “Monday’s FBI raid on President Trump's longtime personal lawyer Michael Cohen was reportedly an attempt to seek information on not just his dealings on behalf of the president, but also a more surprising topic: Cohen’s history as a New York City cab owner. Cohen’s foray into the taxi business is a little-known but formative chapter in his life, during which the lawyer from Long Island forged some of the core relationships, and honed some of the sharp-elbowed tactics, that would define his wide-ranging business career.

Special counsel Robert Mueller’s team has previously sought information about many aspects of Cohen’s professional life. Investigators have asked about a failed Ukrainian ethanol company he co-owned, which sought a deal with a powerful politician, Viktor Topolov, whose associates were members of the Russian and Ukrainian underworld. Closer to home, questions have arisen about Cohen’s work with Symon Garber and Evgeny Freidman, two Soviet-born New York taxi barons who managed his fleet, two sources with knowledge of the special counsel’s inquiry told BuzzFeed News. There is no indication that Mueller’s team is investigating Garber or Freidman for wrongdoing. One witness who was asked about them was asked about a total of 4 0 people or companies with ties to Cohen...

Cohen followed his father-in-law into the rough-and-tumble world of New York City taxis in March 1997, registering five new cab companies, including Sir Michael Hacking Corp. and Lady Laura Hacking Corp., according to New York state business registration records. His holdings grew. New York City records show Cohen, his wife, and his in-laws hold a stake in more than 15 colorfully named taxi companies such as Golden Child Cab Corp. and Smoochie Cab Corp. ...Today, about half of Cohen’s medallions are managed by a company run by Freidman, who was charged in 2017 with stealing $5 million that should have been paid to New York state, and who has also been charged with threatening to kill a former business partner’s family.” Read more here. 

FLASHBACK: Freidman is also a major fundraiser for Mayor de Blasio.

MICHAEL COHEN’S BACK TAXES — Daily News’s Reuven Blau: ”He had money to pay porn star Stormy Daniels $130,000, but not the more than $50,000 to pay the state for his medallion taxes. President Trump’s longtime personal lawyer and fixer, Michael Cohen, and his wife, Laura, owe $53,836 in unpaid taxi taxes, according to the state’s Department of Taxation and Finance. Cohen owns at least 32 taxi medallions that have been managed by associates connected to the “Taxi King,” Evgeny Freidman.

Taxi passengers must pay an added 50 cents fee during each ride. Medallion owners are required to send that money to the state to help fund MTA operations. But that hasn’t happened in some cases for Cohen’s medallions, state tax records show. The 11 tax warrants range from $2,031 to $10,166, records show. The oldest dates back to 2013, and the most recent is from this year. They were all sent to Michael Cohen directly and some list his home address on Park Ave. in Manhattan. The warrants are connected to three companies: Smoochie Cab Corp., Martha Cab Corp., and Laf Hacking Corp.” Read it here. 

— "New York Courts Act Against Lawyers Protesting Immigration Agents," by WNYC's Beth Fertig: "For the second day in a row, public defenders on Tuesday staged a walkout against the presence of Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents (ICE) in a city courthouse, this time in Queens. But the Office of Court Administration called these 'impromptu demonstrations,' that it considers disruptive and take lawyers out of the courts. After Tuesday's protest by the Legal Aid Society in Queens, Court Administration spokesman Lucian Chalfen said the agency took the unprecedented step of reassigning 10 new cases in the arraignments courtroom to other lawyers who can represent the poor...However, Tina Luongo, who heads the criminal practice at Legal Aid Society, said the ICE protests are usually during lunch breaks. Another one was held in the Bronx on Monday, where a man was wrongly picked up by ICE. She also insisted that supervisors and other public defenders step in to cover clients whose lawyers have left the building to protest. 'We are absolutely not abandoning our clients and never have and never will,' she stated." Read it here.

SOCIAL DATA: 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Alex Phillips, press secretary for Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand (D-N.Y.) ... Ed Skyler, Citi’s EVP for global public affairs and former NYC deputy mayor for operations ... Erika Masonhall, who works on comms for news partnerships at Facebook (h/ts Tucker Bounds and Meredith Carden) ... Bob Fois ... Raelyn Johnson, executive producer at MSNBC … William P. Lauder, executive chairman of the Estée Lauder Companies, is 58 (h/t Jewish Insider) … Tess Morrissey of SUNY’s University at Buffalo

WELCOME TO THE WORLD – Becca Slaughter, chief counsel for Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer and nominee for the FTC, and Justin Slaughter, a partner at Mercury Strategies, welcomed Philippa ‘Pippa’ Hope Slaughter, who weighed in at 7 lbs, 10 oz, 20 inches. Her confirmation hearing is today and a Schumerland alum notes: “She and her husband are bringing their three kids. Lots of nominees bring their kids. But they are bringing their baby Pippa, who was born last Monday. That’s right, Becca gave birth eight days ago, and she’s (1) testifying and (2) bringing the baby to the hearing.” Pics https://politi.co/2Hb3vkS … http://bit.ly/2JxS44Z 

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

— ‘WE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CONTENT,’ Facebook chief Mark Zuckerberg admitted during his marathon testimony before senators on Tuesday. The remark was striking given that Facebook has long avoided defining itself as a media company, which would be responsible for what’s published under its name. 

-- “With one short sentence, Zuckerberg rejected a long-time chestnut in Silicon Valley: that platforms aren't responsible for the content posted by users,” wrote Business Insider’s Matt Weinberger. “It's a line that companies like Twitter, Google, and Facebook itself have often fallen back on, to explain why they've been slow to address issues of hate speech, harassment, and misinformation on their services.”

-- “This is a big deal,” tweeted Variety’s Ted Johnson, “with potential implications for Hollywood as it tries to get Silicon Valley to do more to fight piracy.” CNBC’s Brian Sullivan tweeted: “Zuckerberg admitting Facebook is ‘responsible’ for the content is pretty incredible... and potentially dangerous for the company down the road.”

-- Zuckerberg also acknowledged Facebook had been contacted by special counsel Robert Mueller during his testimony. POLITICO’s Quint Fogey and Aubree Eliza Weaver have a rundown other key moments from Zuckerberg’s Senate testimony. And the Facebook chief will be taking questions from House members today. 

— From the NYT: ”Facebook Fallout Deals Blow to Mercers’ Political Clout”

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

— BIG DEAL — “Pfizer moving headquarters to Hudson Yards,” by New York Post’s Lois Weiss and Steve Cuozzo: “Pharma giant Pfizer has clinched a momentous deal to move its Manhattan headquarters to The Spiral — a dramatic, 1,031 foot tall skyscraper which Tishman Speyer is building in the Hudson Yards district, the companies announced Tuesday morning. The 800,000-square-foot lease was signed this week, eight months after The Post first reported on the plan last August. It was not a done deal until now even though Pfizer expressed its commitment to Rob Speyer’s development company last summer. The Post has learned, meanwhile, that in an equally momentous deal that can boost the office district along Second Ave., Pfizer will sell its buildings at 219 and 235 E. 42nd St. to press-shy, Brooklyn-based investor David Werner for about $360 million.” Read more here

— “David Werner buying Pfizer’s Midtown HQ for $360M,” by The Real Deal’s Mark Maurer: “As it finalized its new lease at a proposed Hudson Yards skyscraper, Pfizer struck a deal to sell its longtime Midtown office buildings on East 42nd Street to David Werner for about $360 million, The Real Deal has learned. The pharmaceutical giant has been searching for a buyer for the properties at 219 and 235 West 42nd Street while it negotiated to relocate elsewhere. The buildings span a total of 1.1 million square feet. The deal would be for the fee position at 219 and the leasehold position at 235, sources said. It would involve a leaseback to Pfizer of at least five years, given that the company’s new home at Tishman Speyer’s Spiral is not expected to be ready until 2022.” Read more here

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— Former Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver’s re-trial will be pushed back a week or so due to a juror’s illness. 

— Amtrak trains from Albany will again be re-routed to Grand Central Terminal from May 26 to Sept. 4. 

— Troubled Rochester judge Leticia Astacio was arrested and charged for attempting to purchase a shotgun in violation of her probation. 

— The NYPD released more video from last week’s fatal shooting of an unarmed and mentally ill man in Crown Heights by police officers. 

— A new report from S&amp;P found the for-hire vehicle surcharges in New York’s recently passed budget won’t generate enough revenue to fix the subways.

— The smoking ban in NYCHA apartments begins July 30.

— New York City’s homeless girl scout troop held their first cookie sale. 

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

The Red Bulls drew with Chivas, 0-0, falling in the two-leg CONCACAF Champions League semifinal, 1-0 and ending their best run in the tournament ever.

Mets 8, Marlins 6: The unbeatable Mets came from behind once again, tying the game on home runs from Asdrubal Cabrera and Wilmer Flores, then taking the lead for good on a two-run double from Yoenis Cespedes. Other than good health, there isn’t much to suggest this 9-1 start, best in franchise history, is a mirage.

Red Sox 14, Yankees 1: Well, that didn’t go according to plan. Luis Severino got knocked around, and his successors did no better. Aaron Judge homered, at least.

The day ahead: The Mets go for the sweep in Miami. The Yankees play at Fenway. The Knicks reach for one last helping of extra ping pong balls in Cleveland. The Nets finish up in Boston. NYCFC hosts Real Salt Lake at Yankee Stadium.

#UpstateAmerica: Celebrity Chrissy Teigen weighed in on the Cellino and Barnes saga. 

#ZooYork: A news reporter was punched while doing a stand-up in Queens.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC