A few dozen protesters greeted first lady Melania Trump as she arrived at Southwest Key, a nonprofit shelter for immigrant youth in Phoenix. (Photo by Amanda Fahey/Cronkite News)

A few dozen protesters greeted first lady Melania Trump as she arrived at Southwest Key, a nonprofit shelter for immigrant youth in Phoenix. (Photo by Amanda Fahey/Cronkite News)

First lady Melania Trump visited the Southwest Key shelter in Phoenix Thursday to talk to staff and children housed there. She toured a U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility in Tucson earlier in the day.


A few dozen protesters greeted Trump as she arrived at the nonprofit shelter for immigrant youth. Many donned olive-green attire with messages on the back, including ones that said “Abolish ICE.” The messages were written in stylized white paint that mimicked Trump’s now infamous “I really don’t care. Do u?” jacket she wore on her way to a Texas child detention center earlier this month.


Vannia Moreno, who said her mother is an immigrant, participated in Thursday’s protest to send a message to Melania Trump.


“We’re out here protesting saying that we do care,” Moreno said. “We care for these kids that are being held in these detention centers, and it’s inhumane.”


Earlier this month, President Donald Trump issued an executive order, telling immigration officials to keep undocumented immigrant families together. It came after weeks of criticism over his administration’s “zero tolerance” policy that led to the separation of families at the border, according to an earlier Cronkite News article.


His executive order did not reverse the zero-tolerance policy, and adults caught at the border will still be referred for criminal prosecution or held while their asylum claims are assessed.


But reuniting families separated at the border has proven complicated.


In fact, the CEO of Southwest Key, which operates programs in seven states, has waded into the family separation issue.


In a tweet, the nonprofit said: “The chief executive of the nation’s largest shelters for migrant children said Tuesday he fears a lack of urgency by the U.S. government could mean it will take months to reunite thousands of immigrant children with their parents.”


After the motorcade arrived at the facility, a security detail escorted Melania Trump through the back entrance. She stayed for about 45 minutes, but she did not address the protesters and media outside the shelter.


On Thursday, protesters chanted in English and Spanish: “Hey, hey, ho, ho, Melania Trump has got to go” as her motorcade arrived at the facility.


Demonstrators came with coolers of water and a large awning that stood next to a inflatable Donald Trump wearing a Ku Klux Klan robe.


Melania Trump held a roundtable discussion with facility staff and visited three rooms at the shelter, where she spoke to children.


Melania Trump told the workers she was “here to support you,” according to the Associated Press.


The facility, near 27th Avenue and Indian School Road, houses more than 100 children who range from infants up to 17.


On May 22, 2018, the House of Representatives passed the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act in a strong bipartisan vote. For banks and credit unions with less than $10 billion in assets, this is a blessing that will benefit the people and businesses here in South…

Berkadia recently announced securing $19.17 million financing for Enclave at the Foothills, a multifamily garden-style property located in Tucson. Managing Director Ed Kim of Berkadia’s Irvine, California office secured the refinancing through Freddie Mac. The borrower was Arizona-based HSL …

I hail from Washington, D.C., one of the great crab capitals of the U.S., and crab always enjoyed star status in the Russell home. My mother’s crab imperial was my earliest encounter with the concept of comfort food, and I’ve lost count of how many heaps of steamed blue crabs have been dumpe…

Great news: As of May, the Tucson International Airport has experienced 23 consecutive month…

The one issue that seems to unite our community is roads. Businesses of any and all sizes ar…

The Tucson Hispanic Chamber was honored to host Arizona Governor Doug Ducey’s Legislative Lu…

Repeat after me: “Our business can be more customer-centric.” 

Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, established in 1927, is an essential part of Tucson’s economy.   