“Toddlers are being detained.”







The Associated Press just confirmed this. 

The Trump administration has open three "tender age" shelters in south Texas where babies and toddlers  forcibly separated from their parents by border guards are being stored. 




They're basically jails for immigrant babies who are now, for today, functionally orphans. 


Our government made these kids orphans.


There is no plan to reunite the families. In this report, one woman says the government can't tell her where her son is.


 We don't have photos or video from inside the facilities. The government won't allow journalists in.


The Trump administration is separating families at the border. They're calling these prisons for kids "tender age shelters." We don't know exactly where they are. 

“In general we do not identify the locations of permanent unaccompanied alien children program facilities,” said  Department of Health and Human Services spokesman Kenneth Wolfe.

Excerpt:


The three centers — in Combes, Raymondville and Brownsville — have been rapidly repurposed to serve needs of children including some under 5. A fourth, planned for Houston, would house up to 240 children in a warehouse previously used for people displaced by Hurricane Harvey, Mayor Sylvester Turner said.


Turner said he met with officials from Austin-based Southwest Key Programs, the contractor that operates some of the child shelters, to ask them to reconsider their plans. A spokeswoman for Southwest Key didn’t immediately reply to an email seeking comment.

The government now reportedly plans to open a fourth in Texas, according to AP.






Lawyers and medical providers who have visited the Rio Grande Valley shelters described play rooms of crying preschool-age children in crisis. The government also plans to open a fourth shelter to house hundreds of young migrant children in Houston, where city leaders denounced the move Tuesday.


Since the White House announced its zero tolerance policy in early May, more than 2,300 children have been taken from their parents at the U.S.-Mexico border, resulting in a new influx of young children requiring government care. The government has faced withering critiques over images of some of the children in cages inside U.S. Border Patrol processing stations.


Decades after the nation’s child welfare system ended the use of orphanages over concerns about the lasting trauma to children, the administration is standing up new institutions to hold Central American toddlers that the government separated from their parents.


“The thought that they are going to be putting such little kids in an institutional setting? I mean it is hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” said Kay Bellor, vice president for programs at Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service, which provides foster care and other child welfare services to migrant children. “Toddlers are being detained.”


Bellor said shelters follow strict procedures surrounding who can gain access to the children in order to protect their safety, but that means information about their welfare can be limited.


By law, child migrants traveling alone must be sent to facilities run by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services within three days of being detained. The agency then is responsible for placing the children in shelters or foster homes until they are united with a relative or sponsor in the community as they await immigration court hearings.


But U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions’ announcement last month that the government would criminally prosecute everyone who crosses the U.S.-Mexico border illegally has led to the breakup of migrant families and sent a new group of hundreds of young children into the government’s care.



Former CIA Director John Brennan tells @AriMelber that a new Trump administration policy that is causing migrant children to be separated from their parents is a “tremendous” national security issue. https://t.co/Ev43o0SkjB

— MSNBC (@MSNBC) June 20, 2018



Corey Lewandowski, who said "womp womp" on national TV today regarding a 10-year old immigrant girl with Down Syndrome being taken from her mother, works for a PAC that gets donations from a company that owns private immigration detention facilities. https://t.co/CQJRCGfSXy pic.twitter.com/rztMztYisI

— Aaron Sankin (@ASankin) June 20, 2018






Charges brought by the U.S. government against more than 200 people who protested on the day Donald Trump was inaugurated President were abruptly dropped today. The government’s case amounted to threatening 234 people with a maximum sentence of 70 years in prison for 6 broken windows. It’s great that reason prevailed. It’s not great that […]




President Trump’s corrupt EPA chief is out. The resignation letter is nuts, and mentions God’s divine providence and other creepy surreal stuff that doesn’t belong.




“I am requesting to reunite with my child…” The Southern Poverty Law Center says this is a form some of their clients who have been detained under Donald Trump’s racist “zero tolerance” program have been presented with, to request that ICE give back their children.


		

		
		





We all lead unique lives and, as a result, experience stress in different ways. So, when it comes to dealing with anxiety, wouldn’t it make more sense to choose a tailored solution over a cookie-cutter one? That’s the mindset driving Mindbliss and its unique, AI-curated meditations. Lifetime subscriptions are available today for $49.99. Designed to […]




From wedding proposals to college graduations, there’s nothing wrong with reaching for the camera to capture a special occasion, but sometimes a photo isn’t quite enough to immortalize life’s greatest moments. Whether you walked down the aisle or into your first home, Strellas Personalized Star Maps commemorate your biggest milestones on a stellar scale. You […]




With the ability to recognize images, curate playlists, and even hold a decent conversation, we wouldn’t blame you if you thought AI innovations like Siri were powered by magic. Of course, the reality is that, rather than shamrocks and pixie dust, these breakthroughs are made possible thanks to advancements in machine learning technology and a […]






Read the rules you agree to by using this website in our Terms of Service.

We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.

Boing Boing uses cookies and analytics trackers, and is supported by advertising, merchandise sales and affiliate links. Read about what we do with the data we gather in our Privacy Policy.

Who will be eaten first? Our forum rules are detailed in the Community Guidelines.

Boing Boing is published under a Creative Commons license except where otherwise noted.

		Mark Frauenfelder
     		Cory Doctorow
     		David Pescovitz
     		Xeni Jardin
     		Rob Beschizza

Jason WeisbergerPublisher

Ken SniderSysadmin

		About Us
				Contact Us
				Advertise
				Forums
				Shop	
				Shop Support