Published: June 16, 2018 10:35 a.m. ET

By

That’s the reporting from NBC’s Jacob Soboroff, counted among only a handful of journalists invited by Health and Human Services for a tour inside the largest U.S. detention facility for migrant children, nicknamed “Casa Padre,” and created out of an empty Brownsville, Texas, Walmart

                            
                            
                                  
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
                                  
                                    WMT, -0.78%

                            
                                  
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
                                        store.

Forgot to mention last night: folks at the shelter have a weekly policy call with feds about changes that will affect the shelter.They say they weren’t given a heads up about Trump/Sessions zero tolerance separation policy that’s led to overcrowding.  https://t.co/MtQynq1PoD

Oposing lawmakers, and even Trump administration allies such as Franklin Graham, are scrutinizing the unprecedented actions, unprecedented at least in recent memory, of separation and detention under what President Trump and his attorney general, Jeff Sessions, have deemed “zero tolerance” on border crossings. The administration has said it won’t accept flight from gangs and domestic violence as asylum rationales.

As a matter of policy, the U.S. government is separating families, including infants, who travel into the U.S. by crossing the border illegally. As parents are apprehended and face federal criminal prosecution, the children are considered “unaccompanied minors” and sent into the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR), which is part of HHS, many to await a foster-care sponsor. There have been some reports of cases in which immigrant families are being separated before reaching the ports of entry, where they can present themselves for asylum by following U.S. law.

Here are some photos of the boys in the cafeteria. This is not a school cafeteria. Hundreds called to eat at a time on rotating shifts.When I told @chrislhayes it felt like a prison or jail, I was thinking about this. pic.twitter.com/feZI46SPAc

Soboroff has said be believes his admission to the nonprofit Southwest Key shelter, stretched beyond capacity with the latest influx, was made possible after Sen. Jeff Merkley, an Oregon Democrat, earlier this month used a live Facebook video, eventually reaching over 1 million views, to chronicle his frustrated efforts to gain access to the facility. Reporting reveals limited chances to talk to their parents and up to 22 hours per day spent inside, with access to television and video games.

 Read: House Republicans reach deal to vote on immigration bills, but chances of passage unclear 

The White House responded to Merkley’s actions: “Senator Merkley is irresponsibly spreading blatant lies about routine immigration enforcement while smearing hard-working, dedicated law enforcement officials at ICE and CBP.”

Sessions has said the way to avoid separation and incarceration is to not travel to the U.S., which has prompted his critics to charge that current policy is violating international and U.S. asylum rules.

 More Key Words: 

 Rahm Emanuel offers Jeff Sessions an all-expenses-paid trip to Ellis Island 

  Republican Bob Corker laments that his party is behaving in ‘cultish’ fashion 


                                            Rachel Koning Beals is a MarketWatch news editor in Chicago.
                                        

Join the conversation

Copyright © 2018 MarketWatch, Inc.  All rights reserved.


                By using this site you agree to the Terms of Service,
                Privacy Policy, and
                Cookie Policy.
            