By Hannah Parry For Dailymail.com  


 Published: 11:25 EDT, 19 June 2018  |  Updated: 12:03 EDT, 19 June 2018  





 64

View  comments




Plans for another detention for undocumented children has sparked protests in Houston as Donald Trump's zero tolerance immigration policy sees thousands of kids separated from their parents.


Southwest Key Programs plans to operate a new facility for around 240 children at a former homeless shelter in Houston's East Downtown.


The contractor already manages several detention centers, including one in South Texas where hundreds of undocumented children are being confined.


But the plans have been met with fierce resistance - including from Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner


'I don't want in the city of Houston for us to participate in a policy that I think is morally bankrupt,' he told KTRK. 'This is not about party, not about Democrat or Republican, nothing about that. It's about valuing children.'


Plans for another detention for undocumented children (pictured is the proposed location at a former homeless shelter in Houston) has sparked protests in Houston as Donald Trump's zero tolerance immigration policy sees thousands of kids separated from their parents

Pictures of chain-link fences serving as security walls in shelter intake-processing centers have given rise to claims that the administration is keeping children 'in cages' (Central Processing Station in McAllen, Texas)

On Sunday, around two hundred people gathered outside the site of the proposed center in protest.


The event, organized state Sen. Sylvia Garcia, a Houston Democrat, and the immigration advocacy group FIEL Houston, began as a 'vigil for separated families'.


Protesters marched with signs that read: ' 'Families Belong Together / Familias Unidas No Dividas.'


Diana Espitia and her daughter, Viviana Collymore, previously volunteered at a shelter for immigrants in the Rio Grande Valley.


'We have seen firsthand what it is to see a family come across the border tired, afraid,' Espitia said. 'And the only thing that kept those families alive and hopeful is the fact that they were together. To think that now they're being separated? I'm a mother. I can't imagine my daughter being taken from me, even at 17.'


Garcia, who was joined by many other Democrats and state representatives, compared the children's detention center to a'baby jail.'


'This is a very personal issue for me,' added State Rep. Ana Hernandez, the Houston Chronicle reports. 'I'm an immigrant; my parents came here as immigrants, and we lived in undocumented status for eight years. I know what these families are going through.'


More than 2,000 children have been taken from their parents since the Trump administration announced its new 'zero tolerance' policy in April - which sees all immigrants - even asylum seekers - criminally prosecuted for crossing the border illegally.


More than 2,000 children have been separated from their families since the Trump administration introduced its zero tolerance policy in April

Minors, some as young as 18 months, are separated from their parents but cannot be legally held in prison and so are transferred to the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement who send them to the detention centers.


Currently, 1,500 children are being held at Southwest Key Programs' facility in Brownsville, Texas.


The center was an abandoned Walmart which has been refitted with metal cages, and supplied with floor mats and foil sheets as 'blankets' for the children, ripped from their parents, the Washington Post reports.


Southwest runs a number of the dozen or so centers overseen by the Office of Refugee Resettlement, but Trump's new policy means an influx of children so more centers are required.  


Some places have been forced to make temporary accommodations, such as in Tornillo, Texas, which has set up a 'tent city' for the immigrant children. Others are being house on military bases. 


Southwest Key's Houston warehouse, at 419 Emancipation Avenue, must still be licensed by the state as a childcare facility before it can open. It was previously a homeless shelter and was then used, from September 2017 to March 2018, as a shelter for Hurricane Harvey refugees. 


Recently, videos have leaked showing youngsters detained in cages and the facilities which has put Trump back at the center of a furor over immigration, an issue he inflamed as a presidential candidate and that he has carried into his administration. 


Southwest Key Programs already run a center at an abandoned Walmart in Brownsville, Texas 

The facility is being used to hold boys aged 10 to 17 who were caught illegally crossing the border, normally with their parents 

A stuffed bear is pictured on a bed at an unaccompanied alien children program shelter in Brownsville, Texas, U.S. 

Facing heavy criticism over his tough policy, he is slated to meet with Republican lawmakers on Tuesday ahead of votes on immigration legislation.


He will travel to Capitol Hill as Democrats hurl charges of 'barbaric' treatment of children and his fellow Republicans move tentatively toward legislation that would curb, if not entirely halt, the practice of separating families.


In April, U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a 'zero tolerance' policy in which all those apprehended entering the United States illegally would be criminally charged, which has led to children being separated from their parents. 


But Democrats and some Republicans have criticized the administration for dividing nearly 2,000 children from their parents between mid-April and the end of May.


Online videos showed immigrant children being held in concrete-floored cages at detention centers.


An audio recording said to capture the sounds of immigrant children crying in a detention facility was circulating online. Reuters could not independently verify its authenticity.


The Trump administration is taking illegal immigrant children away from the adults who are apprehended sneaking them across the border, and putting them in shelters, as part of a 'zero tolerance' interpretation of federal law (Central Processing Station in McAllen, Texas)

Immigrant children are shown walking in single file between tents in their compound next to the Mexican border in Tornillo, Texas

The inside of a dormitory at the Tornillo facility, a shelter for children of detained migrants, is seen in this photo provided by the US Department of Health and Human Services

A grand bargain in Congress to finally resolve deep divisions over immigration law appeared unlikely, with Trump focused on winning funding for a wall he has long wanted to build along America's southern border with Mexico.


Trump and House Republicans, in an evening meeting, were expected to discuss two bills scheduled for votes on Thursday. Both were drafted with no input from Democrats. Republicans control the House, the Senate and the White House.


One bill would limit, but not fully prohibit family separations, fund Trump's wall and give legal protections to young immigrants, known as 'Dreamers,' who were brought to the country illegally as children. Details were still in flux.


The bill faces strong headwinds as it is opposed by Democrats, who object to another provision that would cut legal immigration levels, and conservative Republicans who are backing a rival bill that takes a harder line on immigration.


In the Senate, Republican Senator Ted Cruz, who ran unsuccessfully against Trump in 2016 for their party's presidential nomination, said he would introduce legislation this week to halt family separations.


Cruz said his bill would build temporary shelters where immigrant families could stay together in cases where there was no threat to the children's safety, double the number of federal immigration judges and speed handling of asylum applications.


Border crossings briefly dropped after Trump took office in January 2017, but have since risen to levels seen during the administration of his Democratic predecessor, Barack Obama. Almost 52,000 people were caught trying to cross the southern border illegally in May, according to government figures. 


There have been reports that children separated from their parents after crossing the US border illegally are being held in facilities for between 45 and 55 days.


Wendy Young, president of advocacy group Kids in Need of Defense, said that during Obama's presidency children would be held for about a month while the government tried to find family members in US to take them in. 


Now, Young told the Washington Post, children are being held for longer before being moved on. 


She said: 'We’re starting to see that creep up more into the 45-to 55-day range.' 


Discussing what would become the Trump administration's 'zero-tolerance' migrant policy last year, then-Department of Homeland Security (DHS) secretary John Secretary told CNN that the Department of Health and Human Services does a 'very good job' of putting the children into foster care or 'linking them up' with family members in the US. 


The DHS has explained that there are four reasons a child will be separated from a parent: If there is reason to doubt the claim of familial relationship between adult and child, if the adult is being referred for criminal prosecution, if there is reason to suspect the adult is engaged in human trafficking or if there is reason to believe the adult poses a safety risk to the child.                 


Nearly 2,000 children were separated from their families over a six-week period in April and May following the inauguration of the policy. Pictured: A room inside the DHHS facility at Casa Padre Shelter, in Brownsville, Texas

An occupant at Casa San Diego, a shelter for children of detained migrants, is seen in this photo provided by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, in San Diego, on June 15

Under the Trump administration's new policy, all unlawful crossings are referred for prosecution - a process that moves adults to the custody of the US Marshals Service and sends many children to facilities run by the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).


Under the previous administration, such families were usually referred for civil deportation proceedings, not requiring separation.


Because those found to have crossed the border illegally are now being criminally prosecuted, they are separated from their children (who are not deemed responsible for the actions of their parents). 


As a result, the parents are detained and, because the children are not charged with a crime, they are not detained with the parents. 


Nearly 2,000 children were separated from their families over a six-week period in April and May following the inauguration of the policy. 


Children under the age of four are not separated from their parents, officials have said, but this has been challenged by media reports and rights groups.


According to the DHS, the US government is bound by the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 to release unaccompanied alien children to the DHHS within 72 hours - 'absent exceptional circumstances'.


This does not apply to people from Mexico and Canada, however, who are eligible to withdraw their application for admission to US. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group