Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Calhoun County jail in Michigan now has three fathers of the separated immigrant children sent to Michigan

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

A police officer stands at the entrance to Bethany Christian Services in Grand Rapids on June 27, 2018. Bethany has taken in about 50 immigrant children separated from their parents after they crossed the southern border.
(Photo: Niraj Warikoo, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

Three fathers of some of the separated immigrant children in Michigan were recently sent to Calhoun County jail in Battle Creek for possible reunification, said an immigrant advocate. 


The immigrant fathers from Central America are the parents of 3 children who are each younger than five years old, said Susan Reed, supervising attorney with the Michigan Immigrant Rights Center. They were from out of state and arrived at the county jail in Michigan this weekend, she said.


Two of the fathers are from Honduras, said an ACLU attorney.


Read more:


Immigrant mom thought she may die in custody


Immigrant kid taken to Mich. reunited with mom


The center is providing legal representation for the roughly 50 immigrants kids under the care of Bethany Christian Services, based in Grand Rapids. Reed said that less than ten of the 50 kids are under the age of five years old. A federal judge had ruled earlier that separated immigrant kids under the age of five must be reunited with their parents by Tuesday.


Reed met with two of the fathers this weekend. 


"We're certainly hoping they and the kids will be released," Reed said. "We are working diligently for reunification for every one of these families."


Bethany Christian Services has said it has more than 50 separated immigrant kids in its care, a result of President Donald Trump's "zero tolerance" immigration policy which led to U.S. authorities separating about 3,000 kids from their asylum-seeking parents or caregivers. 


Contact: Niraj Warikoo: nwarikoo@freepress.com or 313-223-4792. Follow him on Twitter @nwarikoo
