Great stories in the Washington Post on the "other side" of the opiod crisis responsible journalist would publish both sides of an issue. Will you?The other opioid crisis: Pain patients who can’t access the medicine we needBy Anne FuquaSome patients are in pain. Some just want drugs. How do I tell them apart?By Jonathan Reisman


@6:38 I have read WaPO story about the crisis facing people who desperately need pain medications to relieve their suffering.  Their crisis partly stems from the CDC changing the rules on Dr's prescribing the meds.  But that crisis is not "the other side" of the opioid crisis caused by abusers of opiods. That crisis is largely caused by Pharmaceutical companmi9es pushing and promoting opiods driven by systemic corporate profit seeking.  The best example of that is the widely reported case of the largest Drug Co. in the US shipping 5 million doses to a little town of 400 people in W. Virginia. That company and the next 2 largest Drug Co's shipped 130 million doses to that little town of 400, another town close by of 300 and 2 more towns, all of them not more than 30 miles apart with a total population of 6,000 people.  I can't help but wonder how many other areas of the country that similar examples of corporate greed is taking place.  The CDC may have written new rules to stop these kind of instances if systemic corporate greed and like many regulatory rules it created a crisis of unintended consequences for legitimate users of pain meds.  Maybe we need different rules for Dr.s prescribing opiods for people with injuries who will need paid meds for a relatively short period of time and different rules for prescriptions for those suffering chronic pain.  BTW there have to have been some Dr.s and pharmacies that were profit driven more than serving patients by prescribing and selling 130 million doses in a very small area of 6,000 people.        


Oh yeah. SHIT needs to be addressed because some are turning to illegal drugs for legitimate pain.


This report given by dd of pharmaceutical companies abusing sales and distribution of opioids was reported by 60 minuets.Where pharmaceutical regulatory policies are and have been met with fierce opposition by those big companies. Where profits are being applied rather than responsible distribution for safety. Until pharmaceutical companies can be checked through use of lobbying power. I see no changes other than the fines which amounts to a fraction of a weeks sales of their products. Cities have begun to take on the big pharmaceutical companies to court for alleged abuse. However, expect a fight with these giants. Companies like these have the best lawyers money can buy. Moreover, the money to carry out and drag a long battle within the courts.@9:24 Shit has been addressed!But money talks. E42


Cont: Like Chivis reported it’s a slippery slope when you are dealing with pharmaceutical companies and policies. Accountability is iffy ( doctors who prescribe/ / pharmaceutical distribution ).Who is at fault?E42


The Real Pain of Withdrawal can not be fixed with more drug supply paid by the US taxpayer or by the insurers that were forced to supply the opioid for free.Let the addicted sue the lawmakers in Congress that were paid campaign contribution kickbacks by Big Pharma lobbyists and their Big Pharma patrons for damages and for repairs, after all the US government is contemplating the cost to be only 200 billion dollars down payment, to be paid cash, in advance, to the good fellas of the present administration, "just to wet their beaks".


@12:51 a cartel/crime group conspiracy now???As if CDS is the only cartel in operation in the U.S. the truth is CDS will find other suckers, most likely criminal gangs to start off with to launder money for them in THIS part of the country and or another cartel might enter the area due to this void though in a smaller scale for a while because Californians need their CDS and Chapo corridos and t-shirts. Fuck they might as well make a Chapo/Disney style park for them with Chapo characters hugging all the fucken drug shit users there!


The FBI and the DEA were chasing drug diversions, confiscating the drugs, and often doing their choice move, confiscating the money, that was facked up, congress oversight went to hearings, grabbed the investigators by the tail, spun them on the air, slammed them on the sidewalk, microwaved their investigating nalgas in the micro oven and trimmed their nails for good with laws against seizure...see the hearings on YouTube opioid addiction skyrocketed, now they are blaming La Chapa... no pinchis mamen


Put something new up you lazy clowns.


Good read, these sinaloa guys gate it when it's a story that makes cds look bad. The only clown here is you, tonto


Agree with 9:02 


yep 6:43 isnt even a full clown , he or she is just clown shoes


11:42 You wish, clown shoes are not that smelly.6:43 pura Pata jedionda.


"The coordinated actions at the national level that we announced today have put this organization out of business permanently."lol.good article, cds taking lots of hits lately. EPN's final f*ck you to Chapo before leaving the presidency.


Great work US law enforcement. 


7:21 NAH, just making room for the new scions of drug trafficking, specially now with Russian money being watched carefully and hotels not being massively sought after, condos not selling even to chinese that would receive green cards for 500 000.00 dollars and golf clubs losing their usual millions of dollars a year, what better thing than knocking off Los Chapos to install the heirs of Joseph Weichselbaum while the Russian Mafiya arrives to take over.--But say NO to money? NEVER DE LIMON LA NEVER.


The Washington Post is a left wing liberal trash rag that publishes 99% fake news. They lean towards socialist and democratic views and very rarely cite sources that support their lopsided views. The WP is very unreliable and is not relied upon for factual information or news. The reporters are also highly opinionated with their one-sided liberal rants with no facts to support their articles. Many major papers have posted full page op-ed’s concerning the WP’s unreliability and false news reporting. 


7:24 . I agree with what you say except your wording . Don't confuse the democratic process with the Democrat Party . I am sure it was a typo but everyone may not understand that .


@1:24PM  Speaking of sources, could you give us a link to "Many major papers have posted full page op-ed’s concerning the WP’s unreliability and false news reporting."Also would like to know where you get your "factual information and news".  


It's owned by dickhead Jeff Bezos


Washington post is the same trash as CNN but great post b.b. 


@7:24 get out of here with your lies pendejo


@7:24 and 9:26 Carlos slim helú is one famous New York Times investor, but he is not the owner or has any right to any input or editorial content,--Sun Myung Moon the Korean mother superior of the moonies got his paws on the Washington Times precursor of the extremely right wing slanted Fawx News of Rupert Murdoch, expert in hacking other people's communications and e-mails even dead innocent little girls were not safe from Mr Murdoch's journalism, his newspapers are costing him his ass, even his young Chinese gifriend or wife is trying to get his money before he dies.There can't be a contest between the 99% lies of FAWX NEWS based on 90% lies and the "lies of fake news", fact checked and found to be almost all 100% truth based 100% truths.--WaPo and the NYT have published FULL PAGE editions on print about more than 2 000 lies said by the so called "president", all fact checked... I hope you get better at least until impeachment is over...


8:32 you know perfecly where apes dig for their facts dd, their ass! That the easy part, hurling away takes some refinement.


http://www.allgeneralizationsarefalse.com/Media Bias Charts


9:57 the bad part is that "all generalizations are false" is itself a generalizing statement, I pride myself of being generally the exceptional exception to the generalization except when being sarcastic...Love you too yaks.


Please, stop it with the phylosophics and do more muckraking, There is a lot of 💩 poóp going on evendors in the border where a wall with see through capabilities good enough to please the emperor has been suggested be made of the "same cloth" as his rich, smart, sharp looking new clothes, with some of the same $139 000.00 doors secretary of the interior RYAN ZINSKE BOUGHT FOR HIS OFFICES--Last but not least, remember that WaPo brought down one powerful president before it got to be "known" as a leftist liberal rag  by extreme right neo-nazi partisan teabaggers, FACTS!


Big hit for cds, that's most likely Tijuana plaza, a lot of guys from Tijuana and Sinaloa. They been getting hit lately, looks like ctng/cjng has the upper hand 


The sinaloa killers have thounsands of this groups all over the world looks like Tijuana and Sinaloa along with jalisco are the main plazas for money laundering but being real this is probably like taking one dark spot from a cheetah  good story tho one thing for sure is USA made bank


STFU! Sinaloa has thousands of these groups?Sinaloa has thousands of members but not thousands of groups! Much less in the U.S.!You nutthuggers want to make Sinaloa look like it is a country of sorts. "Oh Sinaloa has many millions of people, it feeds millions, it has millions of guns, they run millions of gangs" etc...heard it all.If Mexico had only ONE cartel then I, could probably believe that but truth is there are at least two other cartels, CJNG and Juarez that have influence and strenght in Mexico and the U.S. and possibly Zetas and CDG who have given CDS a run for their money also and have thousands of members themselves!Plus there are hundreds if not thousands of crime groups in the U.S. at least not all of which work for CDS and or even cartels! You're a true nutthugger but open your fucken eyes!!!


11:08 comments like these means it hurts your sorry ass they got busted! Afraid of someone else taking over are we? I, thought you guys say claim that with money Sinaloa people can get out of jail and or plain never be caught???


4:56 one cartel or many, they are all the pendejos of somebody else that really puts money in their bank account, nobody persecutes trying to murder and no law enforcement agency prosecutes except to fine them a little once in a while.--So why get so indignant protesting like your ladily virginity has never been taken?


6:56 why get so indignant protesting like your lady virginity is taken when imbecil drug users consume drugs and die off???


6:56 I'm not in favor of any cartel chavala! CDS however had caused more pain for some people around the part of the country where I, live that you can't even imagine. Fuckin idiots like 11:08 love to yell shit like he has simply to encourage other fucken idiots to continue with the drug trade and for that particular group and that is why it upsets me pendejo!


7:50 you are so eassy you carry your own vaseline. Repent!


I will say sinaloa is the most know place of Mexico just heard a song from a rapper 69 name sinaloa by the way I'm black from France  supporting bb


Cool man, Merci Beaucoup ! Spread the word.


Just looked up that song, not one word was said about sinaloa lol. Chapo put sinaloa on the map though no doubt, gucci mane has a song that mentions chapo while on his new album gato has a lyric that mentions a guy from michoacan.. I'm Not michoacan or Sinaloa just a commenter, 69 is wack though lol


9:22 who needs propaganda?Sure it's not 69


Question to all readers / commentators and B.B. staff?  Will president Trump possible proposal for implementing the dear penalty will gain momentum?He praised other countries for their role of enforcing laws on drug dealers. Something to ponder on?  Input fellas?E42


I don't think that would ever fly here...but I heard him say it's something to look at. He followed with much harder sentencing..


That would never happen in the U.S. look how hard it is to kill the murders and rapists. You mean to tell me they're going to kill a bunch of guys that sold bricks? Nope we don't have the guts for it. Is it Wright or wrong? Depends on who you're asking. At the end I have my opinions like any other human being, but I am no judge.


Confiscating Chapo's money or helping him pay his fine?


Mini Lic @ work with the DEA.


Why are there so many names REDACTED?  Are they well known folks, politicians, bankers, etc...?


Redacted to protect their partners "because of national security concerns"...if it were some civilians or weekend Johns you'd see  their names and photos on the papers, TV and police blotters.But everytime shot touches the powerful they all run together to obscure the facts and their dirty laundry.


...And let Stormy Daniels talk on 60 minutes, gademet


They are redacted to preserve the investigation. It allows them to continue without co- conspirators becoming aware that certain people have been detained or indicted. 


One thing is for sure, Tijuana has been making a lot of bust lately and it's mostly cds people. There is a few snitches, even a judge got busted, not to mention that baseball player. 


For years the Tijuana border had been ignored. This is why now the busts are comming out.


While the dogs are smelling the ground looking for tunnels somebody is ramming the ship through their ass, LOL.Whatever the loses that is cheaper than the tunnels.






Comments are moderated, refer to policy for more information.Envía fotos, vídeos, notas, enlaces o información Todo 100% Anónimo;borderlandbeat@gmail.com

 

 




General Mail Box (Buggs-Founder):




borderlandbeat@gmail.com 




Mainboard/Forum Administrators:




Inquiries and Communications send to Chivis or Buggs


chivis.martinez@  hushmail.com       


DD:


allend4bb@gmail.com


Otis:


spike.borderlandbeat@ gmail.com
