Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. W winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:56 pm

The Utah County Jail in Spanish Fork.

The Utah County Jail in Spanish Fork.

A temporary fix has been implemented for a funding shortfall in the Utah County Sheriff’s Office that doesn’t require closing jail beds or eliminating staff, according to Utah County Commission Chair Nathan Ivie.


Utah County Sheriff Jim Tracy unexpectedly announced his resignation Tuesday during the commission meeting, citing lack of communication with the Utah County Commission over a funding shortfall caused by an inmate in the Utah County Jail whose medical bills are projected to exceed $1 million.


The Sheriff’s Office had been referred to collections for the overdue bills, Tracy told the commissioners Tuesday, and said he planned to close 128 beds in the jail and eliminate up to 20 positions to find the money to cover those costs.


After a meeting with Tracy on Friday morning, Ivie said Tracy will be transferring funds to provide a temporary fix for that budget shortfall. On Tuesday, the commissioners had identified $453,000 within the sheriff’s budget that could be transferred to the correct account to pay for those medical bills.


Tracy declined to comment on the issue Friday morning, though he did confirm he had met with the commissioners Friday morning. Tracy said he would send out a prepared statement later Friday. The Daily Herald did not receive a statement before deadline.


Ivie said the funding transfer, based on an analysis, should cover the Sheriff’s Office needs for a minimum of 30 days.


“It’s a temporary fix,” Ivie said. “That’s why we have to open the budget after that.”


The budget will likely be opened to replenish the sheriff’s funds within the next month, Ivie said.


Ivie said Tracy is working on providing the commission numbers for how much money will need to be transferred from county reserves once the budget is reopened. Though no definite numbers are available, Ivie said they are estimating about $600,000 will need to come out of reserves to replenish the sheriff’s funds at that time.


The hardest part about coming up with the numbers, Ivie said, is it’s impossible to know what the inmate’s medical bills will continue to cost the county.


“That’s the hard part is we don’t know what he’ll cost, but we’re trying to make our best educated guess,” Ivie said. “We could have to reopen the budget again before the end of the year to address this guy’s needs.”


Ivie said there is no chance of the inmate being moved to another facility, despite being in the country illegally, because he is in the jail on county charges and is therefore under the county’s jurisdiction until he receives due process.


Ivie expressed frustration with what he called failed immigration policy that the person ended up costing so much money to the county. Ivie believes the inmate should have been out of the country by now.


“This person should have been deported because of past criminal history,” Ivie said.


On Tuesday, Tracy told the commission his resignation will go into effect Aug. 1.


Katie England covers politics, the environment and courts for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.

Utah County Sheriff Jim Tracy resigned unexpectedly during a Tuesday morning commission meeting and said major cuts were coming to the departm…

Katie England covers politics, county government and southern Utah County for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.



                                    
                                        Whenever Katie  England posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
