Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 67F. SW winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Considerable clouds this evening. Some decrease in clouds late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 67F. SW winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:56 pm

Utah County Sheriff Jim Tracy speaks during a press conference concerning the finding and identifying of the remains of Elizabeth Salgado on Thursday, May 24, 2018, at the Utah County Sheriff's Office in Spanish Fork. During the press conference, authorities confirmed human remains were found in the Hobble Creek Canyon area last Friday, and those remains were identified late this Tuesday as those of Elizabeth Salgado. Salgado, 26, went missing April 16, 2015, from Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Jim Tracy speaks during a press conference concerning the finding and identifying of the remains of Elizabeth Salgado on Thursday, May 24, 2018, at the Utah County Sheriff's Office in Spanish Fork. During the press conference, authorities confirmed human remains were found in the Hobble Creek Canyon area last Friday, and those remains were identified late this Tuesday as those of Elizabeth Salgado. Salgado, 26, went missing April 16, 2015, from Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Jim Tracy resigned unexpectedly during a Tuesday morning commission meeting and said major cuts were coming to the department in light of a budget shortfall.


But after meeting with Tracy following the commission meeting, Commission Chair Nathan Ivie said the commission will make sure the Utah County Sheriff’s Office has funding to keep major staff cuts from happening, or parts of the jail from closing.


The Utah County Sheriff’s Office is short on funds by about $800,000 to $1 million, Tracy told Commissioners Ivie and Bill Lee during Tuesday’s commission meeting. Commissioner Greg Graves was not in attendance. That shortage is due, in part, to large medical needs by one patient that Tracy said he couldn’t discuss because of medical privacy laws.


Tracy said he has sent multiple emails over the past few months requesting direction or advice from the commissioners, but hadn’t heard anything back. All three commissioners later said they had multiple discussions with the sheriff on the issue via other methods.


“At this point in time, I’m taking that as an indication that I need to solve this issue within my existing budget,” Tracy said. The only way he saw to do that, Tracy said, is to reduce the force by about 15 to 20 positions, close 128 beds in the jail, and move that money over to the medical fund so that the bills can be paid.


“We are being referred currently to collections,” Tracy said.


Tracy said he also took that lack of response as a vote of no confidence, and said he would resign his position effective August 1.


“Unless you have some other suggestions, that’s where I’m at,” Tracy said.


Neither Lee or Ivie were aware of the sheriff’s intent before the meeting, and Ivie called the resignation a “complete shocker.”


Ivie said there would be no major layoffs in the department or any parts of the jail closed.


“I thought from our conversations the sheriff was aware of that,” Ivie said. “But apparently he felt differently.”


Ivie and Lee met with Tracy individually following the commission meeting, and Ivie said that $450,000 from within the jail’s current funding can be transferred to pay the bills until the commission is able to find funding for what he called an “extraordinary circumstance.”


The commissioners will make sure that once that $450,000 runs out, the sheriff’s office will have the funds necessary to keep the jail functioning, Ivie said, and is working to reopen the budget to provide the sheriff’s office funds to get through the year.


“It’s not that there’s no money to pay vendors,” Lee said. “It’s just not going to stretch as far as you’d like, which we already knew.”


Ivie said the person whose medical bills had caused the crisis is in the country illegally, and the county is also looking into finding funding from federal partners.


“I would really like to emphasize, this has resulted from a broken federal immigration and deportation policy,” Ivie said.


When Lee brought up that $450,000 during the commission meeting, Tracy said that money was for a different line item and couldn’t be used for the specific debts owed.


On at least two occasions, Graves said, Tracy had come to the three commissioners after a closed session to bring up the issue.


Graves said the county has plenty of money in reserves to fund the deficit, and is in favor of making a transfer to the sheriff’s office.


“It’s not a question of would I be willing (to transfer the money),” Graves said. “It’s a matter of we have to.”


Lee also mentioned the county’s reserves, which he said has more money in it than the county is required by law to have.


“We’ll have to open up the budget, and we’ll have to put money into those accounts,” Lee said.


All three commissioners said they had communicated with Tracy about the issue in ways other than email before the unexpected resignation, including by phone and personal meetings. Lee said he had asked a Sheriff’s Office official to write a letter on the issue that Lee shared with other state and county officials on a recent trip to Washington D.C.


Tracy’s term would have ended in December. Pleasant Grove Police Chief Mike Smith recently won the Republican primary for the race, and is the only candidate on the ballot in November.


“I think it’s important to know what a great public servant he’s been, and what a great loss it will be to lose him early,” Graves said.


The Utah County Sheriff’s Office has been struggling with staffing and retention for some time.


On June 19, Tracy told the commission that the jail was down by nearly 24 positions.


Those comments came during a discussion about implementing a wage study that would fix wage discrepancies for county employees, as Tracy said he was losing some of his best employees to other departments paying up to $1,000 more per month.


Staff at the sheriff’s office confirmed there are 24 open deputy positions as of Tuesday. The office can staff 300 deputies, but only 275 positions are currently filled.


Deputies with the Utah County Sheriff’s Office respond to a host of needs, like staffing security guards at the county jail and the district courthouse.


They also provide patrol, detective and special victims task force members, as well as aiding search and rescue teams in emergencies, like recent incidents of searching for the plane crash in Lake Mountain or rescuing hikers in Hobble Creek Canyon.


During the June meeting, Tracy also cited statistics that Utah County has the fewest county employees per capita as any county in the state.


“It’s not only an issue of how many people we can keep,” Tracy said in June. “But there are going to be needs for increased numbers, of personnel in the county to help this caseload to keep from breaking the spirit and the will of those who are still here.”


Replacing a county official is up to the political party to which the official belonged. According to state statute, the Utah County Republican Party will have 30 days from the time it is noticed about the vacancy to submit a name for the interim replacement.


The Utah County Commission will then have no more than five days to appoint the person to serve out the rest of the term.


Tracy will be releasing a statement later this afternoon regarding his resignation, but will not be granting media interviews, according to a tweet from Sgt. Spencer Cannon with the Utah County Sheriff’s Office.


Reporter Ashley Stilson contributed to this report.


Katie England covers politics, the environment and courts for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.

Review some of the top news stories of the week. 

BREAKING: Utah County Sheriff Jim Tracy has resigned. 

Katie England covers politics, county government and southern Utah County for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.



                                    
                                        Whenever Katie  England posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
