


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

An emergency stay of deportation was granted Friday for Antonio de Jesus Martinez, who has been held at Hudson County Jail for nearly eight weeks.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Rally held outside of Elizabeth Detention Center against Trump policy of separating immigrant families at the border.
    Amy Newman, Staff Writer

Antonio de Jesus Martinez with his wife and children.
(Photo: New York Civil Liberties Union)

Antonio de Jesus Martinez faced deportation and being torn from his family while he was held at Hudson County Jail for nearly eight weeks. 


His wife, a U.S. citizen, fell into depression with him gone and his young daughter woke up at night looking for her father, officials said. 


A court ruled on Friday, though, that Martinez will not be deported after an emergency stay was granted, authorities announced. 


Martinez was originally from El Salvador and came to the United States in 2003. He married a U.S. citizen named Vivian and has a daughter who is nearly 3 years old and a 4-month-old son. They live in Queens, New York.


Martinez was detained following an interview while applying for residency status, according to the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey.


“It’s like a trap telling someone that they can apply for relief and fix their status and then when they do come in arresting them," said ACLU of New Jersey Senior Staff Attorney Farrin Anello, part of the legal team representing Martinez. "In this case, the petition that his wife filed for him was granted.”


Martinez was taken into custody by Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials. An ICE officer told his wife that his detention was part of a new policy that began to be implemented in New York two to three weeks prior, according to the ACLU. 


“We are so excited about the news today," Vivian Martinez stated in a press release. "Finally we see a little bit of light and feel hope that this process will happen like we thought it would and like it was supposed to from the beginning.


“When my husband and I got the notice about our appointment for an interview on our application, we were so excited. They took all our hopes away when he got detained. It wasn’t fair.”


Family separation isn't just at the border. W/ @NYCLU, we won a stay of deportation for Antonio Martinez, dad of two &amp; husband of a U.S. citizen. At his green card interview, ICE unconstitutionally arrested him - part of a pattern. #FamiliesBelongTogetherhttps://t.co/ByVWioY1cxpic.twitter.com/rEVnOZBuiT

A week after their interview and Martinez’s detention, the family was told they had passed the interview and their application to prove their marriage’s validity was approved.


The New York Civil Liberties Union and the ACLU of New Jersey obtained a stay of deportation for Martinez in an emergency petition filed Friday afternoon, according to the ACLU. The lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court of New Jersey asked the court to declare the policy of detaining noncitizen spouses who undertake the initial step to seek permanent residency to be unlawful. 


Martinez's lawyers will now look to have him released from jail while he continues the process of becoming a permanent resident.


"Antonio followed the protocol the government put in place so that people married to U.S. citizens could stay with their families,” said ACLU of New Jersey Executive Director Amol Sinha. “And for that good faith, the government unconstitutionally punished him, his wife, and their two young children with the prospect of long-term separation."


Immigration: Sen. Bob Menendez joins faith leaders in demanding that immigrant families be reunited


More: A Clifton mother of three is deported to Albania, months after her husband's removal


Email: jongsma@northjersey.com 



    Meet immigration reporter for The Record and NorthJersey.com, Monsy Alvarado.
    NorthJersey

 


 
