ALBANY — Saying that makers of dangerous synthetic drugs continue to stay ahead of the law, Gov. Cuomo Thursday said he will seek legislation to crack down further on manufacturers of synthetic pot and fentanyl.

Cuomo said he will propose a bill to add 35 types of synthetic marijuana known as K2 to the state controlled substances list, subjecting those who make them to criminal drug penalties.

The 35 types are already illegal under federal law. Cuomo's legislation will give the state health commissioner the power to add to the list any new drugs that have been added to the federal list of controlled substances.

The governor said he will push a separate bill to add 11 types of fentanyl to the state controlled substance list.

While overdose deaths in the state involving opioids increased nearly 35% between 2015 and 2016, the number is significantly higher for fentanyl-related deaths.

The Cuomo administration says that fentanyl-related deaths increased 160% between 2015 and 2016, including more than 310% in New York City.

Fentanyl analogs have been increasingly found in heroin and cocaine sold in the state, the administration says.

The state has added compounds to the list of illegal substances in the past, only to see the makers of the synthetic drugs stay ahead of the law by slightly changing formulas when one compound is made illegal.

"It's a game and that's what they're playing," Cuomo said. "The law needs some flexibility."

He said his bill could include a provision outlawing specific chemical formulas or any derivative from those formulas.

Synthetic drugs have proven dangerous, sending scores of people to the hospital.

A 2016 report by the state Senate Independent Democratic Conference found that synthetic marijuana cost state taxpayers more than $22.7 million in hospital and jail expenses in 2015.

In all, more than 6,000 state residents were hospitalized due to the use of dangerous synthetic drugs, the report found.

Meanwhile, the state Department of Financial Services is sending a letter to insurance companies telling them they must cover anti-overdose drugs related to the use of fentanyl.

The letter is designed to keep insurers from placing arbitrary limits on the number of naloxone doses that are covered since fentanyl can be up to 50 times more powerful than heroin and it can take multiple doses of naloxone to reverse a fentanyl overdose, Cuomo aides said.

With the state Legislature likely not returning to Albany until January, it's unlikely the governor's bill will come up until the new year.

Meanwhile, Cuomo also announced the federal indictments of three Central Islip men in Suffolk County on drug trafficking and conspiracy charges.

He said the arrests were part of a joint federal and state enforcement effort to combat the illegal sale of K2 in New York.

The case also resulted in the seizure of 1,000 packets of synthetic marijuana and its chemical analogues.

"Make no mistake: selling this poison is illegal and we will continue to do everything in our power to crack down on sellers and hold accountable those who continue to break the law," Cuomo said.