ALBANY — State lawmakers launched a campaign Tuesday to keep in jail a former Black Liberation Army member who was convicted of the 1971 murder of two city cops.

Backed by police union leaders, lawmakers unveiled an online petition — www.noparoleforhermanbell.com - to urge the state Parole Board to deny Herman Bell's bid for parole. The 70-year-old Bell has a parole hearing in February.

"To put him back on the street would be horrendous," said Brooklyn Sen. Martin Golden, a Republican.

"This was an especially heinous crime and the release of Herman Bell would be an affront to all law abiding citizens," added Sen. Patrick M. Gallivan (R-Erie County), chairman of the Committee on Crime Victims, Crime and Correction.

Bell, Anthony Bottom and Albert Washington ambushed Officers Joseph Piagentini and Waverly Jones after luring them to the Colonial Park Houses — now the Rangel Houses — on W. 159th St. with a bogus 911 call on May 21, 1971.

Jones was shot in the head and died instantly.

Piagentini was shot 22 times after he begged for his life and told Bell and his cohorts that he had a wife and two children.

All three suspects were convicted of the two murders and sentenced to 25 years to life in 1979. Bell was also implicated in the 1971 murder of a police officer in San Francisco and convicted of voluntary manslaughter.

Washington died in prison but Bottom has a parole hearing scheduled for June and lawmakers also want the parole board to deny him parole.

"The message to those families and the message to other police officers and to the 19-and-a-half million people we represent is that we are not going to let these animals back on the street that are killing innocent cops," Golden said.

Bell has been up for parole every two years since 2004.

In 2014, he unsuccessfully sued the board over its denial, arguing he had shown remorse and had used his time in prison wisely by earning a master's degree in sociology, learning to play the flute and mentoring young inmates to avoid violence.

Earlier this month, Diane Piagentini gave a statement to the Parole Board urging that Bell remain behind bars.

A Parole Board official said the board will consider a "number of factors" before making its decision, including statements made by victims and victim's families, an inmate's criminal history, institutional accomplishments, potential to successfully transition back into the community, and perceived danger to public safety.