Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Sunny. High 93F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low near 70F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 9:54 am

Yiheng Percival Zhang

Yiheng Percival Zhang

A congressional committee is investigating potential misuse of research funds by a former Virginia Tech biological systems engineering professor charged with several fraud crimes last month in federal court.

The House Committee on Science, Space and Technology requested a bevy of documents from the university in a letter addressed to Tech President Timothy Sands last week.

Yiheng Percival Zhang, 46, is charged with wire fraud, making criminal false claims and making false statements to the “detriment of the United States Government’s innovation and development programs,” according to a federal affidavit filed in the U.S. Western District Court of Virginia. He has pleaded not guilty to the charges.

A university spokesman said Zhang no longer works at the school. An FBI agent testified that Zhang resigned effective last week, according to federal court documents. He was being held at Roanoke City Jail on Tuesday.

Zhang, of Blacksburg, has expertise in protein engineering, synthetic biology and biofuels. He is accused of defrauding the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy and Virginia Tech of more than $1.1 million.

Prosecutors allege that he filed grants for research already conducted in China, withheld grant funds from the university and lied on forms filed through federal agencies.

“In light of the highly competitive nature of government funding, the Committee is interested in understanding all the facts surrounding this case, what steps the University has undertaken to uncover the extent of the wrongdoing, and what safeguards Virginia Tech has in place to mitigate similar cases in the future,” the letter said.

The letter, signed by Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, asks for the university to provide the following documents and communications dating to August 2005:

Members of Virginia’s delegation on the committee requesting the documents, Barbara Comstock, R-Fairfax, and Don Beyer, D-Alexandria, were not immediately available for comment.

Tech spokesman Mark Owczarski wrote in an email that the university intends to provide all documents requested to the congressional committee. The committee requested those documents to be provided by next Thursday.

Zhang started teaching at Virginia Tech in 2005 and became a U.S. citizen in 2011. He was also paid by the Tianjin Institute in China. He received $50,000 annually from the institution, which is part of China’s academy of the sciences.

At a detention hearing last month, a transcript of which was later reviewed by The Roanoke Times, prosecutors alleged that Zhang was a flight risk and could have access to substantial financial resources.

He has been developing a natural sugar substitute with a market value of $68 billion, authorities said. His salary at Tech was more than $100,000 annually.

Zhang is involved in civil litigation in the same federal court over work he’s done with the substitute known as tagatose.

According to information from that transcript, a translator present for a search of his home in September overhead Zhang tell his wife he intended to go to China. Zhang was arrested that day. The wife later testified that after he left the university, he planned to spend five years temporarily living in China continuing his research.

“He’s not happy here,” Rui Feng, his wife, testified in Roanoke federal court.

Prosecutors opposed bond or release.

“If he managed in some way to get over to China, would there be any way to get him back?” said Stephen Pfleger, an assistant U.S. attorney.

“No,” replied FBI agent Craig Hunt.

Magistrate Judge Robert Ballou ruled Zhang would be held without bond.

Staff writer Jeff Sturgeon contributed to this report.

Yiheng Percival Zhang

A Virginia Tech professor is accused of defrauding the United States government and the univ…

Robby Korth covers higher education at Virginia Tech and Radford University.


                                    
                                        Whenever Robby Korth posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
