Sunny. High near 95F. Winds light and variable..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low near 70F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 6:54 am

Zhang

Zhang

A congressional committee is investigating potential misuse of research funds by a former Virginia Tech biological systems engineering professor charged with several fraud crimes last month in federal court.

The House Committee on Science, Space and Technology requested a bevy of documents from the university in a letter addressed to Tech President Timothy Sands last week.

Yiheng Percival Zhang, 46, is charged with wire fraud, making criminal false claims and making false statements to the “detriment of the United States Government’s innovation and development programs,” according to a federal affidavit filed in the U.S. Western District Court of Virginia. He has pleaded not guilty to the charges.

A university spokesman said Zhang no longer works at the school. An FBI agent testified that Zhang resigned effective last week, according to federal court documents. He was being held at Roanoke City Jail on Tuesday.

Zhang, of Blacksburg, has an expertise in protein engineering, synthetic biology and biofuels. He is accused of defrauding the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy and Virginia Tech of more than $1.1 million.

Prosecutors allege that he filed grants for research already conducted in China, withheld grant funds from the university and lied on forms filed through federal agencies.

“In light of the highly competitive nature of government funding, the Committee is interested in understanding all the facts surrounding this case, what steps the University has undertaken to uncover the extent of the wrongdoing, and what safeguards Virginia Tech has in place to mitigate similar cases in the future,” the letter said.

The letter, signed by Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, asks for the university to provide the following documents and communications dating to August 2005:

Members of Virginia’s delegation on the committee requesting the documents, Barbara Comstock, R-Fairfax, and Don Beyer, D-Alexandria, were not immediately available for comment.

Tech spokesman Mark Owczarski wrote in an email that the university intends to provide all documents requested to the congressional committee. The committee requested those documents to be provided by next Thursday.

Zhang started teaching at Virginia Tech in 2005 and became a U.S. citizen in 2011. He was also paid by the Tianjin Institute in China.

He received $50,000 annually from the institution, which is part of China’s academy of the sciences.

At a detention hearing last month, a transcript of which was later reviewed by The Roanoke Times, prosecutors alleged that Zhang was a flight risk and could have access to substantial financial resources.

He has been developing a natural sugar substitute with a market value of $68 billion, authorities said. His salary at Tech was more than $100,000 annually.

Zhang is involved in civil litigation in the same federal court over work he’s done with the substitute known as tagatose.

According to information from that transcript, a translator present for a search of his home in September overhead Zhang tell his wife he intended to go to China. Zhang was arrested that day. The wife later testified that after he left the university, he planned to spend five years temporarily living in China continuing his research.

“He’s not happy here,” Rui Feng, his wife, testified in Roanoke federal court.

Prosecutors opposed bond or release.

“If he managed in some way to get over to China, would there be any way to get him back?” said Stephen Pfleger, an assistant U.S. attorney.

“No,” replied FBI agent Craig Hunt.

Magistrate Judge Robert Ballou ruled Zhang would be held without bond.

Zhang


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




