Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Associated Press


		
		
		
		
	


									May 23, 2018 | 8:46pm
												

FRESNO, Calif. — A California inmate bragged to a judge that he was performing a public service when he killed a cellmate awaiting trial on charges of sexually abusing a child.

The Fresno Bee reported Wednesday that a judge sentenced a remorseless Gary Dale Poole to 75-years-to-life in prison after a jury convicted him of first-degree murder. Poole on Tuesday said in court for the first time that he strangled Michael Stauff, 62, in April 2014.

“Mercy was mixed with justice. He met his maker,” Poole told Superior Court Judge Jonathan Conklin.

Poole, 67, had previously denied killing Stauff, who was found strangled by ripped bed sheets in their shared cell. A jury convicted him of murder after an hour of deliberations in March.

The judge called Poole’s admission Tuesday “striking in its audacity” after denying the charge for so long.

“In trial, you said you were innocent. Today, we know that was an absolute fabrication. You did it,” Conklin said in sentencing Poole to the maximum term.

Court records showed Poole was convicted of unlawful consensual sex with an inmate, burglary, bank robbery and robbery. At the time of Stauff’s killing, Poole was in jail on drug charges, court records showed.

Prosecutors argued during the trial that Poole killed Stauff because he refused to share food and coffee and the two argued over a television.

Stauff’s cousin, Lynda Qualls, told the judge she and her family appreciate that Stauff’s death was “valued by the court system and not swept under the rug.”

Qualls said she hoped Poole would receive mental health counseling in prison.

Stauff was awaiting trial on charges of lewd or lascivious acts with a child and continuous sexual abuse of a child.


			Read Next
		


			
				Catholic seminary says it has no applicants for fall progr...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Catholic seminary says it has no applicants for fall progr...			
		

Share Selection

143,318

90,955

52,942

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters