Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The fund began in 2016 and uses a revolving pot of about $300,000 to bail people out of jail. As their cases are resolved, the money goes back into the fund.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Nashville Bail Reform Advocate, Gicola Lane is thanked by an inmate after his interview at the Davidson County Male Correctional Development Center in Nashville, Tenn., Wednesday, Jan. 24, 2018.
(Photo: Lacy Atkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Gicola Lane doesn't need to set an alarm in the morning.


Her phone starts ringing early, and it doesn't stop.


Lane runs the Nashville Community Bail Fund and spends her days fielding calls from lawyers who represent poor people sitting in jail, unable to cobble the money together to get out.


She bounces between local jails like a pinball. Inside, she interviews inmates who might get to use the bail fund. To qualify, they must face charges with bails of $5,000 or less.


The fund began in June 2016 and uses a revolving pot of about $300,000 to bail people out of jail. As their cases are resolved, their bail money goes back into the fund to help others. 



    Nashville Bail Reform Advocate Gicola Lane helps inmates with the Bail Fund Program.
    Lacy Atkins / The Tennessean

► More: Nashville judges agree to push forward with plan to release more inmates without bail


So far, the fund has gotten more than 150 people out of jail, paying an average bail of almost $5,000 per person.


Lane splits her time between jail, the bank and the bonding office, working from home, from the car or from coffee shops when she can. She moves with quiet energy of someone who knows every minute she spends on the clock counts.


One day recently, she was racing to pay a pregnant woman's bail. But the computer systems tracking the woman's location were pointing in different directions. Lane drove downtown, then to a jail on Harding Place and then back to find the woman.


“It’s absolutely a race,” she said in a telephone interview from her car. “These people are relying on you for their freedom. You want to get as many people out as you can in a day.”


If Lane can help a defendant, she saves them from making what can be an agonizing choice: wait in jail for an attorney to develop a defense or take a plea deal in a bid to get out and return to normal life.


“Somebody in that situation gets put in this Catch 22,” said Nashville Public Defender Dawn Deaner, who works to match suspects with the bail fund. "There's pressure from that person wanting it to get resolved quickly."


Taking pressure off by getting more poor people out of jail while their case is processed has allowed public defenders to work more to clear their clients of charges, rather than trying to negotiate quick plea deals to get them out of jail.


“I can’t even describe how wonderful it is to have this bail fund in Nashville for not just the clients in our office who have this opportunity but for the lawyers in our office,” Deaner said. “The reality is our clients oftentimes think we’re not doing anything to fight for them and that we are part of the system steamrolling over them.”


Poor people who stay in jail because they can't afford bail face a series of "cascading" negative effects on their lives, according to a 2016 report from Harvard University Law School.


Jail time can jeopardize their employment, their health, their family and their homes, the report said. They are much more likely than their wealthy peers to plead guilty and they tend to have longer sentences than people who get out of jail while their cases are adjudicated.


Bipartisan efforts to reform money bail and release more people without it have taken hold nationally in recent years. Nashville officials are working on a parallel track to pursue that goal here.


Money bail is meant to ensure someone returns to face their charges in court, but research has shown high bail amounts don't boost appearance rates. But low-cost initiatives, like the text-message reminders Lane sends her clients, can.


As of December, the fund has doled out more than $500,000 in bonds, and only $11,000 has been forfeited.  


Lane doesn't have to read the research to understand the impact of her work. The East Nashville native has had to scrape together funds to bail out her friends, family and father over the years.


She's helped people hold car washes and other fundraisers to raise the money to get people out of jail. She knows that for many people, it's not as hard to pay relatively low bails, and she sees her work as a way to level the playing field.


“Right now there’s two justice systems. There’s one for the wealthy and then there’s one for the poor," she said. “If you have money, regardless of what your charge is, you get out.


“If you don’t have money you sit there.”


Longtime Nashvillians Joan Shayne and Martin Brown Sr. established the bail fund in an effort to tackle that divide.They see the bail fund as a way to help people while making a statement on what they see as wealth-based inequality of the money bail system.


In 2018, Shayne, Brown and Lane are ready to make a public push to grow donations to the bail fund so that they can help more their current average of about five people per week.


Part of that work will be educational. They hope to approach people to stress the presumption of innocence and the struggles poor people face in the shadows.


“I thought if you’re arrested, you’re guilty. I thought that too, so there’s a lot of learning that has to go on and I think probably a lot of empathy,” Shayne said. “We have to make it real for people.”


One way they are seeking to do that is by telling more stories about the people they help.


The fund helped Lem Peebles pay his bail on a 2017 aggravated assault charge that was ultimately dismissed by the state. Without the fund's help, he said, he would have sat in jail and jeopardized his way of life.


"I would have lost my apartment and everything," he said. "I don't have much as it is but I would've lost that."


Getting people out of jail also stands to save taxpayer money.


In 2016, 9,066 defendants charged only with misdemeanors stayed in jail until their case was resolved, city data showed. About half of them were charged with lower-level misdemeanors like trespassing or disorderly conduct.


The average bail for misdomeaner cases was $4,051.


Those defendants spent an average of three days in jail. The cost for those stays adds up to more than $3 million annually.


The bail fund is not the only ongoing effort to reduce the number of people who face a money bail.


As many as 30 bail funds, including one in Memphis, have cropped up nationwide. And numerous think tanks have pumped out reports disputing the efficacy of cash bail.


► More: Inside the effort to change Nashville's cash bail system — and avoid a lawsuit


In Nashville, District Attorney Glenn Funk, Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall and Deaner have worked together to expand a city program that releases defendants without a money bail. That system would seek to determine an individual's risk of skipping court or getting arrested without considering money at all.


Nashville judges signed off on the expansion Wednesday, clearing the way for many misdemeanor defendants to sidestep cash bail.


In a statement, the bail fund praised the move.


"We were happy to hear the news that Nashville’s General Sessions judges are pursuing a plan to release more people pretrial without setting bail," the statement read.  "We are hopeful that this will be an important first step in ending money bail and pretrial incarceration in Davidson County."


Lane will still work to help people who don't qualify for the city program as long as it's needed.


“The bail fund is immediate relief,” she said, stressing the need for a more durable, long-term fix. “We want to put ourselves out of business.”


Reach Adam Tamburin at 615-726-5986 and atamburin@tennessean.com. Follow him on Twitter @tamburintweets.


 
