Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

John Bernard Feit exits the 92nd state District Court after he was sentenced to life imprisonment for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

John Bernard Feit exits the 92nd state District Court after he was sentenced to life imprisonment for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

The former priest convicted of a local schoolteacher’s 1960 murder was transferred from the Hidalgo County jail Monday morning to the Texas Department of Criminal Justice’s Byrd Unit in Huntsville.


John Feit, 85, was transported to the facility from the Rio Grande Valley at 3:30 a.m., according to Hidalgo County District Attorney Ricardo Rodriguez.

Feit was sentenced to life in prison on Dec. 8 after a jury found him guilty of the murder of Irene Garza, who died by asphyxiation likely by suffocation.


The Byrd Unit is an all-male facility that can house approximately 1,300 offenders, according to TDCJ’s website.

Feit’s attorneys have yet to file a motion for a new trial, but have 30 days to do so upon the verdict and sentence being entered into record. If filed, this would be the first step in appealing the conviction, which is expected.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.