Some clouds. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Some clouds. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 9:54 pm

A motorcycle pulls a casket carrying the body of John M. “Indian John” Williams on Thursday. Hundreds of bikers joined in a “Last Ride” to honor Williams. The procession traveled from Palmer Funeral Home in River Park to Southlawn Cemetery south of South Bend. Williams died in a motorcycle crash early Saturday while eluding Mishawaka police.

A motorcycle pulls a casket carrying the body of John M. “Indian John” Williams on Thursday. Hundreds of bikers joined in a “Last Ride” to honor Williams. The procession traveled from Palmer Funeral Home in River Park to Southlawn Cemetery south of South Bend. Williams died in a motorcycle crash early Saturday while eluding Mishawaka police.

SOUTH BEND — As hundreds of bikers paid last respects to John M. “Indian John” Williams at his funeral Thursday, police and prosecutors were keeping a tight lid on an investigation into his death.

Williams, who would have turned 47 today, died early Saturday after crashing on his motorcycle during a chase by Mishawaka police. His passenger, 41-year-old Rebecca Mack, of Mishawaka, avoided life-threatening injuries, police have said.

Like all vehicular deaths, the case is being investigated by the St. Joseph County Fatal Crash Team, which is composed of investigators from the South Bend, Mishawaka and county police departments.

But since Williams died and therefore can’t be charged with a crime, it was unclear Thursday just what FACT is investigating. Neither Prosecutor Ken Cotter nor the lead FACT investigator on the case, St. Joseph County police officer Corey Brothers, were available to be interviewed Thursday, said Cotter’s spokeswoman, Jessica McBrier.

The Tribune on Thursday contacted Mishawaka police Chief Kenneth Witkowski and asked him whether the officer or officers chasing Williams followed department policy on high-speed pursuits, an issue that police departments are increasingly grappling with nationally. Witkowski wouldn’t comment, saying he had yet to receive a phone call or see a news release from FACT, indicating the investigation had finished.

“At this point I have not even read the report or anything,” said Witkowski, who spent Tuesday and Wednesday in Indianapolis for a police academy graduation. “I have had nothing yet sent to my office regarding that pursuit.”

Still, Witkowski said, he felt that his officers acted appropriately.

“I don’t think, in my mind, from what I’ve seen so far, we did anything wrong,” he said. “But that’s about all I can give you at this point.”

Meanwhile, it remained unclear which officer or officers were chasing Williams. Officer Don Magnuson is listed on the department’s daily log as the officer reporting the crash. Witkowski declined to identify the officer or officers involved.

Shortly before 1 a.m., police responded to a report of a “fight” at The Phoenix Bar &amp; Grill, 101 Lincoln Way W. in downtown Mishawaka, according to a FACT news release issued Saturday. An officer was interviewing witnesses when one of them identified a woman as the “alleged assailant” in the fight, apparently Mack, jumping on to the back of Williams’ motorcycle.

The officer called out that he was in pursuit, got into his marked squad car, turned on his lights and tried to catch up to the motorcycle as it drove away, traveling at high speeds and disregarding stop signs and lights, according to the FACT news release.

How Williams and Mack traveled from the Phoenix to the spot on Jefferson Boulevard, near the Village Pantry south of AM General, where they crashed, was also still unclear. An audio recording of radio chatter between officers and a 911 dispatcher reveals that an officer following Williams and Mack told a dispatcher that Williams had run a stop sign on Marion Street, which crosses Cedar Street near Battell School, before turning east onto Jefferson near Jordan Ford, and then ran a red light at Merrifield Avenue.

At one point, an officer tells the dispatcher that the officer had run over something in the road, flattening his tire. It then sounds as though other officers join in the chase, but no officer ever describes seeing the motorcycle crash.

“Send medic,” an officer says. “I’ve got one female, conscious, bleeding from the head. One male. Unconscious. Have a pulse though.”

In a 2015 case, Williams was charged with battering his girlfriend, Jeanette Taylor, in their South Bend home. Prosecutors charged Williams with misdemeanor counts of domestic battery, battery resulting in bodily injury, marijuana possession and interference with the reporting of a crime. In exchange for dismissal of the other three counts, Williams pleaded guilty to the interference charge, which alleged he prevented Taylor from calling 911. St. Joseph Superior Judge David Chapleau sentenced Williams to a year in jail but suspended that time and placed him on probation.

Although the FACT news release indicates police told Williams to stop so that they could question Mack regarding the fight, Williams also had a warrant out for his arrest. The warrant, also called a “body attachment,” had been issued four days earlier, apparently because Williams had failed to pay about $600 in court costs from a 2015 case, according to court records.

Prosecutors in April 2016 also filed a petition to revoke Williams’ probation in that case, alleging he had failed to comply with a court-ordered substance abuse program, but the outcome of that petition was unclear from court records.

McBrier said she did not immediately know the reason for Williams’ recently issued warrant.

As of deadline Thursday, the Mishawaka Police Department had not replied to The Tribune’s request for a copy of the department’s policy on high-speed chases.

According to a copy of the policy, updated in 2014, that the department provided for a February 2017 article, officers pursuing an “actual or suspected violator of the law” are allowed to run stop signs and traffic lights, “after slowing down as necessary for safe operation;” exceed the speed limit as long as they don’t “endanger life or property;” and can “disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.”

At the same time, officers must drive “with due regard for the safety of all persons.”

An estimated 500 bikers took part in a “Last Ride” for Williams on Thursday, riding from Palmer Funeral Home in River Park to Southlawn Cemetery south of South Bend. Since his death, friends from the tightly knit biker community have expressed sorrow on Facebook.

“My heart hurts so much right now...” one woman posted. “He was the most loving caring exciting human on this planet, he was so full of joy ... man this can’t be.”




                                    
                                        Whenever Jeff Parrott posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Be the first to know about breaking news with email alerts sent right to your inbox.

The news you need to start your day, sent weekday mornings.

The day's top 5 news headlines, sent weekday afternoons.