Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Francisco Vasquez

Francisco Vasquez

A McAllen man was arrested Sunday for the attempted murder of a peace officer after he fired at a Palmhurst police officer.


The incident took place after a Palmhurst police officer noticed Francisco Vasquez’s truck parked on the side of the road in the 3400 block of North Taylor Road.


Vasquez, 36, was slumped over the steering wheel, according to the criminal complaint, and when the officer approached the vehicle for a “welfare check,” Vasquez refused to exit his truck.

The officer subsequently noticed Vasquez trying to conceal a handgun, after which the officer “backed up to a safe distance and began requesting secondary units to assist,” notes the complaint.


The handgun was later determined to be a .380 caliber pistol.


It was at this point the officer heard Vasquez make three to four attempts to chamber his weapon, the complaint notes, followed by the sound of a gunshot from the truck.


Vasquez then attempted to drive away, the officer in pursuit. A second patrol unit arrived and the officers “positioned themselves in tactical advantage and began giving (Vasquez) verbal commands,” to which Vasquez complied and was taken into custody.


He gave two breathalyzer readings, the first .116 and the second .101, both above the legal limit of .08.

In addition to attempted capital murder of a peace officer, a first-degree felony, Vasquez was charged with unlawful carrying of a weapon, a Class A misdemeanor, and driving while intoxicated, a Class B misdemeanor.


If convicted of the most serious offense, Vasquez could face a prison sentence of 5 to 99 years.


At the time of this writing, Vasquez remained in the Hidalgo County jail on a combined bond of $330,000.



Francisco Vasquez


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.