Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Opioid and heroin abuse rose to an epidemic level on a national scale in the past year, and Cheatham County isn’t immune to the trends.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


An example of a Narcan kit, which is used to administer naloxone to people who have overdosed on opioids
(Photo: MNPD)

Opioid and heroin abuse rose to an epidemic level on a national scale last year, and Cheatham County isn’t immune to the trends.


In 2017, Cheatham County EMS recorded 149 overdoses, including 12 overdose deaths.


Cheatham County Sheriff Mike Breedlove explained, though, that some overdose deaths were not recorded in Cheatham County’s database, even if that’s where the overdose occurred.


Based on Tennessee’s current statistics protocols and guidelines, the county in which the death is pronounced – rather than the county in which the incident took place – is where the death is recorded, he said.


So, if a Cheatham County resident overdoses at home and is transferred to a medical facility in Nashville for treatment where he or she later dies, that death is tallied in Davidson County.


Of the 149 overdose cases, there was one heroin, two fentanyl and six other opiates confirmed throughout the year.


One way local law enforcement agencies work to combat overdoses is administration of the opioid antagonist Naloxone, known by its brand name Narcan.


“Narcan is only being used to reverse the immediate effects of what that person is dealing with at that very moment, which is an overdose,” Cheatham County EMS Director Danny Schaeffer explained. “Narcan is not a cure. It is not going to fix this person. What it does is it allows us to keep them alive until they’re ready to live again.”


Cheatham County law enforcement began administering Narcan in March 2016.


EMS data show 206 Narcan administrations in Cheatam County in 2017.


“The bottom line is, it saves lives,” Breedlove said of the “wonderdrug,” which he added is only effective in opioid overdoses and produces no side effects.


He calls Narcan an "instrumental" tool which is a "no-brainer" for law enforcement to use.


Cheatham County Sheriff Mike Breedlove (Photo: Submitted photo)

“What I found out was, the first responders – being deputies – got there on the scene, (and) basically all they could do was stand there and watch while waiting for EMS to get there (to administer Narcan)," Breedlove said. "By the time that they got there (sometimes), it was too late.


“This is such a needed program in every single county in the state,” Breedlove said. “We are at an epidemic..”


State officials reported at least 1,451 drug overdose deaths in Tennessee in 2015, though the actual number is likely higher by the hundreds, a previous USA TODAY NETWORK – Tennessee report found.


The following year, the estimate jumped to at least 1,631 drug overdose deaths statewide, according to the Tennessee Department of Health.


State data also show deaths from fentanyl, a synthetic opioid, upped from 169 in 2015 to 294 in 2016, a previous report states.


The number of Tennesseans who died from drug overdose, including opioids, hit a record high in 2016. (Photo: Created with Piktochart.)

The Cheatham County Sheriff’s Office policy is to train all officers to use Naloxone. 


And they're not the only agency administering Narcan  in Tennessee.


The Metro Nashville Police Department requested and received a prescription for nearly 800 Naloxone kits in June, and ordered the medication for just under $60,000, according to an Aug. 11 press release.


“The Medical Examiner’s Office tells us that, during the first five months of this year alone, at least 87 deaths were related to opiates or opioids,” Chief Steve Anderson said in the release. “That figure underscores the necessity of our officers carrying Naloxone as they answer calls for service and conduct investigations across the city. The medication will also help protect our personnel who may unwittingly come into contact with these dangerous substances.”


According to an Aug. 11 USA TODAY NETWORK –  Tennessee report, Nashville Mayor Megan Berry said 245 opioid-related overdoses occurred in Davidson County last year.


Cheatham County EMS data show that from March 1, 2015 to March 1, 2016, 119 overdoses were reported, including 14 overdose deaths, and from March 1, 2016 to March 1, 2017, 113 overdoses were reported, including six deaths.


“Obviously, the number of overdoses (in Cheatham) have come down, but the number of doses of Narcan have not. They’ve actually went up,” Shaeffer said. “We’ve seen a trend over the last several years with these opioid overdoses where it’s not just a prescription medication overdose or just a heroin overdose. You have a combination of things that are causing that overdose...  You’re dealing with a lot of different opioid medications and a higher strength of those, which is requiring a lot more Narcan to be administered to these people.”


Breedlove recounted listening to family members of loved ones battling addiction, and they ranged the spectrum: teenagers and young adults all the way up to senior citizens – grandparents – dying of drug overdoses.


“This is an epidemic that has (affected) every single family,” Breedlove said. “It crosses all lives, whether it’s race, gender, age, everything. Who thought of a grandparent dying of drug overdose because they’re shooting up this liquid in their veins?


“Regardless...it’s our job to save that life,” he said. “That’s what we sign up for. That’s what we give the oath for. It doesn’t matter who that person is.


“We can’t save them all, but we’re going to try.”
