Clear skies. Low around 70F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low around 70F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:52 pm

State Sen. John McCollister

State Sen. John McCollister

Thanks for subscribing to the Omaha World-Herald and supporting local journalism. As a subscriber, you have exclusive access to articles that carry the Subscriber Plus logo (left). 

LINCOLN — The last voice the public defender expected to hear on recordings of jailhouse phone calls was his own.

Ben Murray of Hebron recently told a panel of state lawmakers how staff at the Hall County Jail in Grand Island recorded 59 phone conversations between him and a client. The conversations were supposed to be confidential under the rules of attorney-client privilege.

A judge referred to the breach as “the CD fiasco.”

Murray stumbled across the problem in 2015 when he was given a compact disc from the Nebraska Attorney General’s Office during pretrial discovery, which requires prosecutors to turn over incriminating evidence to the defense. Murray soon learned that the prosecutor had waited six weeks before telling the jail to stop recording the private calls and about three months before giving the CD to the defense lawyer.

The situation prompted District Judge Vicky Johnson to take the unusual step of disqualifying three assistant attorneys general and a county attorney from the case.

“It is simply not comprehensible to this court why the state sat on this as long as it did,” the judge said in her August 2015 order.

The incident illustrates the need for a law that would ban jails from recording attorney-client phone calls, State Sen. John McCollister said last week during a hearing before Legislature’s Judiciary Committee. The Omaha senator included the provision in Legislative Bill 776, which also would prevent county jails from charging excessive fees for inmate phone calls.

Murray, who practices in Hebron and represents criminal defendants in several south-central Nebraska counties, testified in support of both provisions of the bill.

“These people are poor,” he said. “They can’t afford the bonds they’re asked to post, so they’re stuck in jail for the entirety of their cases. ... The least we can do is give them unmonitored phone access to their lawyers.”

Nebraska jails commonly record calls by inmates, and those recordings can be provided to investigators. But calls between defendants and their attorneys are supposed to be off-limits.

Mark Foxall, director of the Douglas County Department of Corrections, said his staff programs phone numbers of defense attorneys into the jail’s phone system. A computer is supposed to automatically block the recording of any inmate call made to his or her lawyer, Foxall said.

The rules of attorney ethics govern confidentiality in conversations between lawyers and their clients. Attorneys may not divulge information without a client’s informed consent and attorneys must notify opposing counsel if they accidentally hear a secret exchange, said Mark Weber, Nebraska’s Counsel for Discipline, the officer that investigates attorney misconduct for the State Supreme Court.

Intentionally listening to such conversations or not reporting those heard inadvertently would represent an ethical violation. It would typically be up to the defense counsel to report such breaches to a judge, who in turn would sort out how to address them.

While the rules prohibit prosecutors from eavesdropping on confidential discussions, they also require defense lawyers to take reasonable steps to shield client conversations from government surveillance.

The example that surfaced at last week’s hearing involved a man charged in late 2014 with sexual assault of a child in Nuckolls County. Murray was appointed to represent the man, and the Attorney General’s Office stepped in to help prosecute the case.

Not long after charges were filed, the defendant was transferred to the Hall County Jail for pretrial detention. Because the 90-mile distance between Hebron and Grand Island made regular face-to-face meetings impractical, Murray’s office accepted calls from the defendant over the ensuing months.

The jail’s handbook informed inmates that their calls “may” be recorded, according to the judge’s ruling in the case. A jail employee told the judge that attorney calls can be blocked upon “proper request,” but the handbook did not instruct inmates how to make such requests.

Assistant Attorney General Charles Byrd obtained a CD of phone recordings in late February 2015. While listening to the CD, Byrd said he heard the defendant attempt to make a call to his lawyer, who happened to be out of the office at the time. As a result, Byrd told the judge, he heard no sensitive information and did not listen to any more of the attorney-client calls.

Murray filed a motion to disqualify the prosecutors. He also asked the judge to suppress any evidence authorities may have obtained from the calls.

The prosecutors did not oppose the suppression motion. But they did dispute the disqualification request, saying no one in the office listened to any exchanges between Murray and his client.

In her order, Johnson said she believed prosecutors when they said they didn’t hear sensitive discussions. Nonetheless, the judge also said she was “deeply bothered” by the months of delay before the breach was shared with the defense.

“The notion that a prosecutor has in hand 59 recorded conversations between the defendant and his lawyer has the blatant appearance of unfairness,” she said.

She did not disqualify the entire Attorney General’s Office, which assigned one of its prosecutors stationed in Scottsbluff to the Nuckolls County case. A letter to the court from Corey O’Brien, who now supervises the office’s criminal division, assured the judge that the Scottsbluff attorney would have no communications with the lawyers who had previously been assigned to the case.

The defendant was eventually convicted and is currently serving a sentence of 23 to 25 years in prison.

Byrd, the prosecutor who waited to turn over the calls, now works as a deputy prosecutor in Lancaster County. Reached by phone Monday, he referred questions to the attorney general’s staff.

Todd Bahensky, director of the Hall County Department of Corrections, said he had only a vague recollection of the matter. He said his staff can program the phone system to block recordings of calls placed to an attorney’s number.

But the attorney has to request the block, he added.

State Sen. John McCollister




College students in Nebraska would be given an anonymous survey about sexual assault at their schools under a bill introduced by an Omaha state senator.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Joe Duggan works in The World-Herald's Lincoln bureau, where he helps cover state government, the Legislature, the state Supreme Court, southeast Nebraska and Lincoln. Follow him on Twitter @JoeDugganOWH. Phone: 402-473-9587


                                    
                                        Whenever Joe Duggan posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


