Portland News

BY GORDON R. FRIEDMAN

Columbia Sportswear chief executive Tim Boyle plans to pay $1.5 million to jumpstart construction of a 100-bed homeless shelter and services center on city-owned land under and next to the Broadway Bridge, officials announced Tuesday. 

 

The shelter, which project organizers are calling a “navigation center,” is intended to offer the homeless a place to sleep, eat, bathe and do laundry plus connections to health care and social services.

 

Boyle’s gift will be paid as a donation to Oregon Harbor of Hope, a nonprofit run by real estate developers working to find solutions to Portland’s intractable homelessness problem.

“I care about Portland. I grew up here. Our business is here," Boyle said Tuesday during a press conference. "We’re trying to attract more employees to the city, to our place of business, and that's why I’ve decided it's important to invest in the project."

 

In a prepared statement given to The Oregonian/OregonLive on Monday, Boyle said the navigation center project will play an important role in helping homeless Oregonians "who need services and support and who deserve our compassion." He also said the plan is an example of how governments, businesspeople and nonprofits can work together on homelessness policy.

 

One of Oregon’s few billionaires, Boyle has been a vocal critic of the city’s approach to the homeless in downtown. He said in an op-ed published in The Oregonian last November that workers at Columbia-owned bootmaker Sorel had been intimidated by homeless people and bothered by detritus left on sidewalks by the homeless. Boyle threatened to relocate Sorel and voiced support for Mayor Ted Wheeler’s request to hire at least 80 more police officers to help regulate homeless people’s conduct and downtown crime. 

 

Several major American cities, particularly San Francisco, operate homeless navigation centers. Former Portland Mayor Charlie Hales proposed building one in Portland in 2016, but the plan never became a reality. Josh Alpert, then Hales’ chief of staff, said at the time that opening the shelter was “too expensive, too complicated, and in the end, not worth it for our purposes.”

Wheeler, who took over after Hales, on Tuesday gave the city's blessing to the navigation center concept and public-private partnerships aimed at tackling homelessness.

 

“Homelessness is a humanitarian crisis unfolding on our streets, and demands a community-wide response,” Wheeler said in a statement to The Oregonian/OregonLive on Monday. “I want to send the message that if you have ideas, or resources or expertise – and you want to put them to work addressing homelessness – government can be an effective partner.”

 

During Tuesday's announcement, Wheeler said Portland needs "more shelter capacity" for the homeless, and said residents ought to be more willing to help the homeless in their neighborhoods. "We can’t only support shelter as long as it’s not in our own backyards. We can’t only support affordable housing as long as it's not in our backyard," Wheeler said.

 

The mayor continued: "We can all contribute and we should. We all need to step up because this is a community issue and requires community-based solutions."

Multnomah County Chairwoman Deborah Kafoury praised the partnership announced Tuesday, along with city and county efforts to help the homeless. 

 

"We aren’t turning to pie-in-the-sky gimmicks," Kafoury said. "We’ve done things that we know work."

 

She said city and county agencies have done much to increase the number of homeless shelter beds and make it easier for people on the streets to get into shelters and more permanent housing.

 

Kafoury also took a shot at the Republican-led Congress and White House, saying current federal attitudes on housing and homelessness are more likely to "hurt our neighbors on the edge."

The chairman of Oregon Harbor of Hope, developer Homer Williams, has championed a variety of non-traditional homelessness solutions. He'd previously pitched converting city-owned properties, including a golf course and warehouse, into affordable housing, and a $100 million one-stop homeless campus. But, like Hale’s plan, none of the ideas have come to fruition. Last week he offered $7 million to buy the county-owned Wapato jail in a bid to turn it into a homeless shelter.

 

"This is a great day for Portland," Williams said Tuesday. He said businesses, nonprofits and wealthy locals must all "join this fight" against homelessness. "We have to embrace it and we have to participate in it," Williams said.

 

Don Mazziotti, a developer and Oregon Harbor of Hope board member, said Monday his group’s vision for a downtown navigation center is to help the homeless “find a way to recovery and productivity” and “show them where to go next.” Mazziotti formerly served as head of the Portland Development Commission, now known as Prosper Portland.

 

Mazziotti said notable Portland attorney Robert Stoll helped drum up political and business support for a navigation center, adding that Stoll pitched Boyle on the project. Stoll said last week that he has been building support for the project while also advising Wheeler and Multnomah County Chairwoman Deborah Kafoury on homelessness policy.

 

“The mayor and the county chair have asked me to be sort of an informal adviser to them on homeless issues and I’ve been trying to do that,” Stoll said, adding that Wheeler and Kafoury “wanted me to pull some of these groups together and see what we could do.” 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        