White nationalist Matthew Heimbach was arrested this week for assaulting his wife and her stepfather, who also happened to be his hate group's chief spokesman.

The bizarre incident began after the pair confronted Heimbach about his months-long affair with the wife of the spokesman, Matthew Parrott, according to charging documents.

The arrest report, obtained by the Southern Poverty Law Center, also said Heimbach hurt his wife by "grabbing her face" and made her cheeks bleed.

Heimbach was charged in Orange County, Ind., with one count of battery, another for domestic battery, strangulation and intimidation. He made $1,000 bail after being arrested in Paoli, the IndyStar reports.

Heimbach leads the Traditionalist Worker Party, which SPLC has branded a hate group, and he helped organize the "Unite the Right" rally in Charlottesville, Va., last year.

The fracas began when Heimbach's wife Brooke first confronted him about his affair with Jessica Parrott, her stepdad's wife.

Heimbach has previously said the three-month fling was over, but Matthew Parrott and his wife decided to test his will, the charging documents claim.

They set up Heimbach to see if he'd try and sleep with Jessica Parrott, which he did Monday night inside his trailer, which is on Parrott's property.

Matthew Parrott, who was watching from afar, ran into the trailer to confront the pair.

He poked Heimbach in the chest, at which point the white nationalist leader twisted Parrott's hand — then allegedly choked him from behind.

"I fell on the floor and I escaped the trailer to return to my house," Parrott wrote in an affidavit.

Heimbach followed Parrott into the house. Parrot threw a chair at Heimbach to defend himself, but Heimbach started strangling Parrott until he briefly lost consciousness, the arrest report claims.

When Parrott came to, he heard his wife telling Heimbach that Brooke had a cellphone recording that confirmed their affair.

Parrott grabbed his other daughter and took off, calling cops from a Walmart parking lot in Paoli, the arrest warrant says.

The responding officer then went to Heimbach's trailer, where he and Brooke were putting their kids to sleep.

Heimbach tended to the children and told Brooke, whose name is redacted from the documents, to "send the police away and tell them everything was fine."

The officer heard a scuffle and ran into the home — finding a "visibly upset" Brooke clutching one of her children, according to the arrest documents.

Brooke, who made a recording of Heimbach's demands, later wrote in an affidavit that he "kicked the wall" when she refused to shoo away the cops.

"He then grabbed my face and threw me onto the bed," she wrote. "My cheeks bled a little."

Heimbach was arrested when the officer rushed in.

This isn't his first run-in with the law.

He gained notoriety for assaulting a black protester at a Louisville, Ky., campaign rally for President Trump in 2016.

Heimbach, who moved to Paoli after becoming friends with Parrott online, pleaded guilty in July 2017 to disorderly conduct and was sentenced to 90 days in jail.

His jail sentence was suspended so long as he stays out of trouble for two years, according to the SPLC.

Parrott indicated he'd left the Traditionalist Worker Party when contacted by the group.

"I'm done. I'm out," he told the organization. "SPLC has won. Matt Parrott is out of the game. Y'all have a nice life."