Advertisement

Supported by

By Michael Cooper

CINCINNATI — A concert hall that was simply too cavernous: hard to sell out and leaving audiences feeling distant from the music. Lobbies that have grown shabby over time. A fortresslike presence, somewhat isolated from the city just outside its doors.


These are all problems that Lincoln Center and the New York Philharmonic have been trying to fix for nearly two decades at the theater now known as David Geffen Hall — and still hope to, after their announcement earlier this month that they had scrapped a $500 million gut renovation in favor of a more modest approach.


But Cincinnati faced these issues, too — and went ahead and did something about them. Just as the latest Geffen Hall plans were being sent back to the drawing board, this city’s stately 1878 redbrick Music Hall was reopening to cheers after a $143 million, 16-month renovation that restored its High Victorian Gothic grandeur, uncovered bricked-over windows to open its facade to the surrounding neighborhood and shrank its giant auditorium by removing a thousand seats.


As he welcomed the cheering audience back at the reopening concert on Oct. 6, Louis Langrée, the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra’s music director, said the new hall would bring them “closer to the music.”

“It used to be so long and narrow and cold,” Walter E. Langsam, 82, an architectural historian and longtime patron, said during intermission. “It embraces you now in a way it never did.”

A visit to the renewed Music Hall suggested that it could be a road map of sorts for officials in New York.


In modern concert halls, as in modern baseball stadiums, smaller is generally considered better. Orchestra officials here said that while there had been more sellouts in recent seasons, especially of Cincinnati Pops concerts, they were the exception, not the rule. Just as ball teams no longer build stadiums for World Series crowds, most orchestras no longer build halls that only visiting superstars can hope to pack.


Audiences raised on high fidelity and high definition demand more intimate experiences.


“I think our ears are different,” the new president of the New York Philharmonic, Deborah Borda, said of the trend toward smaller halls in recent decades. “We are now used to having a sound system and cranking up the sound, or putting buds in our ears.”

Before its renovation, Cincinnati Music Hall was, in the pejorative words of some musicians, a bit of a barn. The multiuse hall, which was the site of the 1880 Democratic National Convention, held 3,417 seats — many tucked under balconies. Now the side and rear walls on its lower levels have been moved in. When the orchestra plays on a stage that now extends past the proscenium and into the auditorium, the hall holds just 2,282. (It can seat up to 2,524 when other resident companies, including the Cincinnati Opera, the Cincinnati Ballet and the Cincinnati May Festival, perform.)


“It gives you a little more latitude to program things that you know are going to be challenging to some, but which are part of your mission,” said Jonathan Martin, the orchestra’s new president, who noted that popular pieces like “Carmina Burana” would always outsell Bruckner symphonies. “But we should be doing Bruckner, because that’s part of our mission.”

When the New York Philharmonic first planned to leave Carnegie Hall for Lincoln Center in the 1950s, it envisioned a hall with 2,400 seats. But it built one with more than 2,700 amid a post-World War II classical boom. Now, Ms. Borda said, there is a “real possibility” that a redone Geffen Hall will lose seats “to enhance the acoustical experience and to make it a better emotional experience at concerts.”


With fewer seats, Music Hall can now fit more comfortable ones — a bit wider, with added legroom. And in a nod to the desires of modern audiences, cup holders allow concertgoers to bring drinks into the auditorium with them, as Broadway audiences often do these days. (At one point on reopening night, the clinking of ice cubes could be heard during a quiet passage of Scriabin’s “Poem of Ecstasy.”)


The restrooms were upgraded, increasing capacity by about 60 percent. The hall also added more concession stands.

One reason New York scaled back its plans for a radical transformation of Geffen Hall was the growing fear that building the most recent, complicated design threatened to leave the Philharmonic homeless for more than two seasons. That was considered a real risk to the orchestra, which can ill afford to hasten the loss of its subscriber base.


Here in Cincinnati, the orchestra carefully planned for its single season away from home, taking over a theater in downtown Cincinnati and spending $3 million to bring it up to snuff. It scheduled more visiting stars than usual and offered free parking to subscribers to try to keep them in the fold. During its season in exile, an orchestra official said, its subscriptions only dipped by 4.6 percent.

Another fear in New York was the rising price tag — and questions about how much money the city could be expected to provide. Cincinnati scaled back some of its earlier ambitions, too, in order to bring costs down, but in the end accomplished its wish list with $143 million. Grants from the city of Cincinnati and the state of Ohio, along with state and federal tax credits, provided roughly half the budget.


A big difference between the renovation here and the one in New York is that Music Hall has long been celebrated for its acoustics, while Geffen Hall has been considered acoustically troubled.


For its reopening, Cincinnati’s hall got an acoustical workout, from the ebullience of John Adams’s “Short Ride in a Fast Machine” to the Classicism of Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 1 to the blaze of Scriabin. In Jonathan Bailey Holland’s atmospheric new piece “Stories of Home,” whispered murmurs of the woodwind and brass players, speaking in English and German, came through clearly. Janelle Gelfand, a veteran Cincinnati critic, judged the new acoustics “a work in progress” in a review in Classical Voice North America, praising some aspects but criticizing others.

In an interview backstage, Mr. Langrée praised the new hall as “very honest,” and called its stage a vast improvement that allowed the musicians to hear one another better. “The sound was less clear before,” he added. “It was mostly working on balance, dynamics. Now it’s about colors.”


Mr. Langrée, of course, is also the music director of the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra, which plays each summer in Geffen Hall. When he was asked if the Cincinnati renovation might show the way forward for his New York base, he laughed.


“Oh, yes, I think so,” he said, before stopping himself. “But I cannot give any advice.”

Follow Michael Cooper on Twitter: @coopnytimes.










Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS