Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Isabel Vincent


		
		
		
		
	


									March 10, 2018 | 5:55pm
												

The emails began their urgent ping-pings on Lloyd Constantine’s Blackberry at 7:55 p.m. Sunday.

They were from Eliot Spitzer, Constantine’s boss, who was desperately trying to set up a time to speak on a secure landline. After several requests had still not resulted in a telephone conversation, Spitzer asked his senior policy advisor and former mentor to meet him at 7 o’clock the next morning — March 10, 2008 — at his Fifth Avenue apartment.

Constantine wondered what could be so pressing that it required him to wake up at 4 a.m. for the long drive from his weekend home in Columbia County to Spitzer’s Manhattan pad the next morning?

Frustrated, he picked up the phone and called the New York governor who was just beginning the second year of his term. What happened next turned both their worlds upside down.

“Eliot was crying and said two jangling, if not necessarily inconsistent, things,” recalled Constantine in “Journal of the Plague Year,” his 2012 memoir. “He said, ‘You can throw me over if you want to, and I won’t blame you if you do. As of now, you are my counsel.’ ”

Constantine, one of the governor’s most trusted friends, assumed that David Nocenti, the governor’s official counsel, had died suddenly.

He was not prepared for what Spitzer said next: “I have to resign — as early as tomorrow, the Times will report that I have been involved with prostitutes — I can’t continue as governor.”

Without yet knowing anything more about what would snowball into one of the biggest scandals in New York state history, Constantine offered Spitzer vague reassurances and tried to catch some sleep before embarking on his pre-dawn commute.

The next morning, Constantine dutifully rang the doorbell of the sprawling apartment where Spitzer, then 47, lived with his wife, Silda Wall, 50, and their three teenage daughters.

As the governor ushered his friend inside for what would be a frenzied series of strategy meetings over the next two days, he told his old friend: “Welcome to a Greek tragedy.”

The dramatic downfall of New York’s 54th governor, which took place a decade ago this week, could have been written by Aristotle himself.

Eliot Laurence Spitzer, the ambitious and hard-charging scion of a storied New York real estate fortune, had eschewed the family business and dedicated his life to public service. He held himself to a high moral standard, friends said, railing against corruption and going on a crusade to clean up New York. His two terms as state Attorney General, between 1999 and 2006, saw him take on big banks and brokerage houses — cracking down on securities fraud and other white-collar crime. The self-proclaimed “Sheriff of Wall Street” was elected governor in a landslide and promised nothing less than “a new brand of politics” when he was sworn in on Jan 1, 2007.

“No matter how great the challenge — no matter how impossible the odds — our destiny will never be a path to follow, but always a trail to blaze,” Spitzer said in his inaugural speech.

But just 14 months and nine days later, that trail quickly went up in smoke. Overnight, the mighty sheriff became the “Love Gov.”

On March 12, a grim-faced Spitzer, with his wife of 21 years by his side, ended a promising political career, citing “my private failings” in a shocking resignation speech.

Said failings, it turned out, stemmed from his fascination with hookers.

“I was shocked,” Constantine told The Post. The Spitzer adviser, who also tendered his resignation on March 12, 2008, now runs his own Manhattan litigation firm. When he headed the anti-trust bureau for the Attorney General’s office in 1982, Constantine had hired Spitzer as a 23-year-old student intern, believing he was destined for greatness — maybe even the White House.

He told The Post he had no idea of his friend’s clandestine hookups.

By the afternoon of March 10, 2008, as Spitzer met with Constantine in what had become the frantic huddles — including his wife, Silda, and sister, Emily — at his Fifth Avenue home, Spitzer was identified as “Client 9” by The New York Times. The Times referenced a federal indictment against Emperors Club VIP, a high-end, international escort agency that provided call girls to clients in New York City, Washington, DC, Miami, London and Paris for between $1,000 and $5,500 per hour.

Spitzer had wanted to resign immediately, but Silda, surprisingly, and Constantine strongly urged him to reconsider. Constantine set about researching sex rehab centers in Arizona for the disgraced pol, he told The Post.

“[Spitzer] would have had a rough 2008, but by 2009, he would have gotten back to the absolutely spectacular plans we had in terms of every issue,” said Constantine of his expectations at the time, adding that the governor’s administration was only a week away from completing a new budget to address a $4.4 billion deficit when the scandal broke.

“We urged him to stay for the good of the people of the state,” said Constantine. “But I guess he just didn’t want to be governor anymore.”

Spitzer’s tragic flaw, hidden from even those closest to him, seemed to be a penchant for illicit sex.

“He always acted so squeaky clean and would get really upset if you said anything even slightly off-color,” said David Paterson, the former lieutenant governor who would take over Spitzer’s position when he resigned. “When people act like that you know there’s something wrong. But no one, no one expected this.”

On the morning that Spitzer was huddled in his apartment with advisors, Paterson was in Albany. He told The Post he received a call from Spitzer’s secretary asking if he would fill in for the governor at a meeting with Cardinal Edward Egan, who was in Albany. Paterson, who didn’t know that Spitzer was still at his home in Manhattan, refused.
“It would have been like the Queen of England meeting the vice president and not the head of state,” Paterson said. “It just wasn’t done, and I knew I would somehow be blamed for it later, so I just didn’t go.”

When he finally heard the story of Spitzer’s fall from grace on a conference call with Spitzer’s chief of staff, Richard Baum, and his own advisor Charles O’Byrne, Paterson was in shock.
“I went to say a prayer for the Spitzers and then I called my father,” he told The Post.

Legendary Harlem political operative Basil Paterson asked his son if he had said a prayer when he received the call. When Paterson said he had, his father responded, “Good. Now go and say one for yourself.”

Much to everyone’s surprise, Spitzer had used the high-end escort agency Emperors Club VIP in the past, and federal agents had traced as much as $80,000 in transfers from his bank accounts to the agency over a two-year period. The feds had been monitoring the escort agency, and on March 6 arrested four members of the group on money-laundering and prostitution charges.

The tryst that would end Spitzer’s political career occurred on Feb. 13, 2008, at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, where he checked into Room 871 under the name George Fox — one of his closest friends, who later said he knew nothing of Spitzer’s secret life.

Spitzer had wired $4,300 for his rendezvous with a woman known to him as “Kristen.” The 22-year-old brunette was just five years older than Spitzer’s eldest daughter, Elyssa, then 17. Kristen was later identified as aspiring New Jersey singer Ashley Dupre.

 

On that fateful February afternoon, Dupre traveled by train from Penn Station to DC for the rendezvous. Dupre, who later confessed she had no idea who her client was, had been warned by her bookers at Emperor’s Club that Spitzer was “difficult.” Following the assignation, Dupre was caught on an FBI wiretap telling her pimps, “I don’t think he’s difficult. I mean it’s kind of like, whatever, I’m here for a purpose. I know what my purpose is. I’m not a … moron.”

Later, she elaborated on her encounter with Spitzer in an interview with People magazine: “Some guys, they want to have conversations and really get to know each other. With him, it clearly was not like that. It was more of a business transaction. Strictly business.”

A source told the feds that Spitzer conducted his trysts still wearing calf-length black socks.

In early March, federal investigators had called to inform Dupre that they were investigating one of her clients. Dupre confided the information to her mother, who called her on the morning of March 12 as a somber Spitzer read out his terse resignation, which was broadcast live.

“I try not to revisit that place too often,” said Dupre, referring to the resignation — and the image of a downcast Silda Wall standing stoically next to her husband. “But when I think about his speech, I think of her face, her eyes, the hurt.”

Wall’s devotion to her disgraced husband inspired CBS’s 2009 “The Good Wife,” a TV series about the travails of the humiliated spouse of a politician who ends up in jail following a sex and corruption scandal. The popular drama aired until 2016.

In the end, no federal charges were filed against Spitzer. The investigation found no evidence that he had misused public or campaign funds. The feds also cited “insufficient evidence” to bring charges against Spitzer for “any offense” related to his payments to the prostitution ring.

Wall has never spoken publicly about the sex scandal that led to her husband’s resignation, and quietly filed for divorce at the end of 2013.

A week after Spitzer announced his resignation, David Paterson was sworn in as the 55th governor of New York. In his first press conference, he confessed to several extramarital affairs, including a tryst with a state employee. His wife, Michelle Paige Paterson, stood quietly by his side but later revealed that she had also strayed in their marriage.

“I didn’t want to be compromised, I didn’t want to be blackmailed, I didn’t want to hesitate taking an action because the person on the other end might hurt me or my family,” Paterson said at the time, adding that no public funds had been used for the affairs. “I just thought this was the time to come forward and reveal this.”

Constantine told The Post that he listened to the press conference in horror.

“God, this just isn’t going to be good,” he said.


			Read Next
		


			
				Where are the Spitzer scandal figures now?			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Where are the Spitzer scandal figures now?			
		

Share Selection

149,176

98,068

52,640

41,359

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters