
    
        
            By Noelle Crombie

ncrombie@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

A 27-year-old man sped off of a pier in his pickup truck in Astoria Wednesday morning -- a dramatic scene captured on video by a local man who was working along the Columbia River at the time.

The man, Timothy Erofeeff, 27, of Scotts Mills, was treated for hypothermia after the incident.

Erofeeff is suspected of trespassing on boats at North Tongue Point early Wednesday. He apparently left the area and returned about 10 a.m. when police attempted to arrest him on accusations of criminal trespassing.

He took off when they approached, prompting a short police pursuit that stopped short of Pier 2 of North Tongue Point. Erofeeff sped onto the pier and drove into the water.

Police said Erofeeff was able to get out of his vehicle. He swam away from police but eventually came back. Eventually, employees from a nearby marine company reached him by skiff and pulled him out, police said.

“He just took off straight toward the pier,” said J.D. Moreland, 50, of Astoria, who had a brief conversation with the man before police arrived. 

Moreland said he pulled out his phone and shot video as the man sped up. “He just started driving on that pier as fast as he could.”

Moreland said he was impressive by how quickly police and others came to the man’s aid.

“They talked to him and told him not to panic and called him back in,” he said.

Erofeeff was booked into the Clatsop County Jail on accusations of criminal trespass, violating his parole, attempting to elude police, reckless driving and escape.

His pickup, meanwhile, remains under water.

-- Noelle Crombie

ncrombie@oregonian.com

503-276-7184

@noellecrombie


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        