
    
        
            By Geoff Herbert

gherbert@syracuse.com,


syracuse.com

A manhunt is underway for a Michigan couple accused of killing and torturing a young child.

MLive.com reports the New Year's Day death of a 4-year-old girl in Sumpter Township, about 22 miles outside of Ann Arbor, has been ruled a homicide. Police were called to the Woods Mobile Home Community on Jan. 1 for a report of an unresponsive child who had severe burns to her extremities.

The girl, identified as Gabby Barrett, was taken to the nearby St. Joseph Mercy Hospital, where she was pronounced dead. According to WNEM, an autopsy found the girl had "multiple traumatic injuries" and "signs of Battered Child Syndrome (multiple injuries, multiple sites, multiple ages)."

The girl's mother, 24-year-old Candice Renea Diaz, and her boyfriend, 28-year-old Brad Edward Fields, have both been charged with felony murder, second-degree murder, and first-degree child abuse and torture. 

WILX reports Fields has also previously been accused of assaulting Diaz, shooting her dog and then shooting himself. Fields was arrested on domestic violence charges but Diaz later told police she didn't want to press charges.

The Sumpter Township Police Department said Monday they've been searching for the couple since Saturday. Authorities believe they're driving a black 2002 Chevrolet Cavalier, with Michigan license plate DTR1854.

Both remain at large as of Tuesday morning.

Anyone with information on their whereabouts is asked to call the U.S. Marshal Detroit Fugitive Apprehension Team's 24-hour hotline at 1-313-234-5656 or the Sumpter Township Police Department at 1-734-461-4833 ext. 305.

WILX reports U.S. Marshals are offering a reward of up to $5,000 for information leading to the arrest of both Diaz and Fields.

Additional photos of the couple and their vehicle can be seen here:




            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        