ALBANY — A state commission on Wednesday declared Rikers Island to be among the worst locally-run jails in New York and said it's time to "expeditiously" close the beleaguered facility.

In a blistering report, the state Commission of Correction described a "deeply disturbing and discouraging situation" at Rikers that endangered both staff and inmates.

The report slammed city officials for doing little to rectify the situation — despite repeated pleas and offers of assistance from the state.

"The (Department of Correction) has demonstrated both an unwillingness and inability to take necessary actions to remedy identified violations, often concerning facility safety and security," the commission said in its 73-page report.

The commission said the city's "protracted" 10-year plan to close Rikers was inadequate given DOC's inaction and called for a faster shuttering of the facility.

"Rikers Island is, and has been, violating essential constitutional protections and State laws," the report stated.

"There is no Rikers Island closure plan that is legally binding on future city administrations nor is there a proposed timetable that is reasonable considering the length, seriousness and spiraling year to year increase of violent incidents and degrading conditions facing both inmates and staff," the report concluded.

Eric Phillips, a spokesman for Mayor de Blasio, defended the mayor's handling of the jail and took a shot at Gov. Cuomo, who has called for a faster closing of Rikers.

"The mayor's not only invested deeply in improving conditions at Rikers in the short term — he's made the historic decision to close the jail and move off the island as soon as possible," Phillips said. "We appreciate the governor beginning to show interest in this process, and in fixing the embattled prison system he runs."

The commission's report, which was based on inspections of Rikers facilities throughout 2016 and 2017, found numerous health and safety violations, including incidents of prisoners left unsupervised, improper population counts, inadequate inspections and documentation of firearms used at the facility, and unsanitary conditions in jail cells and food service areas.

Commission members also noted more than a dozen incidents in recent years where inmates died because of mistreatment or shoddy care by staff, including a 2014 "accident" where an individual was left inside a cell with a malfunctioning heating system that drove the temperature above 100 degrees. The inmate died of extreme hyperthermia.

The report also noted that despite having less than half of the inmate population housed in county jails throughout the state, Rikers has far more significant incidents, including assaults, sex offenses and facility disturbances.

Between Jan. 1, 2016 and Nov. 27, 2017, Rikers had 13,523 incidents compared to 8,972 at all the other county jails.

"The evaluations of Rikers Island reveal extensive and systemic non-compliance with fundamental and compulsory regulations intended to provide for a safe, stable and humane correctional system," the report stated.

The report declared Rikers to be among the 5 "worst offenders" of local lockups in the state, along with the Greene County Jail, the Erie County Holding Center/Correctional Facility, the Dutchess County Jail and the Onondaga County Justice Center/Penitentiary.

Gov. Cuomo's administration pledged to review the report and used its findings to once again criticize de Blasio's plan to close Rikers within 10 years.

"There is no doubt that we will demand focus and an expeditious resolution to these systemic, unconscionable and illegal conditions," said Cuomo's Chief Counsel Alphonso David.

"The current plan to close Rikers Island Jail on a 10-year timeline is wholly unacceptable and repugnant to federal and state constitutional principles," David added. "The governor, who has been fighting for meaningful criminal justice reform his entire career, has repeatedly said 10 years is too long because 'justice delayed is justice denied.'"