Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 6:54 pm

McGuire

Dart

McGuire

Dart

Thursday was a magnificent evening in Goochland County. Stars were visible in the clear sky and children played football on a school field under the lights, a snap of cold in the air.

The Goochland High School auditorium was two-thirds full. U.S. Rep. Dave Brat, R-7th, one leg crossed over the other, applauded speakers from the front row of a forum hosted by the Goochland Tea Party. Sandy Rios, the director of governmental affairs for the American Family Association, was the keynote speaker.

Also inside to speak was John McGuire, the Republican candidate for House of Delegates, District 56, to succeed Del. Peter F. Farrell, a Republican from Henrico County who opted not to seek re-election.

Just a few minutes away, a group of about 40 people gathered at a recreation center for a Goochland NAACP debate, discussing things like forfeiture of personal property without a warrant and the death of mentally ill inmate Jamycheal Mitchell in 2015 in the Hampton Roads Regional Jail, where he wasted away after state officials failed to transfer him to a hospital as ordered by a judge. Inside the forum was Melissa Dart, the Democratic candidate for the House seat.

The Republican-leaning 56th includes Louisa County and parts of Goochland, Henrico and Spotsylvania counties.

“My whole life has been about teamwork and leadership,” McGuire, 49, a former Navy SEAL, told those gathered at the high school. “I’ve been in politics now for nine months, but I’ve been a leader my whole life and I know from being in the military there really is no substitute for hard work.”

McGuire founded a fitness training business called SEAL Team Physical Training Inc., which has locations in Richmond, Short Pump, Charlottesville, Washington and Atlanta. He started the business 19 years ago and has 55 employees.

He drew a long standing ovation from the audience when he said he had been a SEAL for 10 years.

He said he was abandoned by his mother at age 5 and lived in foster homes. In October 2006, he broke his neck in an accident and was paralyzed.

A doctor told his wife, “If John does make it through the night, he will never use his arms and legs again,” McGuire said.

But “I never had a doubt that I would be strong again.”

On his campaign website, McGuire says it took him a year to learn how to walk again and three years to write his name.

In Goochland on Thursday, McGuire recognized veterans and first responders in the audience, saying he puts first responders in the same group as the armed forces.

He said one reason he’s running for delegate is “because I’m sick and tired of seeing police officers shot in the back.”

McGuire, whose brother Rusty McGuire is the commonwealth’s attorney in Louisa County, said in a follow-up interview that he was referring to situations in which police officers were shot without warning.

He told the tea party forum he has a message for police officers when he does radio interviews: “When I get elected in November, I will absolutely, always have your back.”

He also opposes moving or relocating Confederate monuments from public places.

“I think we should teach history, not erase it, and I think everybody here would agree with that, too.”

McGuire told those in the auditorium everyone should respect law enforcement and the military.

“We do have an incredible country and I don’t think we need to subscribe to the agenda of the media. We have an incredible country,” he said.

Dart and McGuire both live in Henrico.

Dart, 46, a health care consultant with AllyAlign Health in Glen Allen, has the task of trying to persuade Republican voters in the district to vote for a Democrat. Support for public education is a main part of her pitch.

Dart wants to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, expand broadband internet to rural areas that currently don’t get money for it, and raise Virginia’s $7.25-per-hour minimum wage, maybe to something more like West Virginia’s $8.75 per hour. She supports LGBTQ rights and wants to increase spending for mental health services for veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder.

She is among House candidates who pledged to not accept donations from Dominion Energy or Appalachian Power Co., whose big donations and success with the legislature are under increasing scrutiny.

With her opponent at the tea party event, Dart didn’t have anyone to debate at the NAACP forum. She answered questions alongside Francis Stevens, the Democrat running in District 65 against Del. R. Lee Ware Jr., R-Powhatan — who also was at the tea party forum and, like McGuire, talked about the importance of preserving Confederate monuments.

Dart said she recently spoke at an event to a woman who is an immigrant and has sons in college. The woman told Dart, “For the first time ever, I’m scared for their safety.”

“I was really struck by that,” Dart said. “She wasn’t hysterical, she wasn’t even upset. It was just very matter-of-fact.”

Racism didn’t go away and come back, Dart said, and communities are still trying to figure out solutions to painful issues.

“Frankly, arguably, because of the federal administration, people are emboldened and they feel, you know, we’ve got the Confederate flags. So we have to find a path forward. I don’t know what that is.”

After 20 years of living in Henrico, she said, people are asking her about Confederate statues.

“I never thought about the Confederate statues, but there’s real pain there.”

Dart said she supports proposals for a nonpartisan redistricting commission to draw legislative lines, which are currently drawn by members of the General Assembly.

She predicted that Democrats would make gains this year in the House of Delegates, where Republicans hold a 66-34 majority. She said that would help Democrats’ ability to influence legislation in committees.

“That’s where the real stuff happens,” she said. “And the more diversity we have, the more Democrats we have, the more women that we have, the more that we can peel away the layers of this voter suppression.”

In contrast to Dart’s support for Medicaid expansion, McGuire said the program is starting to be utilized by people who shouldn’t qualify for it, and he opposes expansion under the Affordable Care Act because he believes the federal dollars would come with requirements.

If elected, he said, he’d like to focus on simplifying the process for starting a business.

pwilson@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6061


Twitter: @patrickmwilson

McGuire

Dart

See our election coverage of the Richmond area and statewide races. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Patrick Wilson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Get the RTD Politics email update every morning during the GA and weekly all year

Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




