
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Will Paul Millsap‘s wrist injury cost the Nuggets a playoff berth?

Kiz: We see the $30 million man on the Denver bench. And forward Paul Millsap looks good in a suit. But when can we expect him back in a basketball uniform? He has missed more than 30 games after a fluke injury to his wrist. It would be foolish to rush the rehabilitation process. Nevertheless … while watching the Nuggets stuck in a win-one, lose-one rut, I wonder: Does coach Michael Malone miss Millsap as much as I do?

Mizell: Yes, it’s fair to assume that Malone and the rest of the Nuggets miss Millsap. A lot. But here’s what’s been so interesting about Millsap’s prolonged absence: The Nuggets largely survived the period immediately after his injury, including a brutal December in which they played 10 road games and had Nikola Jokic sidelined for seven contests with a sprained ankle. The puzzling losses have piled up after Christmas. Slipping up against Philadelphia without Joel Embiid or Sacramento without Zach Randolph or Atlanta or Phoenix during the NBA’s dog days is understandable. Losing to all of them is shocking. Heck, even split those games, and Denver would be a half-game out of the fifth spot in the West entering Tuesday’s games.



Kiz: After the Nuggets signed Millsap, the team’s leadership was very careful not to declare that his addition would guarantee a spot in the Western Conference playoffs for the first time since 2013. But why spend all that dough to go back to the lottery? I thought it was reasonable to expect the Nuggets would finish 47-35 with Millsap. Without him, they are a fringe playoff team, at best. So here’s the $30 million question: Will Millsap return too late to salvage a postseason berth?

Mizell: Even though the Nuggets have lost six of their last nine games, they still hold the eighth spot entering play Tuesday. And I think they’ll remain in the hunt down the stretch. But the season’s final month will be a bear. Denver closes March on a seven-game road trip, then plays six potential playoff teams in a row in April. What all the contenders in a crowded bottom of the Western Conference playoff race add or subtract at the Feb. 8 trade deadline will also impact who gets in and who stays home.

Kiz: In Millsap’s absence, Jokic and Jamal Murray have done a remarkable job to keep Denver in the playoff hunt, but instead of taking advantage of an easy schedule in January, the team has lost its sense of identity and dropped games that I fear the Nuggets will regret down the road. In what way does this team miss Millsap the most? And how big of an adjustment will it be for Jokic and Murray to adjust their playing style to Millsap upon his return?

Mizell: The Nuggets miss Millsap’s defensive presence, offensive versatility and on-court veteran leadership. What I’m most curious to see is if inserting Millsap back into the lineup again requires an acclimation period, or if the Nuggets pick up where they left off when they started rolling offensively in the eight games prior to his injury. There’s some wiggle room for growing pains in late October. Not so much after the all-star break.