Sunny skies. High 94F. Winds SSW at 5 to 10 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low around 70F. Winds SSE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 12:52 am

Matthew Stubbendieck

Metro columnist

Matthew Stubbendieck

Alicia Wilemon-Sullivan told her relatives and friends that she was going on vacation to Key West.

Then the Florida mother flew to Omaha on a one-way ticket to take her own life — with the help of her Nebraska boyfriend, Cass County authorities say.

The visit started out ordinary enough, say her boyfriend’s parents, Howard and Sheri Stubbendieck of Weeping Water, Nebraska. Their son, Matthew, 41, had picked up Alicia, 38, at Eppley Airfield on July 31.

They’d all gone out for dinner at Old Chicago in west Omaha that evening. The following morning, Howard chatted with Alicia before she and Matthew, who’d recently moved back to Nebraska from Florida, said they were going on a country drive.

Alicia never came back from the drive and within a few days, Matthew had taken Cass County Sheriff’s deputies to a wooded area near Weeping Water where Alicia’s partially decomposed body was found. He told authorities she had taken her life during an ordeal that took hours: She had cut her wrists multiple times and he’d tried to suffocate her to ease her death. He now is being held in the Cass County Jail on a felony charge of assisting suicide.

Howard Stubbendieck, a former mayor of Weeping Water and a retired quarry superintendent, said he and his wife had no idea that their son and girlfriend were planning her suicide — a way to end her pain from the cancer she said she had.

“I think she came here for three reasons,” he said in an interview Sunday. “To meet us. To see Matt. And to kill herself. Why would she do this to us?”

An affidavit, filed last week in Cass County Court, describes in graphic detail what happened on Aug 1.

Matthew Stubbendieck told authorities that Alicia, his girlfriend for 1½ years, had stage 4 cancer in her lymph nodes, neck, armpits and stomach and couldn’t live “another minute.” He said she didn’t have a regular doctor — and he’d never gone with her for treatment — but she had been diagnosed and treated in an emergency room.

He said she had come to Nebraska to end her life and wanted to die in his arms. He said he had made “a bunch of promises” — including to not tell anyone about her death for several months after it had occurred. But he had decided to break those promises by contacting authorities because it was “the right thing.”

During that country drive on Aug. 1, Stubbendieck said the couple looked for a place where Alicia could spend her final hours. They went to the MoPac Trail near Schramm Park near Nebraska Highway 31 in rural Sarpy County. But a worker was there, so they hunted for another out-of-the-way location and found it in Cass County. Around 2 p.m., while Stubbendieck stepped away to urinate, he said Alicia began cutting her wrists with a kitchen knife she’d taken from his parents’ house.

The ordeal lasted the rest of the day — more than seven hours — and Stubbendieck twice tried to end Alicia’s pain by suffocating her. After four hours in, he tried to do it as she slept, but she awoke and looked so frightened he stopped. She cut her wrists more, and he asked if she was ready. She said she was not — she wanted more time. An hour later, he asked if she was ready and she said yes. He tried again to suffocate her, but it looked to him like she was suffering even more and so he couldn’t go through with it. When he left her about 9:30 p.m., she was whispering.

Stubbendieck said he returned the next day, on Aug. 2, and found Alicia “deceased, lying on her back and not breathing.”

It was a few days later, Aug. 5, that he contacted authorities. Cass County Sgt. Karl Boehm pronounced her dead at 8:52 p.m. that day. By that point, her body had begun to decompose.

An autopsy, conducted by Douglas County coroner’s physician Michelle Elieff, included these findings: Cutting wounds on Alicia’s forearms and wrists were “consistent with commonly observed self-inflicted cutting wounds.”

There was no sign of blunt-force injury.

The toxicology report showed that she had morphine in her system, along with other chemicals including hydromorphone, a narcotic painkiller, and acetaminophen and diphenhydramine, which is an ingredient in antihistamines and sleep aids.

And the cancer? The pathologist did not explicitly address whether she had it beyond this detail: no tumors or masses.

From Stubbendieck’s cellphone and interviews with Alicia’s family and co-workers, authorities found evidence that the pair had planned her death in Nebraska. Alicia had arranged for a friend to watch three of her children (she has four, according to Howard Stubbendieck).

Matthew Stubbendieck most recently worked as a tree trimmer in Omaha. His criminal record in Nebraska includes various misdemeanors for driving under the influence and writing bad checks.

Assisting suicide is a felony charge that has rarely resulted in prison time in Nebraska and Iowa, according to a World-Herald review in 2016 of a dozen such cases in both states. County attorneys in Nebraska and Iowa told the newspaper last year that prosecutions under current laws are extremely rare and a prison sentence is not required. If a person doesn’t have a lengthy criminal record, the family of the victim is not seeking punishment and a suspect is unlikely to reoffend, a prison sentence is unlikely.

Wilemon-Sullivan’s family couldn’t be reached Sunday.

Howard Stubbendieck said he and his wife did not know Alicia well. He said they did not know what her plans were when she came to Nebraska, other than that the visit would be quick.

“She told us, ‘With this cancer, I don’t have long.’ ”

Matthew Stubbendieck




A missing person report filed with the Volusia County Sheriff’s Office in eastern Florida provides new details in an assisted suicide case involving a Nebraska man.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Metro columnist

Columnist Erin Grace has covered a variety of beats since she started at The World-Herald in 1998 — from education to City Hall and from the city's western suburbs to its inner-city neighborhoods. Follow her on Twitter @ErinGraceOWH. Phone: 402-444-1136.


                                    
                                        Whenever Erin Grace posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


