Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Ciro Treviño looks out across the courtroom in the 370th state District Court at the Hidalgo County Courthouse on Tuesday, November 14, 2017, in Edinburg. Treviño, 28, plead guilty to one count of racing on a highway causing bodily injury and one count of racing on a highway causing death for his alleged role in a two-car crash that killed Marcelo Flores, 20, and left Angel “Cordy” Garcia, 25, with a traumatic brain injury.

Linda Garcia, mother of Angel "Cordy" Garcia, testifies in the 370th state District Court at the Hidalgo County Courthouse on Tuesday, November 14, 2017, in Edinburg.

Linda Garcia moves her son Angel "Cordy" Garcia from the courtroom after she testified in the 370th State District Court at the Hidalgo County Courthouse on Tuesday, November 14, 2017, in Edinburg.

Ciro Treviño looks out across the courtroom in the 370th state District Court at the Hidalgo County Courthouse on Tuesday, November 14, 2017, in Edinburg. Treviño, 28, plead guilty to one count of racing on a highway causing bodily injury and one count of racing on a highway causing death for his alleged role in a two-car crash that killed Marcelo Flores, 20, and left Angel “Cordy” Garcia, 25, with a traumatic brain injury.

Linda Garcia, mother of Angel "Cordy" Garcia, testifies in the 370th state District Court at the Hidalgo County Courthouse on Tuesday, November 14, 2017, in Edinburg.

Linda Garcia moves her son Angel "Cordy" Garcia from the courtroom after she testified in the 370th State District Court at the Hidalgo County Courthouse on Tuesday, November 14, 2017, in Edinburg.

EDINBURG — Emotions ran high in the 370th district court Tuesday evening when a young man who accepted responsibility for a fatal crash that occurred nearly two years ago learned his fate.


State District Judge Noé González sentenced Ciro Treviño, who pleaded guilty to highway racing causing death and highway racing causing serious bodily injury, to six years in prison.


In the courtroom at the time were members of the defendant’s and victims’ families.

Treviño faced a sentence of two to six years instead of two to 20 per count, which is what each charge originally carried, as part of a Sept. 7 plea agreement reached between the Hidalgo County District Attorney’s Office and defense attorney Jose Antonio “Tony” Gomez.


Another term of the plea agreement is that Treviño, the 28-year-old son of a local attorney, will not be eligible for parole.


The second degree felonies stem from a Jan. 5, 2016, car crash that occurred when Treviño’s Corvette, which he had only purchased that morning, crashed into a Jeep at the intersection of 10th Street and Sprague Road in McAllen.


The passenger in Treviño’s vehicle, 20-year-old Marcelo Flores, was killed in the incident while the driver of the Jeep, 25-year-old Angel “Cordy” Garcia, sustained a traumatic brain injury.


Those in court Tuesday were played video of the January 2016 crash and heard from witnesses who described the impact it had on their lives.


According to the pre-sentencing investigation report, Treviño’s speedometer read 124 miles per hour, which the defendant “vehemently denied” in his testimony during the sentencing phase, telling the court that he remembered braking immediately before the impact.


Treviño also told the judge that while he admitted to racing on another road shortly before the crash, he accelerated only to “outdistance” Rene Raul Ramirez III in the vicinity of Sprague Street — this to show off his new vehicle.


Treviño was allegedly racing Ramirez III, whose trial on similar charges will be set for a later date.


“I believe that somebody needs to take responsibility for this,” Treviño said. “I want to do that to bring peace and I feel like it’s the wisest thing to do to quit denying my involvement in this tragedy… (and) if I acknowledge my mistakes and take responsibility for my actions.”


Gomez asked the judge to consider the mitigating factors in the crash when determining the sentence, factors which the attorney admitted did not “exculpate” his client. These include Garcia running a red light, being on the phone at the time of the crash and that he had alcohol and marijuana in his system.


Assistant Criminal District Attorney Vance Gonzales argued, however, that Treviño has faced previous misdemeanor charges of accident involving damage to a vehicle caused by driving at a speed of more than 100 mph, which were ultimately dismissed. This is in addition to “18 separate traffic infractions.”


Gonzales further noted that Treviño also had alcohol and marijuana in his system at the time of the crash.


“Yes, this was coming,” the prosecutor said of the fatal day, arguing that Treviño — who he described as having a history of street racing — disregarded a flashing yellow light and did not proceed with caution through the intersection.


On the heels of two high-profile cases — the Monica Melissa Patterson capital murder trial and last week’s execution of Ruben Ramirez Cardenas, a man he sentenced to death nearly 20 years earlier — the judge said this case was among the hardest he’s presided over in a career that spans two decades.


In addition, an emotional González said he was thinking of the case while swearing in his own son as an attorney, which occurred in the same courtroom only a few days before handing down Treviño’s sentence.


“There isn’t anything I’m going to do today that’s going to satisfy anybody,” he said, adding that the sentence would not bring justice to those in the courtroom.


Many in court Tuesday wore custom T-shirts that read: “Justice for Cordy (and) Marcelo.”

“The Garcias aren’t going to get justice here; the Floreses aren’t going to get justice here,” González said. “It’s not what this is for… this is to start the healing. There’s not anything I’m going to do today that’s going to make it easier for this young man (Garcia) to live his life… or for the Floreses to deal with half a birth …”


Before a handcuffed Treviño was taken into sheriff’s custody, Garcia, who sustained injuries in the crash that now require him to use a wheelchair, issued a statement.


“You ruined my life,” Garcia said. “You destroyed my dreams.”


Anger was evident in Garcia’s voice. At the time of the crash, the soccer aficionado had been training for a RGV Toros tryout.


“You took everything from me,” Garcia added. “I struggle every single day to learn to do everything all over again. My life will never be the same. I need 24/7 care. Who will take care of me when my parents are gone?”


He also criticized Treviño for showing no remorse after the crash, a similar accusation made by the prosecution.


Flores’ mother told Treviño in Spanish that she didn’t blame him for her son’s death and that she was grateful he had called her son’s twin brother to inform him of the crash so that he and his father could see him one last time. But she questioned how he had the nerve to continue racing after the crash.


She also offered Treviño’s parents some advice about holding their children accountable, saying that none of the three families would have found themselves in the courtroom had that happened.


Prior to exiting the courtroom, the judge reminded Treviño — who admitted to feeling as though his life was over — that he had something to look forward to upon his release from jail: a newborn daughter born Oct. 10, the day her father was originally set to be sentenced.


msmith@themonitor.com



EDINBURG — Before the second day of an emotional trial involving a fatal car crash, the man …


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.