Gallery: Mercer County corrections officers pack freeholder meeting


    
        
            By Kevin Shea

kshea@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

TRENTON -- The Mercer County corrections officers' union says county administration officials have been telling judges and defense lawyers that they will again propose closing the county jail and arrange a deal to ship inmates to Hudson County.

The union, PBA local 167, said in a statement the plan to close the jail is still bad and costly, and Mercer County Executive Brian Hughes' administration has not kept the union in the loop - as it claimed it would.

The county, the union says, has an opportunity to turn the jail plan around and save jobs.

"Shipping detainees out to Hudson County only benefits Hudson County; it is not the answer for Mercer County," PBA President Donald Ryland said.

A Mercer County spokeswoman did not address those specific allegations, and said the county continues to explore solutions to house, "a shrinking jail population in an antiquated correctional facility where most of the costs are fixed."

Hughes first proposed sending the bulk of county's inmates to Hudson County's jail in February 2016 as part of a $21 million per year deal to house 600 inmates, for two years.

The plan had the Mercer County Correction Center, in Hopewell Township, being turned into an intake and processing center. Layoffs would occur, officials said.

Hughes last year argued the plan would save Mercer County $20 million once up and running. Corrections officers resisted strongly, packing freeholder board meetings.

With state bail reforms underway, the jail population has been steadily sinking, from 600 to 700 before bail reforms, to about 500 per day earlier this year.

On Tuesday, the population was 462.

Plan to outsource Mercer jail inmates not dead, county says

Last year, Hughes put the brakes on the plan and called for a consultant study, but earlier this year said the plan is not dead.

The consultant's report is not ready, Mercer spokeswoman Julie Willmot said.

The union this week says Hughes needs to kill the plan.

He's been trying since early 2016 to "paint a fake picture," saying the jail was in "terrible condition" and that overtime and staffing costs were "out of control"

"Those claims were false in 2016, and continue to be false today," the statement said. "Despite what the county wants everyone to believe, the jail is not falling apart."

A state Department of Corrections inspection in December 2016 found the Mercer facility passed all state requirements and was in full compliance, the union says.

And the union says the Hughes administration has been making claims that the PBA contract is too costly, but the union worked without a contract for three years.

(The union and county have negotiated a new, three-year labor contract for 2015 to 2017 which will be voted on by the freeholder board next week.)

"The county administration cannot blame employees for its own managerial failings and then argue they must contract out for services," the union said.

"The reality is that a properly managed corrections center can effectively, safely, and efficiently house its detainees with controlled costs especially now with the jail population dropping," the statement said.

Ryland said sending Mercer inmates to Hudson County - 90 minutes away - still has "enormous" transportation, access and court issues.

Ryland said Hughes has a chance to better the jail.

"Simply put, this plan is like owning a home that you have to maintain and then keeping that home while renting an additional apartment at even greater cost," Ryland said.

"It makes no sense," he said.

Kevin Shea may be reached at kshea@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter@kevintshea. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        