Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.

A subscription is required to continue reading.

Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Sunny skies. High 94F. Winds light and variable..

A mostly clear sky. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:15 am

White

White

A Spotsylvania man has been charged with multiple offenses following a shooting in the parking lot of a county motel Wednesday in which two people were wounded.

Alonzo D. White, 27, is charged with two counts of malicious wounding, two counts of using a firearm in the commission of a felony, possessing a firearm as a felon and shooting into an occupied vehicle. He is being held at the Rappahannock Regional Jail.

According to Sheriff’s Lt. C.A. Carey, deputies responded to the Super Value Inn in the Massaponax area about 5:10 p.m. No victims were found at the scene, Carey said, but empty shell casings were recovered. White was arrested in a room at the motel, Carey said.

Police were later notified that a man and a woman had shown up together at a local hospital with gunshot wounds. They were treated and released.

Carey said detectives are investigating the incident, and the motive for the shooting and other details were unclear late Wednesday.

White’s criminal record includes a felony conviction for assaulting a law-enforcement officer in 2011 in Spotsylvania.

Keith Epps: 540/374-5404


kepps@freelancestar.com

White


                                    
                                        Whenever Keith Epps posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Featured event listings have been paid for.