Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Robert Walter Pensado

Robert Walter Pensado

The Precinct 1 Constable’s Office has arrested and charged a former Port Isabel High School coach and math teacher with having a sexual relationship with a student.


Robert Walter Pensado, 43, has been booked into Cameron County Carrizales-Rucker Detention Center on a charge of sexual assault and improper relationship between an educator and a student, jail records show.


Precinct 1 Constable Pete Delgadillo said the U.S. Marshals assisted in arresting Pensado at his Brownsville home on Wednesday.

According to Delgadillo, the relationship started in January 2017 when the teenager enrolled in Port Isabel High School and continued after Pensado left the high school in May 2017.


The girl’s mother, who filed the report, told authorities Pensado gave her daughter the phone and her daughter told her that Pensado provided the phone so they could communicate with each other.


“We immediately seized that phone, tagged it as evidence and got a search warrant,” Delgadillo said.


Authorities accuse Pensado of taking the teenager to places, including Beach Access 6, to have sex.


“When the student, the victim, was taken to Monica’s House, she spilled it out and said that a teacher would take her places to have sexual intercourse and according to the victim he was doing stuff she didn’t want to do. She would tell him ‘No, no, stop, stop’ and he woud continue to do it. In other words, he forced himself on her,” Delgadillo said.

Pensado was also a teacher at Rio Hondo High School for a short time, but resigned after being notified of the investigation.


He remains in jail on a $50,000 bond for each count and faces two to 20 years in prison on each count, Delgadillo said.


mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

