
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Photo provided by the El Paso County Sheriff's Office


More than 110 pounds of marijuana and approximately 75 plants that were ready for harvest were seized April 4, 2018, from a home in the 16500 block of Stage Stop Road in Peyton, Colo. Investigators also found a marijuana trimming machine and cash in the home. Photo provided by the El Paso County Sheriff's Office. 




More than 110 pounds of marijuana and approximately 75 plants that were ready for harvest were seized April 4, 2018, from a home in the 16500 block of Stage Stop Road in Peyton, Colo. Photo provided by the El Paso County Sheriff's Office. 




Raydel Fleitas




Adonis Carrillos-Ponce
Photo provided by the El Paso County Sheriff's Office




More than 110 pounds of marijuana was seized and two people were arrested following the bust of an illegal marijuana grow operation in El Paso County on Wednesday.

Members of the El Paso County Sheriff’s Office Rural Enforcement Outreach, SWAT, Crime Reduction Unit and the Metro Vice Narcotics Intelligence executed two search warrants Wednesday at homes where illegal grows existed, according to an El Paso County Sheriff’s Office news release.

Investigators seized 110 pounds of processed marijuana and about 75 plants ready for harvest at a home in the 16500 block of Stage Stop Road in Peyton. The street value of both was around $750,000, the sheriff’s office said. Cash and a marijuana trimming seize were also confiscated.

Raydel Fleitas, 28, was then arrested and booked into the Criminal Justice Center on two offenses related to marijuana.

In the 6200 block of Balance Circle in Colorado Springs, 7 pounds of processed marijuana was seized, estimated at around $25,000 in street value. Cash was also confiscated.

Adonis Carrillos-Ponce, 31, was booked into the Criminal Justice Center Jail on charges of offenses relating to marijuana and possession with intent, the sheriff’s office said.

Photos from the scene show garbage bags heaping full of marijuana strewn on the floor near piles of marijuana.