


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The two teams have proximity covered, but a back-and-forth struggle that has the competitive edge rotating sides is also a key ingredient.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Arizona Coyotes goalie Antti Raanta (32) blocks a shot by Vegas Golden Knights center Jonathan Marchessault (81) during the NHL home at Gila River Arena in Glendale on October 7, 2017.
(Photo: Cheryl Evans/azcentral sports)

After goalie Marc-Andre Fleury had been selected by the Vegas Golden Knights from the Penguins in the expansion draft and Rick Tocchet became the Coyotes’ newest head coach following a stint as an assistant in Pittsburgh, Fleury texted Tocchet.


“Let’s start a rivalry,” Fleury said.


The two teams have proximity covered, not only because they’re neighbors in the southwest but also in the Pacific Division, but a back-and-forth struggle that has the competitive edge rotating sides is also a key ingredient.


That part of the equation is still a work in progress since Arizona and Vegas have met only once, but it can start to develop as soon as Tuesday when the Coyotes visit the Golden Knights for their inaugural home game at T-Mobile Arena.


“We're both trying to climb the ladder, so you should be able to butt heads,” Tocchet said. “Who wants to get to the ladder quicker?”


Arizona Coyotes right wing Tobias Rieder (8), left, scores a goal on Vegas Golden Knights goalie Marc-Andre Fleury (29) during the NHL home opener at Gila River Arena in Glendale on October 7, 2017. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/azcentral sports)

Vegas lassoed the first wave of momentum in the five-game series with a 2-1 overtime win Saturday at Gila River Arena, a rally the Golden Knights triggered late in the third before scoring the game-winner in the extra period even though they had control of the game much earlier.


Despite the sometimes lopsided feel to the action, neither team ran away on the scoreboard – suggesting this matchup has the makings to be a tight battle.


Both were boosted by strong goaltending, with the Coyotes’ Antti Raanta posting 40 saves in his team debut and Fleury turning aside 27 of 28 shots he faced.


Each netminder’s performance was impressive.


“That was super,” Tocchet said. “Those two guys went at it. It's like two ace starting pitchers went at it, and it was who was going to budge. Those guys played great.”


Fleury was completing a back-to-back after playing the night before, snagging 45 saves Friday in Dallas en route to a 2-1 win over the Stars. But the steady showing wasn’t too surprising considering Fleury’s pedigree as a three-time Stanley Cup champion.


As for Raanta, he was playing his first game as a starter in the NHL after abbreviated prep time in training camp, as he was dealing with a left leg spasm that limited his availability.


“It's always fun to challenge even though you don't think (about) that too much,” Raanta said. “But it's always nice to put yourself there and try to beat the other guy at the other end.”


In the offensive zone, neither power play found a groove with the teams going a combined 0-for-7. The Coyotes and Golden Knights, however, did generate some quality looks throughout the game.


Vegas Golden Knights left wing Tomas Nosek (92) battles Arizona Coyotes center Nick Cousins (25) for the puck during the NHL home opener at Gila River Arena in Glendale on October 7, 2017. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/azcentral sports)

Center Jonathan Marchessault skated in alone on Raanta for a breakaway, and winger Erik Haula cut to the middle but was turned aside on a toe save from Raanta.


Coyotes rookie Clayton Keller had a wind-up from the slot early, and both he and winger Anthony Duclair had shots in-tight on Fleury in overtime.


Ultimately, though, Vegas had better execution and quite a bit more pressure. The Golden Knights outshot the Coyotes 42-28.


“When we’re making the other team's 'D' turn to defend, that's when we're at our best,” Tocchet said. “When we got a little sloppy is when we don't skate as hard and we don't get those pucks in deep. That's when we start to struggle.”


Arizona has the potential to go with a different offensive look Tuesday.


Winger Jordan Martinook is questionable to play after getting banged up Saturday. He didn’t practice Monday, taking a maintenance day to deal with his lower-body issue.


And the team recalled winger Mario Kempe from the American Hockey League and assigned center Dylan Strome to the Tucson Roadrunners.


Strome went pointless in two games after making the team out of training camp in his first year pro.


“He's definitely an NHL player,” Tocchet said. “But what's the right path to do it? I think this is the best path right now.”


The third overall pick in 2015 also made the Coyotes’ initial roster last season and appeared in seven games before being returned to junior. Now, the 20-year-old has the option to develop in the minors – which is the motive behind his demotion, as Tocchet wants Strome to play more minutes in more situations while trying to make faster decisions, be strong on the puck and in the right positions.


He’ll merit another look with the Coyotes if he accomplishes that. But when that happens is unclear.


“I don’t think he was horrible,” said Tocchet, who figured Strome is disappointed and plans to have lunch with him. “He’s gotta get a little quicker into situations, little quicker thinking. He's a young kid. There's some learning curves, but I think he's had a nice camp for us, too. I think he made some strides.”


Kempe was among the final cuts at camp, a somewhat surprising move since he was a speedy presence on the wings. But his two-way contract made him a flexible option in the organization, a situation Kempe understood even though he was disappointed. He had a goal and two assists in one game with the Roadrunners after racking up 39 goals and 83 points in 166 games in the Kontinental Hockey League the previous three seasons.


“We need energy guys that are going to stop on pucks and keep pucks alive,” Tocchet said. “He's on the bench, you call his number, you know he's going to buzz around there. That's infectious.”


The Coyotes have yet to roll out a combination that produces the first win of the season, as they’ve started 0-1-1.


If they find that lineup for Tuesday, they might achieve more than two points in the standings.


Arizona could also start to stoke a duel with Vegas.


“They are a rival team for us now, and I hope we get that feeling going now,” Kempe said. “They won the last game, so we gotta step up now and get that win in their building this time.”


More: Hockey healing Oliver Ekman-Larsson as he embraces new era for Coyotes


Blown leads: Issue for winless Coyotes


Antti Raanta: Makes solid Coyotes debut in overtime loss to Golden Knights


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Reach the reporter at sarah.mclellan@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8276. Follow her at twitter.com/azc_mclellan.


Coyotes at Golden Knights


When: 7 p.m.


Where: T-Mobile Arena.


TV/radio: NBC Sports Network/KMVP-FM (98.7).*


Outlook: The Golden Knights have started their first season 2-0, becoming only the third expansion team to win its first two games. Goalie Marc-Andre Fleury backstopped Vegas to both wins, stopping 72 of 74 shots to boast a 0.98 goals-against average and .973 save percentage. He was named the NHL’s second star of the week for his efforts. Vegas has scored four goals, and winger James Neal has accounted for three of them. Neal scored the team’s first two goals, becoming the first player to score an expansion team’s first two goals since Chris Kontos did the same for the Lightning in 1992. Defenseman Nate Schmidt is tied with Neal for the team lead in points with three. Schmidt has a goal and two assists. Vegas is 0-for-11 on the power play, while its penalty kill is 6-for-7.


*The game will be broadcast on KTAR-AM (620) if the Diamondbacks play a Game 4 Tuesday in the NLDS against the Dodgers.
