Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


WICHITA, Kan. (AP) — Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach has complied with a judge's order by fully registering thousands of voters whose eligibility to cast a ballot had been in limbo because of the state's now-defunct proof-of-citizenship requirement, according to court records. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

McALLEN — The Monitor has promoted a Rio Grande Valley journalist and seasoned newsroom leader who, together with the newspaper’s publisher, will oversee its editorial coverage.


Effective immediately, Michael Rodriguez has been tasked with helming the newsroom as deputy editor.

Rodriguez, 36, is a native of San Benito who previously served in a dual capacity as metro editor for The Monitor and editor of its sister paper, the Mid-Valley Town Crier. The 14-year veteran journalist, who has also served as managing editor for community newspapers in San Benito and Port Isabel, will continue leading MVTC’s editorial arm.


In addition, staff members learned Tuesday that Stephan Wingert — regional vice president for AIM Media Texas, which owns The Monitor — will be serving as both publisher and editor.

According to Wingert, these moves are part of a departmental restructuring designed to bolster newspaper operations. Taking such an approach meant eliminating The Monitor’s executive editor position, which Carlos Sanchez held for nearly five years.


“We wish Carlos well in his future endeavors and appreciate his service to our readers and community,” Wingert said. “This is a strategic decision to streamline our news operation. Our readers can continue to expect quality local journalism. We remain committed to being the most trusted source of local news.”


Rodriguez said The Monitor will maintain its focus on community news and looks forward to the task ahead of him.



Departure of editor 