Sunny. High 88F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 9:54 am

Danica Roem, elected Tuesday as the first transgender lawmaker in Virginia history, is no longer able to keep up with media requests.

She can’t receive texts because her phone is overloaded, and her voicemail is full.

But Roem — a newspaper reporter by profession — told journalists on a conference call Friday to make sure they got her personal cellphone at the state Capitol in January so she can maintain an open dialogue with the press and help with Freedom of Information Act requests.

The Virginia General Assembly will kick off a legislative session next year that will include a diverse new group of Democratic lawmakers following Tuesday’s historic gains the party made in the 100-member House of Delegates.

“As far as I’m concerned, I’m the reporters’ liaison in the General Assembly,” Roem said, noting that voters also elected a second journalist, Democrat Chris Hurst, who beat Republican incumbent Joseph R. Yost in the Blacksburg area. “We’ve put two reporters into the House of Delegates. That’s pretty dangerous for the existing folks who are there.

“I will always be a reporter before I’m a politician.”

That doesn’t mean she’d violate the trust of her legislative colleagues, she said.

Roem, a lifelong resident of Prince William County, was a reporter at the Gainesville Times and made fixing traffic congestion on a major thoroughfare in the county the top issue of her campaign against 13-term incumbent Del. Robert G. Marshall. She also wants to expand Medicaid coverage for the uninsured and focus on “core quality of life issues.”

She’s been too busy to handle every media request, but she took questions Friday on the conference call before heading out for an interview with CNN. “We’ve now made Route 28 world famous,” Roem said.

Roem’s defeat of a lawmaker known for his socially conservative positions is among the biggest of many stories stemming from Tuesday’s election. He attacked her over her personal life and gender identification while she focused on his inability to offer solutions to traffic congestion in the growing county south of Washington. The 13th House District also includes the city of Manassas Park.

Roem said she feels no need to be angry at Marshall, who has not called her to concede or congratulate her.

The voters spoke.

“What more validation do I need?” she said. “The voters did not elect me to be rude. The voters elected me to lead. ... We know where the voters of the 13th District stand on discrimination. They support inclusion.”

She said she doesn’t want to use eminent domain to fix congestion on Route 28 but would like to replace traffic lights with overpasses. She said she wants to use her influence as a delegate to make sure Prince William has the money needed for transportation improvements as the county plans its future.

She said she’d fight to stop any discriminatory bills in the General Assembly. “It will be dead on arrival.”

Roem said her legislative role model growing up in Prince William was the late state Sen. Charles J. Colgan of Manassas, a Democrat who partnered with the late Del. Harry Parrish, a Republican, to build the Prince William Parkway and help recruit community college campuses.

“They were incredibly successful in what they did,” she said.

She slammed President Donald Trump for not putting forward a trillion-dollar infrastructure bill, as he promised during his campaign.

“This White House over and over and over again has put discriminating against the American people over taking care of core quality of life issues. How amazing would it be if instead of spending $15 billion dollars on a wall that is literally impossible to complete because you can’t build a wall through the geographic equivalent of the Grand Canyon ... what if we took that money and we actually put it toward Metro, which needs a dedicated funding source right now, what if we actually took that money and put it toward 28?”

She said she plans to file a bill to create a public records ombudsman, something Maryland has done, to help expedite flow of information and accountability. She also said she’s interested in Virginia creating a shield law that would protect reporters from going to jail if they don’t identify their sources.

“I’ll be happy to lead the charge on FOIA,” she said.

Former Vice President Joe Biden called Roem on election night to congratulate her. A photo of her on her knees crying spread online quickly.

She has advice for other politicians: “Just be yourself.”

“The worst thing any politician can do is say, ‘Oh, should I be more centrist on this issue? Should I be more progressive on this issue? Just be yourself.”

Roem asked reporters to also note the election of Democrat Dawn Adams of Richmond, who defeated Del. G. Manoli Loupassi, R-Richmond. Adams will be the first open lesbian to serve in the House, according to the House Democratic Caucus. Adams knows health care policy and is “an incredible, incredible person,” Roem said.

She also thanked Emerge Virginia, a group that trains Democratic women to run for office.

Del. Charniele L. Herring, D-Alexandria, the party’s caucus chair, said Roem ran a positive and pragmatic campaign focused on fixing Route 28 congestion and “her opponent’s inability to do so during the 13 terms that he served.”

She called Marshall, who sponsored a “bathroom bill,” the “most anti-LGBT politician in the House of Delegates.”

Del. Mark H. Levine, D-Alexandria, an openly gay member of the House, said the election of the state’s first transgender candidate was a fantastic day for Virginia.

The second transgender candidate, he said, would be less interesting — “and that’s the way it should be.”

pwilson@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6061


Twitter: @patrickmwilson

Dawn Adams, partner Maggie Constante, and a small group of campaign staff members nervously watched election returns on TV and on mobile devic…

Corey Stewart, Republican chairman of the Prince William Board of County Supervisors, mocked the gender identification of Democratic House can…


                                    
                                        Whenever Patrick Wilson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Get the RTD Politics email update every morning during the GA and weekly all year

Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




