
    
        
            By Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

The Columbia County District Attorney says criminal charges won't be filed in connection with a deputy who sent a patrol dog into a county jail cell last summer to bite an inmate who wasn't complying with staff's orders. 

A review of the evidence in the case showed K9 handler Deputy Ryan Dews and other deputies used a reasonable amount of force against Christopher Bartlett on August 1, District Attorney Jeff Auxier said in a February memo to Sheriff Jeff Dickerson.

Bartlett, 47, was bitten on the arm by Lars, a 3-year-old Belgian Malinois, because he wouldn't follow deputies' instructions when they were moving Bartlett from a temporary holding cell in one jail block to another cell in a high-security unit, Dickerson told The Oregonian/OregonLive in December.

Besides being uncooperative, Bartlett was warned ahead of time that his actions could lead to him getting bitten by the patrol dog, the memo said. Additionally, Bartlett had a history of attacking and threatening law enforcement officers as recently as July, other use of force options could have endangered other people, and Bartlett had no apparent mental illness that appeared to play a factor in the August 1 jail bite, according to the district attorney.

"There is no way that I could prove beyond a reasonable doubt that your deputies were using unreasonable force to maintain order and defend themselves under these circumstances," Auxier wrote in the memo.

According to the memo, Bartlett wouldn't meet with Auxier to discuss the case.

The sheriff's office previously determined the use of force was justified but asked the district attorney's office to review the case in December after body camera footage of Lars jumping onto Bartlett and wrenching his arm was released.

Watch the full video

Bartlett wasn't seriously injured from the dog bite, was moved to the other jail cell and was released from jail the next day. Bartlett had been booked into the Columbia County Jail 43 times since 2001 as of December, mostly for probation violations, jail records show. 

Dickerson told The Oregonian/OregonLive that Bartlett shouldn't have been initially booked into a temporary holding cell because jail staff was aware of his history. The day before he was bitten, he'd been booked on suspicion of contempt of court.

According to the memo, Bartlett was a "causing a disruption" and refused to put his hands through a cell door port to be handcuffed over the course of nearly six hours before Lars was allowed into the cell. Deputies ordered Bartlett to do so at least once every 45 minutes.

At some point, Bartlett began throwing items around the cell, and other inmates in the unit were taking their shirts off "in protest of the irritating situation they were having to endure all day," the memo said.

The body camera footage shows Dews order the dog into the cell, and the dog jumps onto Bartlett and bites his left arm just above his elbow as Bartlett is on the ground.

Dews yells at Bartlett to stop resisting as Lars bites his arm. Dews moves Lars off Bartlett as other deputies hold Bartlett down and handcuff him.

The deputies bring Bartlett to an outdoor recreation area, where nurses check his injuries. His shirt and pants are later cut away as he is being checked. At points, Bartlett tells the deputies and nurses that he believes his arm is broken, begs for help, curses at the deputies and tells them they all are going to hell. The deputies put a hood on his head to prevent him from spitting at them, and he is put into the second cell.

Lars is one of two Columbia County sheriff's dogs and had been brought into the jail at least half a dozen times since joining the agency in 2015, Dickerson told The Oregonian/OregonLive. The dog is trained to track people and narcotics.

August was the only time Lars has been ordered to bite an inmate, Dickerson said.

A Columbia County grand jury also reviewed the biting case as part of their annual inspection of the jail and determined in February that the jail's use of force policies and practices were reasonable. The grand jury noted that there are no policies that addressed the use of police dogs in the jail, according to the grand jury report.

The panel recommended that a specific policy be created, be reviewed by other state corrections experts, that a dog not be used for routine matters and a dog never be sent into the jail without approval from the sheriff, jail captain or anyone acting in those rules except in cases that involve immediate risk of death, serious injury or escape, the report said.

Stun guns can cause shocked inmates to fall and injure themselves, pepper spray could get into the jail's ventilation system, and deputies could also be injured while going into a cell to subdue an inmate, the report said.

"In certain limited situations, a police canine may be the most advantageous manner to quell a disturbance, prevent an escape or extract a combative inmate from a cell," the grand jury report said.

Read the DA's memo and county jail grand jury report  

-- Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com503-221-8343; @EvertonBailey


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        