Gallery: MLK day service


    
        
            By David Mosca

Dmosca@jjournal.com,


The Jersey Journal

With Martin Luther King Day approaching, many local organizations will be hosting events in honor of the iconic civil rights leader. 

Here is a list of MLK Day events taking place in and around Hudson County next week:

Jersey City:

Temple Beth El's Martin Luther King Service

The 33rd annual Sabbath Service in recognition of the legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. will take place on Friday, Jan. 19. The service will feature guest speaker Dr. Elnardo J. Webster, who will share life experiences that have impacted him and his efforts in making the world a better place in the spirit of Dr. King. A dessert reception will follow the service. The service will take place at 7:30 p.m. Temple Beth El is located at 2419 Kennedy Blvd.

North Jersey Philharmonic Glee Club 

The Jersey City Free Public Library is hosting the annual Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Tribute on Saturday, Jan. 20 at 7:30 p.m. at the Miller Branch Library's Cultural Arts Auditorium at 489 Bergen Ave. Guests include the North Jersey Philharmonic Glee Club, Rev. George Hodnett and Jean Ricks.

Politics of War &amp; Militarism in a post-King era

New Jersey City University's Lee Hagan Africana Studies Center presents the 29th Annual Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Celebration Luncheon at the Gilligan Student Union Multipurpose Room on Wednesday, Jan. 17. Lawrence Hamm, president of People's Organization for Progress, will be the keynote speaker. The event is scheduled to run from noon to 2 p.m. General admission will be $40. Admission for senior citizens (65+) and full-time students of all ages is $20. To purchase tickets, contact the Hagan Africana Studies Center at 201-200-3524 or email wguzman@njcu.edu. 

Lawrence Hamm at AME Zion Church 

Guest speaker Lawrence Hamm will be appearing at the Metropolitan AME Zion Church to celebrate MLK Day on Monday, Jan. 15 at 3 p.m. The church is located at 597 Bergen Ave.

Newark:

MLK Jr. Day Community Celebration 

The Newark Museum will host musical and spoken word performances, as well as hands-on activities for all ages in honor Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. on Monday, Jan. 15 from noon to 5 p.m. A dramatic reading of the "Letter from Birmingham Jail" will be held along with a screening of the "I Have a Dream" speech. The Premier Dance Theatre Company of Montclair will also perform. A film screening of "I Shall Not Be Silent" will also be held. The Newark Museum is located at 49 Washington St. Admission is free to all Newark residents and museum members. Admission will be $5 for all others.

Mary Mary and Tasha Cobbs, Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. Celebration

Gospel music stars Mary Mary and Tasha Cobbs will perform together for NJPAC's annual celebration of the life and legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The event is tonight at 8:00 p.m. at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center, 1 Center St. Tickets range from $29 to $95. 

Bayonne:

Black History Month essay contest for Bayonne students

The Bayonne Youth Center and Mayor Jimmy Davis have announced a Black History Month essay contest for 6th, 7th, and 8th grade students who live in Bayonne. The contest is to honor African-Americans and their contributions to Bayonne or Hudson County. Students competing must compose an essay discussing an African-American resident of Bayonne or Hudson County from either the past or present. The essay must discuss the contributions of this individual who has served to inspire and motivate and describe how has this person impacted the city of Bayonne or Hudson County. Essays should be between 300 and 500 words.  The essays are due by 4:30 p.m. on Monday, Jan. 22 and are to be dropped off at the Mayor's Office at City Hall, 630 Avenue C. 

Winners will be contacted on Monday, Jan. 29. The winners and their immediate family members will be guests to Davis's Jazz and Blues Social, which will be held on Feb. 8 at the Polish American Home. Three prizes will also be awarded: $400 for first prize, $250 for second prize, and $100 for third prize.

Address any questions about the contest by e-mail to either BayonneYouthCenter@yahoo.com or ALosonczy@BayNJ.org.

Bayonne Youth Center luncheon

The Bayonne Youth Center will be holding its annual luncheon to honor the legacy of Martin Luther King Jr. The theme will be celebrating the advocacy and protection of the youth of Bayonne. The event will be held on Monday, Jan. 15, at 1 p.m. at the Bayonne Community Museum located at 229 Broadway. Tickets are $30 per person and $10 for children under 12 years old. Tickets can be purchased at the door. For more information on the luncheon, contact Dawn Herring at 908-528-6478. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        