Advertisement

Supported by

Nonfiction


When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.

By Dani Shapiro

I AM I AM I AM Seventeen Brushes With Death By Maggie O’Farrell 288 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.95.


Two remarkable poems written in the latter half of the 20th century — Wislawa Szymborska’s “Could Have” and Jane Kenyon’s “Otherwise” — address the shadow life that presses itself against us in every living moment. “It could have happened. / It had to happen”; so begins the Szymborska. “I got out of bed / on two strong legs. / It might have been / otherwise,” is the opening of Kenyon’s. The poets remind us that our lives are at the mercy of near misses, catastrophes averted. We make our peace with this present danger — or we don’t. We embrace those we love more ferociously knowing we’re not in control of their fates, or ours — or we don’t.


The Northern Irish novelist Maggie O’Farrell is consumed with this shadow life in her transfixing “I Am I Am I Am,” a memoir that trains its fierce intelligence on her 17 near-death experiences. O’Farrell is acutely aware that her inner and outer worlds have been shaped at least as powerfully by what didn’t happen as what did. In chapters with titles like “Neck,” “Lungs,” “Cranium” and “Bloodstream,” inscripted above intricate black-and-white drawings of the body part in question, Farrell cuts through swaths of her life, using this anatomical structure to great effect as she builds tension and portent.


At age 18, she encounters a stranger on a deserted country path and senses “the urge for violence radiating off the man, like heat off a stone.” She evades him thanks to her preternatural instinct for danger, but her police report carries little weight. Soon thereafter he murders a different young woman. “It wouldn’t be an exaggeration to say that I think about her, if not every day then most days,” writes the adult O’Farrell, the would-be victim who has survived to tell the tale. “I am aware of her life, which was cut off, curtailed, snipped short, whereas mine, for whatever reason, was allowed to run on.”

This awareness — of time, luck, fate and “the feeling of having pulled my head, one more time, out of the noose” — drives O’Farrell’s story. She reminds us that we all live a hairbreadth from death. At times she shifts skillfully from first- to second-person narration as if to implore the reader to understand that there is no protection, nor order, nor safety. Not for her, not for us. In brief chapters that can stand alone but create a resounding effect when read together, she recounts a near drowning, a violent mugging, a terrifying childbirth, a plunging jetliner. The midlife writer also describes her youthful risk-taking: Her own mother tells her, these days, that she was “a nightmare to rear.”


This maternal admonition gains a piercing resonance as the wild child becomes a mother herself, and “I Am I Am I Am” is at its strongest when she describes the intensity of her love and sense of responsibility for her own three children, and her fear of unwittingly putting them in harm’s way. Her daughter is born with an immune-system disorder and an array of terrifying allergies. Anaphylaxis, O’Farrell tells us, means “without protection.” The little girl who once sought danger has grown into a parent who lives “in a state of high alert.”


If I have a quibble with this book, it’s that there are a few spots where O’Farrell’s wise and lyrical voice veers toward the didactic, including footnotes and journalistic asides that distract from the deep emotional resonance. In the end, this memoir is a mystical howl, a thrumming, piercing reminder of how very closely we all exist alongside what could have happened, but didn’t.

Dani Shapiro is the author, most recently, of “Hourglass.”

Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.










Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS