Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSION — The city council approved an amendment to its nepotism policy that will allow council members’ relatives to serve on advisory committees, a practice that has been ongoing in the city for years. 

BOSTON (AP) — J.D. Martinez hit his major league-leading 28th home run, Steve Pearce added a two-run shot and Eduardo Rodriguez pitched 5 2/3 innings on Monday night to lead the Boston Red Sox to a 5-0 victory over the Texas Rangers and their seventh straight win. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Joshua Samuel Fatu, aka Jey Uso

Joshua Samuel Fatu, aka Jey Uso

This story has been updated to include details from the arrest warrant affidavit.


Pro wrestler Joshua Samuel Fatu, better known by his stage name Jey Uso, was arrested in McAllen over the weekend for driving while intoxicated.


The Florida resident was in the Rio Grande Valley to compete in WWE live events held at Hidalgo’s State Farm Arena on Saturday and Sunday as part of a tag team with his brother, who performs as Jimmy Uso.

Fatu, 32, was pulled over by a Texas Department of Public Safety trooper at approximately 2 a.m. Sunday after he failed to use his turn signal on North 10th Street, according to his arrest warrant affidavit.


"Fatu appeared intoxicated and had a strong odor of an alcoholic beverage emitting from his breath," the affidavit reads.


He was booked into the Hidalgo County sheriff's jail at 3:07 a.m. and released later that day at 2:41 p.m. on a $500 personal recognizance bond, according to jail records.

On Saturday, the Usos retained the SmackDown tag team championships and the following night, hours after Fatu's release from jail, the pair won another title match.


Fatu regularly appears on the Tuesday SmackDown Live broadcasts. He is the son of WWE Hall of Famer Rikishi (real name Solofa Fatu Jr.) and an extended relative of Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson and current WWE wrestler Roman Reigns (real name Leati Anoa’i).

