Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 5:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


News organizations are pushing for the public release of data detailing the distribution of prescription opioids throughout the U.S., information that could show how drug manufacturers and distributors contributed to the nation's addiction and overdose crisis. 

LONDON — It’s Serena Williams … and everybody else. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

U.S. Border Patrol

U.S. Border Patrol

EDINBURG — Border Patrol agents from the Rio Grande Valley Sector arrested three immigrants with criminal records and gang ties over the last week, according to a U.S. Customs and Border Protection.

On Wednesday, Oct. 11, agents assigned to the McAllen Border Patrol Station arrested a Salvadoran national near Hidalgo. Record checks revealed the man had an active warrant and was wanted for homicide in El Salvador. The records check also showed the man was a member of the notoriously deadly Mara Salvatrucha gang, also known as MS-13, the news release read.

On Saturday, Oct. 14, Rio Grande City agents apprehended a female Salvadoran national near San Isidro. During an interview with agents, the woman admitted to being a member of the MS-13 gang and presented two tattoos to validate her claim. Record checks confirmed the woman’s gang affiliation, according to the news release.


On Sunday, Oct. 15, agents in Weslaco encountered a Mexican national near Pharr as he attempted to enter the United States. Record checks revealed the man had been previously arrested by the Los Angeles Police Department for rape and was convicted to the lesser charge of sexual penetration with force, the news release said. The man was sentenced to four years in prison.

