Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

✓ Unlimited access to trib.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (866) 981-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:27 pm

Big Medicine

Big Medicine

A Wyoming man pleaded guilty Friday to conspiring to sell painkillers purchased from a former Casper doctor who is now facing federal drug trafficking charges.

Dustin Big Medicine, who appeared in court wearing an orange jail uniform, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to deliver a controlled substance and, as part of a plea agreement, had an additional conspiracy charge against him dropped. The plea deal would allow him to avoid prison, should he complete probation. If he fails, he would face four to eight years in prison.

Big Medicine spoke quietly and rarely said more than three words in response to the judge’s inquiries Friday in Natrona County District Court. Judge Daniel Forgey asked Big Medicine if the defendant had received anything in exchange for distributing oxycodone.

“Just money, your honor,” Big Medicine replied quietly.

Big Medicine is one of 10 people who were charged with felonies resulting from a year-long investigation by the Wyoming Division of Criminal Investigation into Dr. Shakeel Khan and his wife, Lyn Khan. Prosecutors allege that Shakeel Khan sold painkiller prescriptions in exchange for cash. Defendants in the case are alleged to have signed forms at Khan’s request indicating they would not describe the doctor as a drug dealer.

Shakeel Khan and his wife are facing a total of 45 federal charges in their case.

The judge also modified Big Medicine’s bond at the request of both prosecution and defense attorneys, allowing him to go free on personal recognizance as soon as his paperwork is processed. He was previously held on a $3,500 bond.

Follow crime reporter Shane Sanderson on Twitter @shanersanderson



Big Medicine

Three more people accused of selling painkillers purchased from a former Casper doctor appeared Wednesday in Natrona County District Court to …


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 