Gallery: Devils vs. Canadiens | Dec. 14, 2017


    
        
            By Chris Ryan

cryan@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Taylor Hall, Keith Kinkaid, Nico Hischier, Jesper Bratt and the New Jersey Devils will play their first and only home game of the season against the Montreal Canadiens when the teams face off at 7 p.m. on Tuesday at the Prudential Center in Newark.

Hall enters the game with points in each of his last 25 games played, while Kinkaid hasn't allowed more than two goals in any of his past six starts.

Bratt will return to the lineup after being a healthy scratch on Sunday for the first time all season.

Here is the AP recap of the game:

NEWARK, N.J. (AP) -- Taylor Hall extended his point-scoring streak to 19 games, Travis Zajac scored two power-play goals and New Jersey beat Montreal to snap a three-game skid.

Hall's consecutive-points streak is the longest in the NHL this season. Hall, who had two assists, has recorded points in his last 26 appearances dating to Jan. 2. He missed three games before the All-Star break with a thumb injury during that span.

Stefan Noesen, Blake Coleman, Patrick Maroon and Brian Boyle also scored for the Devils. Keith Kinkaid made 29 saves.

Jacob de la Rose scored twice for the Canadiens, who had picked up at least one point in their previous seven games (3-0-4). Brendan Gallagher and Byron Froese had the other goals.

Devils' lines vs. Canadiens

Join NJ.com's live chat in the comment section, and follow along with live score and stat updates above.

Here is everything you need to know about the game:

What: New Jersey Devils (33-25-8) vs. Montreal Canadiens (25-29-11)

When: 7:00 p.m. EST, Tuesday, March 6, 2018

Where: Prudential Center, Newark, New Jersey

TV: MSG+ 

Live stream: MSG GO

Radio: The One Jersey Network

More to know: The Devils have lost three straight games and will aim to get back in the win column to gain hold their position in the first wild card spot in the Eastern Conference. Despite their most recent slide, their confidence remains high.

"I think we're a confident team. We have a lot of good players in this room," defenseman Ben Lovejoy said. "And we have watched film of the last three games. We've watched film from when we've been successful, we've watched film from when we haven't been. We know what we have to do. We're a confident team and we need to go out and do that tonight."

(The Associated Press contributed to this report.)

Chris Ryan may be reached at cryan@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisRyan_NJ. Find NJ.com Devils on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        