Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 87F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Mostly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 67F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:56 am

Mario Sergio Dorame

Mario Sergio Dorame

Attorney General Mark Brnovich is asking the public to be on the lookout for a convicted drug trafficker who is currently on the run.

A jury recently found Mario Sergio Dorame guilty of transporting more than 70 pounds of cocaine, as well as conducting a criminal enterprise and conspiracy. Dorame absconded during trial. To date, law enforcement efforts to find Dorame have been unsuccessful. A warrant has been issued for his arrest.

Dorame was driving his truck west on Interstate 10 in Pima County when he was pulled over for a traffic violation in November 2016. An Arizona Department of Public Safety Trooper found more than 70 pounds of cocaine in a hidden compartment in Dorame’s truck.

Dorame was arrested that day, but released from Pima County Jail without a bond. Although Dorame showed up for pre-trial hearings, he absconded just before a jury trial started in September 2017.

This is not the first time Dorame transported drugs in Arizona. In July 2012, Dorame was arrested for transporting 279 pounds of marijuana in his vehicle. He pleaded guilty in federal court and was sentenced to a short prison term. Additionally, in 2010, he was found guilty of Theft of Means of Transportation in Cochise County.

DPD Sgt. Jose Duarte said Dorame was a Douglas resident at one point, but the  last contact that they had with him was almost a year ago for a traffic ticket.

Sgt. Duarte added he is  not sure if he still has contacts or family in this area.  

"We have also posted an Attempt to Locate with our officers," he said.

Anyone with information on Dorame’s whereabouts should immediately call their local law enforcement agency.

 




                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!