Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:52 pm

Brandon Norton

Brandon Norton

A Bellevue man charged in the death of his wife was ordered held without bail Thursday.

Brandon S. Norton, 37, has been charged with second-degree murder. Norton went to the Sarpy County Jail on Tuesday evening to tell authorities that he had killed his wife.

Authorities have not found the body of Jennifer Norton, 32. Sarpy County Sheriff’s Office deputies searched the Missouri River on Wednesday and continued their search Thursday.

Michael Dressen, a salesman at American Auto Sales of Bellevue, attended Norton’s hearing Thursday. Afterward, he said that he has known the couple for about two years and that they had bought cars from the business.

“I just saw Jennifer on Saturday when she came in to look at a Mazda,” Dressen said.

He said she told him that she was preparing to divorce her husband.

“Jennifer was very happy,” Dressen said. “She had recently gotten a job, but I don’t know where it was.”

During the couple’s visits to the car lot, Dressen said, he learned that they had been together for 14 years, been married for 10 and had five children. Their house on Main Street in Bellevue is near the Missouri River, and Dressen said Brandon Norton often talked about letting his kids walk down to the river.

Anyone with information about Jennifer Norton’s whereabouts is asked to call the Bellevue Police Department at 402-293-3100 or Sarpy County Crime Stoppers at 402-592-STOP.

Brandon Norton




A Bellevue man has been arrested on suspicion of second-degree murder after arriving at the Sarpy County Jail and telling authorities he had killed his wife. 

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Kevin Cole covers Omaha crime and public safety news. Follow him on Twitter @KevinColeOmaha. Phone: 402-444-1272.


                                    
                                        Whenever Kevin Cole posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Beat it out of him!


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


