
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Less than 24 hours before the Colorado House of Representatives will be asked to take a first-in-a-century vote to expel a lawmaker from office, more than two dozen representatives still wouldn’t say how they would vote on the fate of Democratic Rep. Steve Lebsock.

“This is an impossible position to be in,” said Rep. Yuelin Willett, R-Grand Junction, who opposes the vote to eject Lebsock. “…People’s lives are in the balance here, it’s important that we get this right.”

But a day that began with Willett pleading with House lawmakers to tap the brakes on the pending vote over sexual harassment complaints quickly devolved into political bedlam.

Later that morning, Lebsock got into a heated exchange with the woman from an outside law firm charged with investigating him, before a room of lawmakers and reporters. Some Republicans by mid-afternoon were alleging a cover-up by Democratic leadership. And even Democrats were split over whether to delay the vote on whether to expel Lebsock on Friday as planned.

A poll of all 65 House lawmakers by The Denver Post found that supporters face a steep climb to reach the two-thirds majority needed for passage. And some Democratic lawmakers that support expulsion acknowledged, as well, that the vote, which requires at least 44 “ayes,” might fail.

The tumultuous scene at the state Capitol on the eve of Friday’s vote was a fitting capstone for a sexual harassment scandal that has been a spectacle from the start.

Lebsock, of Thornton, in November was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women — and two others who haven’t come forward publicly — filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible.

Lebsock has denied the claims. And in the months that followed Winter’s initial complaint, he has gone on the offensive against his accusers, who he said orchestrated a political attack against him. He held press conferences and distributed a dossier that he said debunked their complaints, while also revealing personal information about his accusers. And he took a polygraph test that he said “proved” his innocence, though such examinations are deemed so unreliable that they’re not admissible in court.

Soon after the House gaveled to order Thursday morning, Willett invoked a little-used House rule to postpone the expulsion vote and establish an Ethics Committee to review the sexual harassment complaints.


The motion was quickly shot down by House Speaker Crisanta Duran, a Denver Democrat, and an attempt to overrule her was defeated along party lines. But it sent staffers and lawmakers scrambling to learn about the procedure Willett had invoked.

Some breaking news on the House floor. Rep. Yeulin Willett, R-Grand Junction, has made a motion to send the Lebsock matter to an ethics panel, which if passed appears would delay expulsion vote pic.twitter.com/pqVNVk3Ayp

— Jesse Aaron Paul (@JesseAPaul) March 1, 2018



It’s one with significant historical precedent. The only other time the House has removed a lawmaker from office — the 1915 expulsion of Rep. William Howlett after he perjured himself during a bribery investigation — came at the recommendation of a similar committee.

By contrast, Lebsock’s expulsion resolution has come at the recommendation of House Majority Leader KC Becker, D-Boulder. The state harassment policy — which lawmakers in both parties say is flawed — is silent on how offenses should be punished. And that lack of guidance has been a consistent point of conflict this session, as top lawmakers in both parties have tried to grapple with the ongoing fallout of the #MeToo movement.

On the House floor Thursday, Becker defended her decision to attempt to remove Lebsock from office.

“I recognize the seriousness of this recommendation,” Becker said. “I also take very seriously the findings in the report and the concerns that we have in this body about people in positions of authority using that position to solicit sex.”

House lawmakers spent the following hours shuffling from one committee room to the next — first, a bipartisan briefing from the investigator at Employers Council — and later divided into their respective caucuses to discuss how to proceed.

The investigative briefing, which spanned several hours, became heated when Lebsock questioned the credibility of the Employers Council’s investigator in an lengthy exchange before the hushed room. During the confrontation, he asked that a recording of one of their eight or nine hours of meetings be played.

“At the very first meeting I was concerned about a statement that you made to me when I was explaining to you how difficult this was for my … family and my friends,  your response was, and this is recorded, ‘It’s not like you are going to die,’” Lebsock said at one point.

The investigator replied: “It was actually in response to you saying, several times, that this was a matter of life and death for you.”

In a party caucus meeting afterward, Republicans suggested the investigation’s conclusion raised as many questions as it answered.

“I hope we get some more time to talk about getting this process right,” said Assistant Minority Leader Cole Wist, R-Centennial, in an interview. “We’ve probably heard the word ‘process’ 500 times today, and there’s a reason for that. People feel like we’re being rushed into a decision.”

In their own meeting across the hall, Democrats disagreed about whether to move forward with Friday’s expulsion vote or wait until Monday.

“We want to get this right,” said Rep. Joe Salazar, D-Thornton. “… I would just feel more comfortable to have a little bit more time.”

But others — including House Speaker Duran — said it had been long enough. Rep. Leslie Herod, of Denver, said postponing the vote to next week would just give Republicans more time to find procedural holdups. “If you need more time to read the report,” she said in a jab at her GOP counterparts, “I will bring you a snack. Let’s get in that room, and let’s get it done.”

Winter chimed in occasionally to weigh in on behalf of Lebsock’s accusers but acknowledged she could wait a few more days.

“We’ve sat there while our marriages and sex lives were tweeted about, for 111 days,” she said. “… I can do four more days. The other women can do four more days.”

And when Rep. Jonathan Singer, D-Longmont, asked how other Democrats felt about taking a vote that might fail, Winter said she and the other accusers wanted to push on.

“We know that the votes might not be there tomorrow,” Winter said in a quiet voice. “But at least someone tried. Because right now in our building, no one has tried to hold anyone accountable.”