
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A North Bergen man has been arrested and 200 pounds of high-grade marijuana was seized following an investigation by the Hudson County Prosecutor's Office, which also recovered $100,000 and a gun.

Miguel Capellan, 33, was arrested on Wednesday and 15 additional pounds of marijuana was also recovered during a search of his home at the culmination of a three-month investigation by the Prosecutor's Office Narcotics Task Force, Hudson County Prosecutor Esther Suarez announced.

Along with the $750,000 worth of marijuana, the Task Force also recovered a stolen gun and seized five vehicles, Suarez said in a statement, adding that the Hudson County Sheriff's Office K-9 Unit assisted in the arrest.

The charges against Capellan include two counts of possession with intent to distribute, possession with intent to distribute near a school, possession of a gun during commission of a drug crime, money laundering, receiving stolen property and two counts of endangering the welfare of a child, the prosecutor said.

Capellan made his first appearance on the charges on Thursday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from the Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution and a detention hearing is scheduled for Wednesday before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        