Sunny. High 88F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:54 am

A second health care worker has been charged with involuntary manslaughter in the death of a 15-year-old patient at a behavioral health care center in Northern Virginia, police said.

Melanie Lewis, a registered nurse, was arrested Thursday after police say she failed to intervene when another employee fatally restrained a patient at North Spring Behavioral Healthcare in Leesburg.

Lewis, 47, of Stephens City was held at the Loudoun County Adult Detention Center on no bond, police said. It was not immediately clear whether she has an attorney; an attempt to reach her relatives was unsuccessful.

Jeremiah Flemming died Nov. 19 after a mental health technician physically restrained him, police said. William Herndon, 47, of Martinsburg, W.Va., was arrested in January on charges of involuntary manslaughter after the state medical examiner concluded the teenage patient he allegedly restrained died of positional asphyxiation.

Authorities have not named Jeremiah because he was a juvenile, but his mother, Kinnisha Flemming of Norfolk, previously identified him to The Washington Post. She said she wanted to speak about her son because “he didn’t deserve the way he died.”

Jeremiah was being bullied and became agitated and started punching the walls before he was restrained during the incident last year, according to details in an internal facility report obtained by his mother. After being sent to a “cool-down room,” he began punching the walls and would not stop, and “staff initiated a physical restraint,” according to the report. “About 2 minutes into the hold nurse observed that Jeremiah dropped his head down and sounded like he was snoring.”

North Spring CEO David Winters said Thursday that he did not have a comment on the charges or investigation at this time, and could not respond to questions about Lewis’ employment status.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




