
    
        
            By Terrence T. McDonald

tmcdonald@jjournal.com

 The Jersey Journal

Two recently released reports shed the barest of light on the situation at Hudson County's jail as county officials probe the deaths of five inmates in the last eight months.

The revelations in the county-commissioned reports include that inmates participated in "patient care tasks," a suicidal inmate was not constantly supervised and abnormal medical test results were not always acted upon. Medical staff did not follow up after a health assessment of one of the inmates who later died in custody, one of the reports says.

The reports are not complete: Four lines have been redacted from one and the other is missing lengthy passages that county officials have deemed not public information, including all of the report's core findings. County freeholders have read unredacted versions of both in recent weeks, with Freeholder Bill O'Dea saying they reveal "some very serious issues" at the jail.

The five inmates who have died since June are an immigrant detainee whose cause of death is still unknown, three people who died after jail officials say they committed suicide and a Bayonne man who collapsed and died inside the jail last month. The county outsources medical care for jail inmates to CFG Health Systems, which has a five-year, $29.4 million contract with the county. A request for comment from the CEO of CFG, which has contracts with jails in 10 other New Jersey counties, was not returned.

Inmates who had previously helped transport patients by pushing wheelchairs or stretchers are no longer permitted to do so and the jail performed a complete audit of all inmates to confirm they are getting proper medical treatment, a county spokesman said.

The two documents are a general review of health care at the facility by the National Commission on Correctional Health Care and the results of an internal investigation into the June death of Rolando Meza Espinoza, the immigrant detainee who died at Jersey City Medical Center on June 10. The Jersey Journal received them after filing public-records requests.

The report on Meza Espinoza, also known as Carlos Mejia-Bonilla, is heavily redacted, down to some footnotes, and reveals almost nothing about the circumstances surrounding his death.

The report's five core findings are all redacted, as is almost the entirety of the narrative of Meza Espinoza's final medical episode. Meza Espinoza had been detained by federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement, which has a controversial agreement with Hudson County to house immigrant detainees at the Kearny jail. Sixty percent of the facility's inmates are ICE detainees.

The Meza Espinoza report says correctional officers saw him "stumbling and slurring his speech" while he was in his cell on June 8. The page and a half between that revelation and a reference to a medical examiner's June 12 review of Meza Espinosa's body are all redacted, as is the cause of the man's death. The report says he suffered gastrointestinal bleeding probably caused by liver disease.

County spokesman James Kennelly said the report was redacted with the approval of the county's outside public-records counsel.

The medical panel's recommendations include that CFG review its existing policies regarding patient intake, that medical staff receive continuing education and that nurses be continually monitored to "assess their competency."

The NCCHC report, dated October 2017, followed a three-day assessment of health services at the jail requested by the county following the deaths of Meza Espinoza and Jennifer Towle, an inmate who died on July 14 (her death was classified a suicide).


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        