Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:54 pm

Gretchen Brown

Gretchen Brown

POWHATAN – When Powhatan County Commonwealth’s Attorney Richard “Dickie” Cox used to face off against attorney Gretchen Brown in court, he knew he needed to bring his A game.

“Gretchen was an attorney that I knew when I had a case with her and there was a hole in my case, I knew she would pick it up,” he said. “I always dreaded when I had that weak case that Gretchen would be the lawyer on the other side.”

Since she had a thriving private practice in Powhatan County and a great reputation, Cox was surprised when Brown expressed interest in the role of assistant commonwealth’s attorney in his office after the funding to make the position full-time was approved by the board of supervisors. He said he felt like he had won the lottery when she applied.

“I knew her legal skills. I knew her social values. I knew she would be just a fantastic fit. How could I get something better?” he said.

Brown of Powhatan has been in her new role since Sept. 1, replacing Tara Hatcher, who was part-time and didn’t want to go full-time.

In a way, joining the Powhatan Commonwealth’s Attorney's Office is like coming full circle in her career. After having a private practice with her cousin for less than a year straight out of law school, Brown said they both felt they needed more seasoning and sought state positions.

In 2002, Brown was hired as an assistant commonwealth’s attorney in the City of Lynchburg, where she worked for eight years before returning to private practice.

While she was enjoying her work in the private sector, Brown said she wanted to focus on criminal trial work and she was especially attracted to the fact the new role would focus primarily on Powhatan’s Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court. Working with youth and families has long been a passion for her, she said.

“I think the juvenile court has within it the ability to effectuate real change in people’s lives. By the time a youth matriculates up into the adult court system, adult courts are more focused on punishment and restitution for victims and community safety,” she said. “Whereas in the juvenile court, you are also supposed to address rehabilitation for the juveniles.”

Cox said Brown has taken some of the pressure off of him and Rob Cerullo, deputy commonwealth’s attorney, by being eager to take on so many of the juvenile and domestic relations court cases. She takes them on, and because his office practices vertical prosecution, she keeps those cases through the circuit court and even the appellate court levels if necessary.

“It’s not like I was burdened before, but it is like a weight being lifted off of my shoulders knowing that I have her in that position and that position is covered and is not something I have to worry about,” he said.

Having a third attorney who can follow those cases through the process was one of Cox’s key arguments for asking the supervisors for the assistant commonwealth’s attorney to become a full-time role.

“You have a victim of a crime. They don’t want to be passed around from one prosecutor to another. You get that relationship. You form a bond with the victim throughout the course of a crime, especially some of the higher profile, more egregious type of offenses,” Cox said. “Comforting the victim is a big deal and having Gretchen in that position is good because she is certainly good at that. She makes them feel honestly that she cares and we care about that case. I think that makes a huge difference.”

Wendy McClellan, witness/victim program coordinator with the sheriff’s office, said she has noticed that passion and concern for victims in Brown.

“A lot of times with the domestic cases, they don’t just need help with an assault charge. There are other things that come into play. They might need legal help with protective orders or with child custody or with housing. I am not saying she is handling all of those problems, but she is helping them and trying to give them guidance and resources that they can reach out to for help,” McClellan said.

At the same time, Cox noted that Brown’s passion isn’t to put every perpetrator of a crime in jail. Instead, she looks for the best possible result.

“She is always looking for a resolution that is going to, many times, benefit the defendant as well as the commonwealth,” he said. “She has a great perspective on who needs to be punished and who needs to be helped or rehabilitated.”

Sliding right back in

A little more than two months into the job, Brown said she is “sliding right back in” to the flow of a commonwealth’s attorney’s office. She said she has enjoyed working with the sheriff’s office by getting to know the deputies and taking a team approach to making prosecutions stronger and better. Since she regularly practiced in front of the judges seated here, it has been good that she hasn’t needed to learn a new bench, she said.

After seven years working in private practices that served the Powhatan community, she said she feels like she is continuing to serve the community wearing a different hat.

“Because I have lived here so long, I know a lot of people in the community and have developed relationships with folks here already. I feel like I have a good understanding of what the community’s values are and what values are important to the community because I practiced here before for the entire seven plus years I have been in private practice,” she said. “Between practicing here and living here I know the community very well already.”

After graduating from Radford University with a Bachelor of Science in English and minor in criminal justice, Brown attended the T.C. Williams School of Law at the University of Richmond, where she graduated in May 2001 and took the bar exam a few months later.

While she and her cousin found success with the private practice they set up later that year, she said they both realized it would be a wise move to “get more mentorship and guidance,” which is when she applied for the job in Lynchburg.

In addition to her regular duties with that office, Brown was the youth community court prosecutor, which involved members of the community making a ruling for juveniles who chose the community court program. The theory was to make the youth interact with members of the community as part of the experience.

She also was a member of the Youth for Tomorrow program in Lynchburg, which sent teams of law enforcement, fire fighters, probation officers, and attorneys into schools to work with at-risk youth. They met weekly with the youth to talk about topics such as gangs, drugs, peer pressure and even the incarceration of family members when that was an issue.

“That is when I came to realize we were working with kids where going to jail was a normal family expectation. Their aunts, mothers, brothers. That was just part of family expectation so they figured they were going to go to jail,” she said, adding the team was there to help them see that didn’t have to be their path, too.

After leaving the commonwealth’s attorney’s office there, Brown worked for about six years with Bowen, Champlin, Foreman, and Rockecharlie in Chesterfield. She then had her own private practice, Gretchen Hutt Brown PLLC, for a little more than a year in Powhatan.

In her private practice, Brown said she worked on cases of divorce, child custody, guardian ad litem, criminal defense and some basic civil litigation.

Having that experience combined with what she learned as a prosecutor in Lynchburg has helped make her well balanced and versed in both sides of the system in doing prosecutorial work and defense work, she said.

“I think a good prosecutor has to be able to look at all aspects of the case in evaluating it,” she said.

While Cox, Cerullo, and Brown may approach cases that come to the commonwealth’s attorney’s office differently, what they have in common is that at the end of the day what is most important to them is to do what’s right with a case, Brown pointed out.

“However we approach the prosecution, the end goal is to make sure we do what is right and what is just in that case,” she said. “Sometimes that may mean not going forward with it. Sometimes that may mean prosecuting it to the fullest extent of the law. But I think that is what the three of us all have in common.”

Laura McFarland may be reached at Lmcfarland@powhatantoday.com.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.


