Sunny skies. High 88F. Winds light and variable..

A mostly clear sky. Low 63F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 12:54 am

A Stafford County man is accused of blackmailing a young girl into sending him nude pictures, court records show.


Dustin Christian Gonzales Villagomez, 28, is charged with two counts of carnal knowledge and two counts of indecent liberties with a child. He was arrested earlier this month and is being held in the Rappahannock Regional Jail.


According to an affidavit for a search warrant filed in Stafford Circuit Court, the Stafford Sheriff’s Office was contacted last month regarding a reported sexual assault that occurred at a county residence. Detective J.S. Massine later watched a taped interview the 13-year-old victim gave to an interviewer at a Child Advocacy Center in Prince Georges County, Md.


The girl told the interviewer that she had been sending nude pictures of herself to a man via cellphone for approximately two years. She said that whenever she told the man that she didn’t want to send any pictures, he told her he would disseminate the pictures he already had if she stopped.


In addition to sending and receiving nude pictures, the girl also talked about two separate occasions earlier this year during which she was sexually molested while at a residence in southern Stafford.


The affidavit did not explain the girl’s connection to Gonzales Villagomez or how the alleged photo sending began.


The search warrant gave police the authority to search the suspect’s home and electronic devices for evidence.


Get the Breaking News and Alerts newsletter


in your inbox several times each day.


———


©2018 The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.)


Visit The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.) at www.fredericksburg.com/flshome


Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


Copyright 2018 Tribune Content Agency.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
