Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Jackie Salo


		
		
		
		
	


									April 9, 2018 | 8:46pm
											| Updated April 10, 2018 | 10:31am
												

A married teacher in Oklahoma was arrested for allegedly having sex with a student amid the statewide teacher walkout.

Keri Hoffman, 35, admitted to police Saturday that she had sex with a 15-year-old student before and after they attended a massive teacher rally protesting pay cuts at the state Capitol, news station KWSO reported.

Hoffman, a Clinton Middle School teacher, and the teen reportedly became sexually involved on the last day of classes before the strike began April 2, according to news station KFOR.

She went with her husband Saturday to the police department, where she allegedly confessed to having sex with the student on numerous occasions.

Hoffman told authorities that she used Facebook to message the boy and arrange the sexual encounters, which occurred inside her car and her dad’s garage.

The pair also allegedly had sex last week before and after the teacher walkout protest at the Capitol.

The algebra teacher gave a ride to a group of students, including the victim, picking him up first so they could have sex, according to police. Hoffman told investigators they had intercourse again that evening when she dropped him off at home.

Hoffman was booked into Custer County Jail on numerous charges including rape. She is being held on $30,000 bond.


			Read Next
		


			
				Florida cop reassigned after suggesting Parkland shooting ...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Florida cop reassigned after suggesting Parkland shooting ...			
		

Share Selection

148,075

97,634

52,256

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters