Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Priscilla DeGregory


		
		
		
		
	


									December 28, 2017 | 6:44pm
												

A staffer at a Westchester County home for troubled boys was mercilessly bullied by a supervisor who called him a “big fat gay man,’’ a new lawsuit says.

Todd Marbury of upstate Ossining is suing Lincoln Hall, the non-profit he worked for, in Manhattan federal court for allegedly allowing the boss to subject him to ridicule for years and then unjustly firing him in 2015.

Marbury says in his suit that administrator Ronald Robinson even accused him of sexually molesting residents.

Marbury, who has a wife and kids, claims Robinson launched his campaign of abuse in 2000 and intensified it in 2010 after becoming his direct boss at the Lincolndale facility in Somers.

“One boy at the Hall overheard Robinson’’ suggesting Marbury had engaged in oral sex with a kid, the suit claims.

“You love young boys, especially those Latino boys,” Robinson also sneered at Marbury, according to the suit.

Marbury said he reported the behavior to the home’s Human Resources Department but was told to “mind his business” and no investigation was ever initiated.

Marbury eventually suffered an emotional breakdown because of the abuse in 2015 and went on leave, his suit says. He had a diabetes-related toe amputation during the break.

He was notified of his termination when he tried to return to work, court papers state.

Marbury’s suit seeks compensation for lost wages, $150,000 in damages from Robinson and compulsory sexual-harassment training for his alleged tormentor.

Lincoln Hall could not immediately be reached for comment.


			Read Next
		


			
				De Blasio fundraiser helped get favors for donors, emails ...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				De Blasio fundraiser helped get favors for donors, emails ...			
		

Share Selection

144,361

91,377

53,318

42,010

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters