Sunny. High 87F. Winds light and variable..

A clear sky. Low 62F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 9:54 am

A driver picked up numerous charges Sunday after he led Stafford County deputies on a high-speed chase that ended shortly after he crashed into a parked car, authorities said.


A pregnant woman was riding with the suspect during the chase and told police that the man refused multiple requests from her to be let out of the vehicle. The woman, who is five months pregnant, was examined by rescue personnel following the crash, but declined to be transported against medical advice, Sheriff's spokeswoman Amanda Vicinanzo said.


According to Vicinanzo, a vehicle with a defective headlight was traveling south on U.S. 1 when it was spotted by Deputy J.A. Mangan just before 8:30 p.m. Mangan attempted to make a traffic stop, but the driver sped away.


In the area of U.S. 1 and Layhill Road, Vicinanzo said, the driver crossed the double yellow lines and continued south in the northbound lanes to get around traffic. He then made a sharp right turn in the area of Truslow Road and crashed into a parked car.


Police said the driver got out of the car at that point and ran toward some woods with Mangan in pursuit. The deputy repeatedly ordered the suspect to stop and finally caught up with him and got him onto the ground.


Joshua Stephen Jackson, 29, of Stafford, was taken into custody. A small bag of marijuana was found in his pocket and an empty container of alcohol was found in the vehicle, Vicinanzo said.


Jackson, whose license was already revoked for previous DUI charges, was taken to Stafford Hospital to be treated for injuries and to have blood taken. He was placed in the Rappahannock Regional Jail without bond following his release from the hospital.


Among the charges Jackson is facing are abduction, resisting arrest, destruction of property, driving on a revoked license, DUI, eluding police, hit and run, possession of marijuana and reckless driving.


Get the Breaking News and Alerts newsletter


in your inbox several times each day.


———


©2018 The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.)


Visit The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.) at www.fredericksburg.com/flshome


Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


—————


Topics: t000002458,t000027866,t000197766,t000027904


Copyright 2018 Tribune Content Agency.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
