Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Lawmakers want to change state law that makes a victim of domestic violence pay for an  divorce lawyer if the abuser is incarcerated for the offense.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Jeanette McCue
(Photo: provided)

FRANKFORT, Ky. — Choked and knocked unconscious, Jeanette McCue said a violent attack in 2016 by her husband left her bruised and battered, with black eyes, a split lip and marks around her neck.


McCue, of Washington County, figures she would have been killed except her husband was too drunk to aim when he fired a gun at her.


The attack that sent her husband to prison for 10 years was shocking enough, she said.


But she was shocked further when she sought to divorce him and discovered that an obscure provision of Kentucky law required her to pay for his lawyer, because as an inmate, he had no means to hire one.


"This is crazy," McCue recalled telling her lawyer. "You want me to pay for him so I can divorce him?"


Read this: Kentucky crime victims don't have an equal voice in court. But that may change with this movement


Other news: Gov. Matt Bevin is critical of 'hubbub' created from climate change 'joke'


Others, including state Sen. Morgan McGarvey, a Louisville Democrat, think it's crazy too, and they are seeking to change the law in cases where a victim of domestic violence is seeking to divorce a spouse who has been convicted and incarcerated for the abuse.


"We have to change this immediately so it doesn't happen to anyone else," said McGarvey, who last week filed Senate Bill 68, a simple, one-sentence measure that would require the state to pay the legal costs of the abuser in such divorce cases. "This is the kind of problem we want to fix."


Five senators are co-sponsoring the bill. They are Republicans Whitney Westerfield of Hopkinsville, Julie Raque Adams of Louisville and Danny Carroll of Paducah, and Democrats Robin Webb of Grayson and Denise Harper Angel of Louisville. Westerfield is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee. 


McGarvey said the costs to the state would be minimal because such cases are infrequent. But he said the change would be a tremendous help to victims of brutal attacks who must then pay costs of a state-appointed lawyer for their abuser.


"To me that's not justice," he said.


Sherry Currens, executive director of the Kentucky Coalition Against Domestic Violence, said she was surprised to discover such a provision is in the law. She said her organization, which includes a network of domestic violence shelters across Kentucky, fully supports it.


"It is just a travesty," Currens said. "I'm really glad someone is taking the lead on this. Of course we will provide any assistance that we can."


Read this: Pension reform bill's funding method may kick 'kids in the teeth,' critics say


More: Northern Ky. sees sharp rise in HIV cases linked to injected drug use


Column: Just to be clear: Jeff Hoover is not the victim in sex harassment scandal


The matter came to light through the work of Cassie Chambers, with the Kentucky Equal Justice Center, who, as a legal aid lawyer, was appointed to help Jeanette McCue with her divorce from her ex-husband, Michael McCue. He pleaded guilty last year to charges related to the attack.


Jeanette McCue said she was left impoverished because her ex-husband cleaned out their bank account before he left Washington County while she was being treated in the emergency room for her injuries. He was later arrested in Western Kentucky, she said.


Chambers said she helped McCue file for divorce and then had to explain to her that, in such cases where the spouse is in prison, the court is required to appoint a lawyer for the inmate and that the person seeking the divorce must pay the costs.


While the costs are limited by what the court deems reasonable — in McCue's case, the bill was $160 — it seems unfair to victims, usually women, who have been brutalized by spouses and often have lived under their control for many years, Chambers said.


"It's like he was still in control, getting the court system to work for him and against her," Chambers said.


Further, for some impoverished women, even a modest legal fee might be out of reach, causing them to give up on efforts to divorce an abusive spouse, she said.


"Some may go back to an abuser," she said. "I think there's a lot of ways the courts put barriers in the way of poor people who just don't have access to resources."


More from Deborah Yetter


'Bible literacy' courses in some Ky. schools are breaking the law, ACLU says


'Aged out' and cast out, former foster care kids find home thanks to Louisville nonprofit


Chambers said situations such as McCue's are unusual but after she came across two more such situations where she represented women who had suffered domestic violence and were seeking divorces from incarcerated spouses, she decided to write an opinion piece about the law requiring them to pay legal costs of their abusers.


It ran in the Lexington Herald-Leader on Jan. 2 and caught the eye of McGarvey, who said he was shocked to learn to the provision and was unaware of it although  he is a lawyer and has done some work in domestic violence cases.


"I read it and couldn't believe it's in the system," he said.


McGarvey credits Chambers with bringing the problem to light, as well as McCue for being willing to speak out about her experience.


"She and Cassie are the story here, the power of peoples' voices," he said.


McCue, a nurse and single parent, said she's been willing to speak out about her experience as she rebuilds her life in hopes of helping others. Her divorce became final in April.


McCue said she wants the public to understand that domestic violence can happen to anyone and she wants to make the system easier for spouses who have survived it and are seeking to divorce their abusers.


"Domestic violence is one of those things you don't like to admit to people," she said. "If something I say can help someone else, I'd much rather help someone."


Deborah Yetter: 502-582-4228; dyetter@courier-journal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/deborahy.
