Gallery: Union Dry Dock Site in Hoboken


    
        
            By Patrick Villanova


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

Hoboken Mayor Ravi Bhalla has suspended an effort to acquire the Union Dry Dock through eminent domain in hopes that Gov. Phil Murphy will table NJ Transit's dueling plan to purchase the land and turn it into a ferry maintenance facility.

In a statement issued this morning, Bhalla said he is complying with Murphy's request that Hoboken not proceed with obtaining the 3-acre waterfront property through eminent domain, which would see the city condemn the site and mark it for redevelopment.

In return, Bhalla called on Murphy to cancel a special NJ Transit Board of Directors Meeting scheduled for Wednesday, during which the body is expected to vote on whether to purchase the land. 

Currently owned by New York Waterway, the parcel is located along Frank Sinatra Drive between Maxwell Place Park and the Castle Point Skate Park. Under NJ Transit ownership, it would be exempt from eminent domain and be leased back to the ferry operator, who would use it as a maintenance facility.

"This decision is in direct response to a proposal Governor Murphy made directly to me last week: suspend or withdraw eminent domain proceedings, and the board meeting will be cancelled so we can all get in a room this week and find a way forward," Bhalla said in a statement.

It remains unclear whether Wednesday's 2 p.m. meeting in Newark will proceed. NJ Transit did not return a call seeking comment. A spokesman for the Democratic governor said, meanwhile, Murphy wants to ensure commuters who rely on the ferries don't lose out under either plan.

"The Governor's Office continues to coordinate with all parties involved to determine an ultimate solution that both respects the voices of the local community and the needs of one of our most vital transportation partners," Murphy spokesman Mahen Gunaratna said in a statement. "The Governor is taking appropriate steps to make sure that commuters are not negatively impacted during efforts to find a long-term solution.



Hoboken spokesman Santiago Melli-Huber said the city is arranging for buses to transport residents to Wednesday's meeting. The state agency delayed the purchase of the property from NY Waterway in January after Bhalla and 100 residents went to an NJ Transit Board of Directors meeting to oppose the plan.

With sights set on completing a network of parks along the Hoboken waterfront, the City Council last month authorized Bhalla to use eminent domain to acquire the Union Dry Dock site. Bhalla then sent a letter to NY Waterway offering to purchase the property for $11.63 million, adding that if a sale could not be negotiated the city would commence condemnation proceedings and seize the land through eminent domain. Bhalla ended the letter by requesting a response within 14 days. 

Today, he extended New York Waterway's 14-day deadline to respond by 45 days.

In a March 31 letter to Bhalla, NJ Transit Executive Director Kevin S. Corbett said the agency's board of directors would hold a special meeting Wednesday and vote to purchase the property from NY Waterway. The ferry operator has a similar maintenance facility on land it leases in Weehawken, but needs a new location after the landowner told the company to "cease such activities" at the site by June 1.

"By purchasing this property, NJ Transit will obtain ownership of the land and gain significant control over the scope and manner of NYWW's operations at the site, while ensuring that the most critical ferry maintenance activities are not significantly disrupted," Corbett wrote in his letter to Bhalla.

The controversy unfolds as NJ Transit studies whether Bayonne's former Military Ocean Terminal is a suitable site for the maintenance facility, Corbett said.

New York Waterway purchased the property from Union Dry Dock for $11.5 in November.

Jeff Tittel, director of the New Jersey Sierra Club, called the NJ Transit proposal a "dirty deal" and is calling for residents to attend Wednesday's meeting and speak in opposition of the plan.

"This is a heavy industrial use that will increase air pollution and noise from diesel engines. The project would also interfere with the Hudson River walkway," Tittel said in a statement. "There are alternatives sites for this facility that make more sense. This area is tidal land that belongs to all of us. The City of Hoboken upholding that by keeping it as open space."


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        