
    
        
            By Chris Ryan

cryan@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

NEWARK -- An official decision will be made after the Devils' morning skate, but forward Kyle Palmieri appears to be on track to return to the lineup on Thursday against the Edmonton Oilers.

Palmieri logged his first practice Wednesday after missing six straight games with a lower body injury suffered in an Oct. 22 practice. The veteran forward said he felt good after going through the entire session.

The right wing said he would need to talk things over with coach John Hynes about playing Thursday, but when asked if he felt ready for an NHL game, Palmieri didn't hesitate.

"Yeah. It was definitely nice to get the practice in," Palmieri said. "It would be nice to get a few more, but I felt pretty good out there and the legs feel good. Hopefully moving forward don't have any setbacks and should be good to go."

Why Quenneville is in NJ

The forward resumed skating last Friday while the Devils were on their Western Canada trip, so Palmieri got ice time with fellow injured forwards Travis Zajac and Michael McLeod.

Palmieri got to test himself to an extent while skating with them, but he needed the added element practice provided.

"For me, it was unexpected movements, being able to react to another guy," Palmieri said. "Those skills sessions, obviously it's a lot of hands work and you're doing the cutbacks and holding your edges, but it's all stuff that you know what you're doing.

"The only thing standing between you doing that is just the ice and your balance. It was something that getting out there and having guys put some pressure on you and have you react is something I needed to test out."

As long as Palmieri shows up to the rink feeling ready physically on Thursday, Hynes won't hold him back.

"If everything looks good today into tomorrow morning, then it looks as though he's a good possibility to play," Hynes said.

If the Devils activate Palmieri off injured reserve for Thursday's game, they will need to make a corresponding roster move to make room. Hynes said that would likely come in the form of putting Marcus Johansson on IR. Johansson has not skated since suffering a concussion on Nov. 1.

The Devils went 3-2-1 with Palmieri out of the lineup, but they will enter Thursday losers of three straight games, including a 6-3 loss to the Oilers in Edmonton last Friday. Getting Palmieri back would certainly provide a boost to the top line and the power play.

"It'll be huge," forward Taylor Hall said. "He's a big player for us, plays special teams, plays a big role in our team."

 Chris Ryan may be reached at cryan@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisRyan_NJ. Find NJ.com Devils on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        