Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear skies. Low 76F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


EDINBURG — Amid the whir of construction still a few weeks from completion, Bert Ogden Arena officials announced Monday that WWE Live will be coming to the venue on Sept. 14, marking the first non-musical act scheduled for the new facility. 

EDINBURG — Amid the whir of construction still a few weeks from completion, Bert Ogden Arena officials announced Monday that WWE Live will be coming to the venue on Sept. 14, marking the first non-musical act scheduled for the new facility. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

Elizabeth Guerrero

Elizabeth Guerrero

This post was updated at 9:30 p.m. with information from Child Protective Services.


A 2-year-old girl believed abducted in rural Mission Thursday morning is now in the custody of Child Protective Services in Nueces County.


The toddler was believed to be in a vehicle with Elizabeth Guerrero, 68, and Elizabeth Morales, 22, who were persons of interest in a homicide case.

“The child was dropped off with family members in Corpus Christi,” said Jena Palacios, spokeswoman for the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office.


John Lennan, CPS spokesman for the South Texas sector, said the state is filing in court to have the toddler placed in temporary foster care on an emergency basis. A hearing will be held within two weeks of the filing to determine whether she will remain in foster care or be able to be placed with relatives, Lennan added.


After an arrest warrant for murder was issued for Guerrero, she and Morales turned themselves in to authorities Friday morning and were booked into Hidalgo County jail.

Investigators believe Guerrero fatally struck Gilberto Gaytan, 20, with her SUV after a custody battle between the victim and Morales took a fatal turn.


Palacios said the victim was the former common-law spouse of Guerrero’s granddaughter, Morales.


Guerrero will be charged with murder Saturday afternoon, at which point her bond will be set.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.