
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

 






Today is a day Broncos fans have been looking forward to since the Super Bowl ended in February.  NFL draft day is one that has teams and fan bases filled with excitement. The Denver Broncos currently hold the No. 5 overall selection in this years NFL draft. It is really a guess as to what general manager John Elway is going to do with the pick. 

The pressure is going to be on Elway this year as the Broncos went a second consecutive season without making the playoffs after finishing the year 5-11. It is also worth mentioning that the last time the Broncos had a top-five draft pick Denver selected Von Miller with the No. 2 pick in 2011. 

Denver Post columnist Mark Kiszla summed it up best in his column for Thursday, “The Broncos are sitting pretty at No. 5 in the first round. Trade back? Don’t even think about it.” 

I am sure a lot of Broncos fans would have to agree with Kiz on this one. Whatever happens it is sure to be an exciting night at the NFL draft. 

— Jeff Bailey, The Denver Post 

TV/RADIO: Here’s what sports are airing today 

MLB: Rockies 5, Padres 2
Full story | Box score 


Do the Browns trade a top-five pick? And where will Baker Mayfield fall? Read more… 

John Elway has spent the past few months pouring over player evaluations as he gets ready for the NFL draft, breaking down every detail, guessing who will be taken at picks one through four and examining his options at No. 5 overall. Read more… 

Elway can’t go wrong with any of these six players. Here’s the list, ready to copy, paste and post in the Denver war room, ranked in the order of my preference. Read more… 

+ Denver Broncos NFL draft history under general manager John Elway. 

+ Former Colorado Buffaloes star receiver Paul Richardson claims a Virginia trooper asked if he was gang member. 

+ A brief history of No. 8 seeds upsetting No. 1 seeds in the NBA playoffs. 

+ Rockies’ rotation facing big challenge as nine-game road trip looms 

+ Avalanche head coach Jared Bednar voted a finalist for Jack Adams Award 

+ Get a grip: Axe Bat is trying to revolutionize baseball bats 

+ Commission on College Basketball: NCAA should ban cheats, let players go pro 

+ Ronald Acuna Jr. joins Atlanta Braves as youngest player in majors 

+ It feels like the end of an era for the San Antonio Spurs 

+ POLL: Should the Broncos use the No. 5 overall pick to select a quarterback? 

9 

The number of games Rockies starting pitcher Jon Gray has struck out 10 or more batters. Four of those games have been against the Padres. 

Players have been altering bats for decades in a bid to improve their grip — adding pine-tar or some specialized grip tape, maybe shaving the handle slightly to make it thinner. Read more… 

If you see something that’s cause for question or have a comment, thought or suggestion, email me at dboniface@denverpost.com or tweet me @danielboniface. 