Advertisement

Supported by

By Kate Taylor and J. David Goodman

When Mayor Bill de Blasio announced on Wednesday night that he had chosen Alberto M. Carvalho, the charismatic superintendent of Miami-Dade County Public Schools, as his new schools chancellor, it seemed like a match made in heaven. Mr. Carvalho had an inspiring life story that mirrored the aspirations of many of New York City’s families. On policy, he and Mr. de Blasio seemed well aligned.


But there were signs, it emerged on Friday, that the partnership — on both sides — might have been far less than perfect. Mr. de Blasio, the more eager suitor, chose to overlook them. Mr. Carvalho, in the end, did not, leading him to reject the mayor’s job offer on Thursday.


For Mr. Carvalho, the red flags were indications that the mayor would heavily involve himself in the job, as he is known to do in other departments.


For City Hall, the warning signs were incidents in Mr. Carvalho’s past — his jilting of another school district in 2008, and a scandal over emails that suggested he had conducted an affair with a Miami Herald education reporter, which he has denied. In fact, those two matters had kept Mr. Carvalho out of the running for another major education job in New York just three years ago.

When the state Board of Regents was looking for a new state education commissioner to replace John B. King Jr., Arne Duncan, then the federal education secretary, had suggested Mr. Carvalho, a person who was involved in that search said on Friday.


Vetting, however, uncovered both the email scandal and the previous jilting. Mr. Carvalho had sought the superintendent’s job in Pinellas County, Fla., only to reject that board’s offer after he secured one from Miami-Dade. Those conducting the commissioner search then decided not to even interview Mr. Carvalho, despite his record in Miami. There seemed to be too much potential for trouble, said the person involved, who spoke on condition of anonymity out of a desire not to pick a public fight with Mr. Carvalho.


Mr. de Blasio’s team was aware of the emails and Pinellas matter.


Asked if the city should have taken a warning from Mr. Carvalho’s history of leaving a district at the altar, Eric Phillips, the mayor’s spokesman said in an email, “Retrospect doesn’t do us much good at this point.”


Now the mayor is back to square one. The search resumed immediately, he said in his regular Friday radio appearance. Some of the same people said to be candidates before — including Barbara M. Jenkins, the superintendent of the Orange County Public Schools in Florida, Andres A. Alonso, a former chief executive officer of the Baltimore City Public Schools, and Kelvin R. Adams, the superintendent of the Saint Louis Public Schools — are likely to be considered again.


Whoever the mayor picks could be considered an also-ran, which some observers said might lead some candidates to balk. Others, however, said that was irrelevant.

Dennis M. Walcott, whom Mr. Bloomberg named as schools chancellor after his second chancellor, Cathleen P. Black, resigned after 95 days, was one. “I honestly don’t think that person will be burdened with what transpired,” he said.

As a reminder that Mr. de Blasio needs to act soon, the education department hosted a goodbye party on Friday afternoon for the current schools chancellor, Carmen Fariña, whom Mr. de Blasio has said will leave at the end of this month. The mayor, who was originally scheduled to fly to Atlanta to speak at a union convention, was grounded in New York by a storm. He did not attend the party.


If Mr. de Blasio and his team were relatively forgiving, Mr. Carvalho appears to have looked at New York’s offer with a more skeptical eye.


Politico Florida reported on Friday that Mr. de Blasio had set as conditions of the offer that he would appoint Mr. Carvalho’s chief of staff and human resources director.


Mr. Phillips denied that was the case, and Mr. Carvalho’s office declined to comment. But Mr. de Blasio set similar conditions at least with some candidates he considered for the chancellor job four years ago, according to someone informed of the terms by one candidate, and who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a private conversation. In the end, two of Mr. de Blasio’s former close aides were given top jobs at the education department, including as the chancellor’s chief of staff.


Raquel Regalado, a former member of the Miami-Dade school board and a friend of Mr. Carvalho, said that, in speaking with him on Friday, “I got the sense that he felt, in his last few conversations with de Blasio, that he wasn’t going to have the type of latitude or autonomy to do what he wanted to do.”

“Down here, he has nine bosses — but nine bosses never agree,” Ms. Regalado said, referring to the school board. She added, “That’s very different from having one boss who is going to make the decisions.”


Mr. Carvalho announced his about-face on Thursday during a televised school board meeting in Miami in which he was bathed in adulation from board members and adoring supporters (and where a mayoral press aide sat ready to field news inquires after Mr. Carvalho’s expected acceptance). Meanwhile, Mr. de Blasio was in Gracie Mansion being pilloried by Bronx elected officials for his handling of an unrelated decision to situate a jail in the South Bronx.


Updates about the Miami spectacle trickled into the mayor’s Blackberry, but nothing that would indicate a political embarrassment was in the making, said a person familiar with the matter who spoke on condition of anonymity because it concerned the mayor’s correspondence.


The subject of the chancellor appointment did come up, however. One attendee, Carmen E. Arroyo, a state assemblywoman, who was angry that she had not been informed about the jail plans, attacked Mr. de Blasio for his selection of Mr. Carvalho.


“You’re hiring a European to run our schools!” a person who was in the meeting said, paraphrasing Ms. Arroyo. Mr. de Blasio said she was wrong, and defended Mr. Carvalho, an American citizen who was born in Portugal. Their back and forth escalated. “They called each other Trump,” this person said. The person spoke on the condition of anonymity in order to share details of a private meeting.


City Hall officials did not dispute the account.

Elizabeth A. Harris and William Neuman contributed reporting from New York and Patricia Mazzei contributed reporting from Miami.










Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS