Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Mark Cannizzaro


		
		
		
		
	


									January 21, 2018 | 9:58pm
												

FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — When some time passes, when the hurt wanes a bit and the Jaguars dissect what went wrong after they had gotten so tantalizingly close to advancing to the first Super Bowl in franchise history, they’ll find their 24-20 loss to the Patriots in the AFC Championship on Sunday came down to three plays.

Three defensive plays the Jaguars failed to make — mistakes — more so than three plays the Patriots made.

Opponents’ mistakes are like chum in the ocean for sharks. It’s feeding time. And there’s no mercy.

The first gaffe came with 1:28 remaining in the first half and the Patriots trailing 14-3 and desperately trying to score before the end of the half. Jaguars safety Barry Church leveled Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski and broke up a long pass over the middle, but he was penalized 15 yards for a helmet-to-helmet hit that knocked Gronkowski out of the game with a concussion.

On the next play, Jaguars cornerback A.J. Bouye was called for a 32-yard pass interference penalty while covering New England receiver Brandin Cooks down the field. That gave New England another free first down, this one at the Jacksonville 13-yard line.

Two plays later the Patriots scored a touchdown to cut the Jags’ lead to 14-10.				


The next crushing play came in the fourth quarter with the Patriots trailing 20-10 and facing a third-and-18 from their own 25-yard line. Tom Brady connected with Danny Amendola for 21 yards with safety Tashaun Gipson giving him too much cushion.

Four plays later, Brady connected with Amendola for a 9-yard touchdown to cut the Jags’ lead to 20-17.

When it was over, the Jaguars finished with six penalties for 98 yards while the Patriots had one for 10 yards. Hidden yardage — 88 yards worth — was the difference in the game.


“A team like New England, they take advantage of that stuff when you give them that type of yardage — that’s what those guys do and they do it well,’’ Jaguars coach Doug Marrone said.

“Going against a team like that you’ve got to play perfect, because they’re one of the most disciplined teams — if not the most disciplined team — in the NFL,’’ Church said. “They don’t make mistakes.

“We hurt ourselves with a couple of huge penalties that put them in position and they were able to take advantage. That’s what they do — they take advantage and capitalize on other teams’ mistakes. We just made too many mistakes.”

Gipson was gutted over giving up that third-and-18 pass to Amendola, and he was stand-up about it.

“That play gave them momentum,’’ Gipson said. “I’m a better player than to give up a third-and-18. I’ll rewind that play 10 times and nine out of 10 times I make that play. And one chance it just happened to cost us. I’ve got to make that play.

“One play will never define me, but obviously I would like to have that play back. I would never say this play is going to haunt me. Absolutely not. That’s Tom Brady. That’s a great quarterback.’’				


Church also was stand-up about his hit on Gronkowski.

“The play is going 100-miles-an-hour and I’ve got to hit him and try to dislodge the ball,’’ he said. “I don’t want to let him catch the ball. The guy is humongous. If you wait for him to catch the ball he might run you over.

“It’s the toughest play in football. If you go low for the knees you’re considered a dirty player and if you go high they throw a flag at you. I tried to lead with my shoulder. I never want to see a guy with a head injury. I hope he is all right. I hope he can play next week.’’


			Read Next
		


			
				Eagles destroy Vikings to set up Super Bowl New York will ...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Eagles destroy Vikings to set up Super Bowl New York will ...			
		

Share Selection

1

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						