Clear skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


 

DENVER (AP) — Nikola Jokic and Will Barton grew up worlds apart. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Considered the biggest international festival in South Texas, BorderFest returns for its 42nd year and “as always,” said Raziel Cano, marketing director for the State Farm Arena, “it grows bigger and better.”


Hidalgo remains the home of the three-day event that celebrates a different country every year. This time around, the Rio Grande Valley will get to take a peek into the culture and history of Spain.


Local representatives and radio personalities gathered on stage at the State Farm Arena Monday afternoon to announce the performers and activities.

Some of the excitement includes a parade, carnival, Siberian black tigers, a mariachi contest, a bloodless bullfight, Spanish cuisine, music and more.


“It’s very educational because we are a Hispanic culture,” said Hidalgo Mayor Martin Cepeda.


In the nearing weeks as the celebrations approach, he said, Spanish locals will be visiting schools around the county to provide educational presentations on the nations’ customs.


The kickoff begins Thursday, March 1, with a time-honored tradition of the “Abrazo,” in which the Hidalgo and Reynosa mayors meet at the McAllen International Bridge for a friendship embrace; the carnival will open same day.


Throughout the weekend, performances will be taking place inside the grounds and around arena’s the vicinity.


Friday, March 2, Josh Abbot performs on the outside main stage, while a 90s pop tour starring multiple performers including Beto Cuevas, OV 7, Calor, JLS and more will be happening inside the 186,000 square- foot facility.


Reps from “La Jefa,” station 98.5 KGBT described the lineup and plans as “una lluvia de estrellas.”


The Budweiser Grand Parade is set to cruise the streets, beginning at 10 a.m. on State Highway 336, Saturday and Puerto Rican reggaeton artist Bad Bunny will be performing a concert inside the arena.


Grupo Pegasso, Banda Los Sebastianes, Los Bravos Del Norte and Cardenales de Nuevo Leon are a few other artists scheduled.


Each year interest and attendance in the festival grows larger and enables enrichment to all ages.


“Borderfest represents something our nation needs more off— unity,” said Patches from 100.3 KTEX radio.

Flamenco dancers ended the conference and the audience and media were dismissed after shouting a collective,” uno, dos, tres, ole!”


Gates will open Friday, March 2, from 5 p.m. to midnight.


Saturday and Sunday activities run from noon to midnight and the Bloodless Bullfight will take place at 5 p.m. Sunday.


Presale two-day tickets can be purchased for $10 at all Boot Jack locations across the Valley; these tickets grant admission to the outdoor festivities. To attend the indoor concerts, visit ticketmaster.com or the State Farm arena box office.


Follow BorderFest on Facebook or visit the website to stay updated with further developments.


rvillalobos@themonitor

