

A former High Plains Comedy Fest headliner, a “Saturday Night Live” writer and “Weekend Update” co-anchor, and local lucha-libre legends await Denver stand-up fans in June.

Here’s the best of the best in the metro area this month.

Lucha Libre and Laughs Wrestleparty
If a comedy show — be it a stand-up showcase or themed event — lasts more than a year in Denver’s highly competitive scene, it’s cause for celebration. The fact that Lucha Libre and Laughs, Denver’s stand-up/Mexican wrestling hybrid, has lasted five years is cause for a two-day celebration. Nick Gossert’s enduring show at the Oriental Theater will hold a two-night “Wrestleparty” this weekend, including national headliners Todd Glass (on June 1) and Brooks Wheelan (June 2).

8 p.m. June 1-2 at the Oriental Theater, 4335 W. 44th Ave. $20-$80. theorientaltheater.com

Nikki Glaser
Although she hasn’t broken through the way some of her peers have, Glaser’s reliably poised, sex-positive comedy creates a sense of conversational intimacy anywhere she performs, whether on past shows such as MTV’s “Nikki and Sara Live” and Comedy Central’s “Not Safe with Nikki Glaser,” or on her stand-up sets (including, most recently, Netflix’s “The Standups” series). A Denver favorite who has performed at indie venues around town, she returns to headline the big room at Comedy Works South.

7:15 and 9:45 p.m. June 8-9 at Comedy Works South, 5345 Landmark Place. $28. comedyworks.com

Anthony Jeselnik
Last headlining the Paramount in 2016 as part of the High Plains Comedy Festival, Jeselnik returns for his “Funny Games” tour. Non-fans be warned: Jeselnik’s love of short, punchy jokes remains as strong as their harsh, unapologetic subject matter and delivery. It’s all in good fun, right? (Yes, even the school shooting jokes — the butt of which is not the students but the meaningless “thoughts and prayers” that follow each new one). Jeselnik is a favorite among critics and stand-up insiders precisely because he intricately tinkers with language while showing a Vaudevillian respect for the treasured set-up/punchline format. It’s a lot harder (and a lot more fun) than it sounds.

8 p.m. June 9 at the Paramount Theatre, 1621 Glenarm Place. $35. altitudetickets.com

Stand Up &amp; Band Up
A twist on the usual comedy fundraiser, this showcase at Jack’s will feature a fishbowl drawing where the winner gets to donate proceeds of the show to the charity of their choice. Hosted by Teri Barton Gregg, the lineup features Denver regulars John Novosad (a.k.a. Hippieman), Chuck Roy, Stephanie McHugh, Mike Langworthy and John Tole.

UPDATE: Since the original publication of this article, this June 10 event at Jack’s has been postponed by organizers until the fall.

Michael Che
As co-head writer of “Saturday Night Live” and co-anchor of the show’s “Weekend Update” (both with Colin Jost), Che has proven a reliably confident, incisive new voice for the aging sketch institution. As a stand-up, the 35-year-old New York native is even less filtered, throwing off some of his progressive fans with strong bits on sex, race, class and more hot-button topics — and occasionally getting himself into hot water on social media with the same.

8 p.m. June 23 at the Paramount, 1621 Glenarm Place. $29.50-$39.50. altitudetickets.com

 

John Wenzel is a reporter and critic-at-large for The Denver Post who has written about comedy, music, film, books, fine art, video games and other popular culture over the years.


What to do, where to be and what to see, from 



Your email address, so we can reply:

An edition of The Denver Post.
					All contents Copyright © 2018 The Denver Post or other copyright holders. All rights reserved.
					This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed for any commercial purpose.