


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

About 300 migrants in Tijuana are mulling whether to seek asylum in the U.S. “Some may get cold feet,” one volunteer with the migrant caravan said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Arizona Republic Reporter Daniel Gonzalez talks about the caravan reaching the border.
    Nick Oza, The Republic | azcentral.com

Central American mothers and children who are traveling with a caravan of migrants, wait to figure out their night's accommodations at a shelter after arriving to Tijuana, Mexico, Wednesday, April 25, 2018. The caravan of mainly Central American migrants are planning to request asylum, either in the United States or Mexico.
(Photo: Hans-Maximo Musielik/Associated Press)

TIJUANA, Mexico — About 300 migrants from Central America are staying in shelters here deciding whether to present themselves to U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers on Sunday to request asylum in the U.S.


It’s a big decision.


After traveling more than 2,500 miles in a caravan that angered President Donald Trump, the migrants must weigh the risk of successfully passing a credible fear interview, the first hurdle toward gaining asylum, or failing the interview.


Those who cannot establish credible fear of persecution of torture if they return to their home country most likely will be placed in a detention center and then quickly deported.


Before Sunday, “some may get cold feet,” said Leonard Olsen, a volunteer with Pueblo Sin Fronteras, the transnational group that organized the migrant caravan.


A little girl inside one of the shelters in #Tijuana housing #migrants from #Central America who traveled in #caravan through Mexico pic.twitter.com/9dtT6ACATw

About 100 of the 300 migrants, mostly women and children, who made it to Tijuana, traveling on foot, by bus, and riding on freight trains, have already decided to present themselves to U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers at the San Ysidro port south of San Diego.


The others are still deciding what to do while meeting with immigration lawyers who have arrived to provide legal advice.


RELATED: Central American migrants in caravan on a collision course with Trump


Their options are limited.


Those who decide not to risk going to the port because they have decided they don’t have a strong asylum case will have to try to find a way to gain legal status in Mexico:


None want to go back to the poverty and rampant gang violence and political turmoil they fled when they joined the caravan on March 25 in Tapachula, Chiapas, on the Mexican border with Guatemala.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Reporter Daniel González and photographer Nick Oza of The Arizona Republic have been covering the migrant caravan's journey through Mexico on its way to the United States.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
