Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN DIEGO — A U.S. government attorney says authorities will release roughly half the immigrant children under age 5 who are still in custody after reunifying them with their families under a court-ordered deadline. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

Alfredo Garcia

Alfredo Garcia

RAYMONDVILLE — A 55-year-old Lyford man was being held on $20,000 bail, charged in connection with a hit-and-run accident that critically injured a cyclist.


Alfredo Garcia was charged with accident involving serious bodily injury, a third-degree felony, Municipal Judge Felicita Gutierrez said yesterday.


By yesterday afternoon, Garcia remained in the Willacy County Jail.

Police arrested Garcia on Tuesday after investigators said they identified him as the driver of a light-colored SUV believed to be the vehicle that struck Ruben Serna, 56, as he rode a bicycle Nov. 18.


Serna remains in critical condition at Valley Baptist Medical Center in Harlingen, a nursing supervisor said yesterday afternoon.


Gutierrez said she set “a reasonable bond” based on Garcia’s record.


“I took into account that he had no history of reckless driving or DWI,” Gutierrez said. “He’s not a flight risk; he’s not a menace to society.”


Gutierrez said Garcia “cooperated totally” with police investigators.


“He was forthcoming,” she said.


Gutierrez said she believed Garcia “was unaware” of the accident.


“He’s remorseful,” she said.


Gutierrez described Garcia as the unemployed owner of what she believed might be a mechanic’s shop.

A police investigation found Garcia was driving an SUV while pulling a boat on his way to Port Mansfield when he hit Serna, Gutierrez said.


Gutierrez said Garcia believed he hit a construction drum.


“He didn’t run over him,” she said, referring to Serna. “He hit him with the (SUV’s passenger side) mirror. The boat (trailer) ran over him.”


Garcia’s photograph was captured by a local Stripes convenience store camera after the accident, Police Chief Uvaldo Zamora said earlier this week.


Zamora said police matched witnesses’ descriptions of Garcia’s SUV believed to have struck Serna as he rode his bicycle on the shoulder of the road in front of the Otis Klar Head Start center on East FM 186 about 7 a.m. Nov. 18.


Serna, believed to be from Houston, was living in Raymondville, where he is believed to have been working at an area ranch, Zamora said.


fdelvalle@valleystar.com

