Advertisement

Supported by

Wordplay


By Deb Amlen

FRIDAY PUZZLE — There are two kinds of people: Those who like their crosswords knotty and difficult, and those who pray for mercy just so they can make some headway. Eventually, and with enough practice, the mercy-seekers become the challenge-seekers. And then they claim that they have given up on doing the early week puzzles, because those are way too easy.


It’s a fair point. For some solvers, the Monday and Tuesday puzzles don’t present much of a challenge, but those puzzles are not really for them. They are for the people still getting the hang of solving, and for the ones who can appreciate a good, straightforward theme. They are for those who like to start their week on a positive note, with a win.


So the solvers who crave more of a challenge wait all week for the Friday and Saturday puzzles — they might even indulge themselves in a Thursday, with its gimmicky themes — and claim to be disappointed if the Friday is “too easy” for them. Don’t say “No, I would never do that”: I’ve seen you on Twitter.


I have news for those solvers: Today’s puzzle is not that hard, which, of course, is a totally subjective call. I didn’t find it hard. But I’ve also been solving every single day for a very long time. Maybe I’m just on the wavelength of the constructor, Peter Wentz. But it’s easy to make this puzzle fall. Sorry. Maybe Saturday will be harder.

But to those who are trying to push through to the themeless puzzles, try this one. There are ways in, and then you will find the rest of the puzzle quite doable. If you know that things that are “hashed and mashed” are potatoes but the rest of the clue says “informally,” and there are six letters, it’s almost a given that the answer will be TATERS. Write that in there at 60A and claim that section as yours. You’ll return later to make it surrender totally to you.


Moving across the bottom of the grid, you know very well that a nightstand belongs at the side of a bed. It’s a plural clue, and you know that calls for a plural answer, which is BEDSIDES. Write that in there at 61A, and drop in that tortured soul, AHAB, at 50D. That southeast corner? Also yours. It’s just a matter of coming back to fill the rest in.


You’ve been doing this long enough that you can smell a pun a mile away, especially when the clue has a “?” at the end. At 33A, read the clue “Things non-PC people buy?” carefully. You don’t believe that Mr. Wentz is talking about someone who is not politically correct for a second, do you? Of course you don’t. It’s clearly a clue about computers. A non-PC person — someone who doesn’t use a personal computer — buys MACS. There’s your eastern entry. Math types might capture the west with ARCSINE at 33A.


And, of course, blacksmiths wear APRONS. There’s your northwest.


I’ve been following the stories about the hacker group known as Anonymous enough to know that their symbol is a GUY FAWKES MASK, so I was able to write that right across the center of my puzzle. It’s O.K. if you don’t know that. That’s what crossings are for, and now you do know it.


BADA BING. One Friday puzzle started. Now you crush the rest of it. You’ve got this.


15A: Ha-ha, you know what else fits here? STAR WARS, although we all know that’s not the right answer. “1999 prequel that grossed over a billion dollars, familiarly” is EPISODE I, but I’m proud that I was at least in the right series.

19-/20A: I had Y_ _D_ for 20A (“Things to 19-Across”) and guessed that the answer was YARDS. That gave me MOW for 19A, which is clued tersely as “Cut.”


38A: At first, this clue/answer pairing bothered me, but after I thought about it, I realized what it was trying to say: “Dated women?” for FAIR SEX just means that the term FAIR SEX is a dated term for women. I am now re-sheathing my weapon.


56A: Congratulations to HODA KOTB for making her full name debut in The New York Times Crossword.


11D: SCABS are the people who cross a picket line to take the place of striking workers, which is why they are the “Sources of labor pains?” Ha-ha, very clever, Mr. Wentz. You know what’s not funny? Seventeen hours of back labor. Source: The Boy.


It’s pretty rare that I build a puzzle around a single, central marquee entry, but if there were ever to be such a case, GUY FAWKES MASK is about as good as I can muster. It must have been deemed too tricky for the Friday audience, but I had my fingers crossed that the original clue of “Anonymous symbol?” would make the final cut. My clues have been saved on many past occasions by the editorial team, so I can certainly respect their judgment. Maybe this is a late makeup for my “Stone work” clue for J.F.K. on a Thursday puzzle all those years ago ...


Rest of the puzzle appears to hold up, even if the quadrants are a little closed off. They all feel pretty smooth, but maybe could have used another splashy modern entry or two. Perhaps a little more crossword glue might’ve done the trick. It’s always tricky to strike the right balance. Hope it’s a pleasant solve regardless.


Happy puzzling!

Your thoughts?

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS