Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:54 pm

Rutley

Rutley

A naked man was arrested Monday after he got himself stuck in a fence near a Stafford County elementary school, police said.

Deputy Dominic Torrice responded to the area of Anne E. Moncure Elementary School in North Stafford at 9:38 a.m. in response to reports of a man who was stuck in a fence near the woods and was improperly touching himself.

Torrice found the man with his legs stuck in the fence and helped him get free. He then covered the man with a blanket, Sheriff's spokeswoman Amanda Vicinanzo said.

No clothes nor a vehicle were in the area. Vicinanzo said the man told police he had burned his clothes in a safe container.

The man, a Beaverdam resident, was not seriously injured, but was covered from "head to toe" with scratches from the thickets in the area, Vicinanzo said. It was not clear how the man ended up near the school; police said he made numerous incoherent statements while being questioned.

Several school employees told police they had seen the man near the fence and one had seen him touching his private area while stuck in the fence.

Justin James Rutley, 30, was charged with indecent exposure, masturbating in public and disorderly conduct. He was placed in the Rappahannock Regional Jail.

A trial for Rutley is scheduled for July 12 in Stafford General District Court.

Keith Epps: 540/374-5404


kepps@freelancestar.com

Rutley


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




