Two UCF students were arrested for a suspected rape of a woman, Universal reported a 15% increase in revenue and Florida Hospital receives an 'A' for patient safety. 



Two UCF students were arrested for a suspected rape of a woman, Universal reported a 15% increase in revenue and Florida Hospital receives an 'A' for patient safety. 

Florida Hospital campuses in Orlando once again received straight A’s from a national group that regularly evaluates and grades hospitals for patient safety.


“Receiving an ‘A’ Safety Grade means a hospital is among the best in the country for preventing these terrible problems and putting their patients first, 24 hours a day,” said Leah Binder, president and CEO of The Leapfrog Group, in a news release. “This is the only national rating of how well hospitals protect patients from preventable harm and death, such as medical errors, infections, and injuries.”


Among Orlando Health campuses, only Dr. P. Phillips hospital maintained its A grade since last fall, according to the spring 2018 Leapfrog Hospital Safety Grades report, released Monday. Orlando Health’s South Seminole Hospital, Orlando Regional Medical Center and South Lake Hospital slid a letter grade from A to B.


An Orlando Health spokesman said that the health system’s Leapfrog grades have remained relatively consistent over time.


“Leapfrog’s frequent bi-annual ratings are similar to the U.S. stock market; short-term dips do not necessarily reflect long-term results,” he said in a statement. “So while we are mindful of this current dip in grades, we are confident in our advancements in quality and the high level of care we provide to patients.”


HCA’s Central Florida Regional Hospital maintained its B grade, while Osceola Regional Medical Center improved a grade from C to B.


Leesburg Regional Medical Center has maintained its streak of grade C since spring 2016.


Neither hospital responded to requests for comment.


The Leapfrog Group, a nonprofit organization devoted to improving quality and safety in health care, has been producing the Hospital Safety Grades report every six months since 2012.


This year, it graded 2,500 hospitals based on 27 patient safety measures, including ICU physician staffing, hand hygiene, microbial infections such as MRSA, falls and deaths among seriously ill patients.


In Florida, 173 hospitals were graded, 30 percent of which received an A, while two — Larkin Community Hospital’s Palm Springs Campus and Sebastian River Medical Center each received an F.


Although the highest percentage of hospitals, in Florida and nationwide, ended up getting a C grade, Leapfrog officials said that there are signs that hospitals are making progress toward reducing preventable errors, infections and deaths.


One in 25 people who are admitted to U.S. hospitals are at risk of getting new infections. Preventable medical errors are the third leading cause of death in the United States, killing more than 400,000 patients each year, according to the organization.


“The national numbers on death and harm in hospitals have alarmed us for decades,” Binder said in a press release. “What we see in the new round of Safety Grades are signs of many hospitals making significant improvements in their patient safety record.”


nmiller@orlandosentinel.com, 407-420-5158, @naseemmiller


Sign up for health newsletters »


More headlines... »


Doctors at Osceola Regional Medical Center performed the 100th transcatheter aortic valve replacement on Ramona Centeno Santos, a Puerto Rican evacuee, who moved in with her granddaughter after Hurricane Maria swept away her house in September. 



Doctors at Osceola Regional Medical Center performed the 100th transcatheter aortic valve replacement on Ramona Centeno Santos, a Puerto Rican evacuee, who moved in with her granddaughter after Hurricane Maria swept away her house in September. 

Randy Harvey, a renowned umpire who has called games for more than 3 decades in college and the major leagues, had both his legs amputated after a mysterious infection that doctors still haven’t determined its source.



Randy Harvey, a renowned umpire who has called games for more than 3 decades in college and the major leagues, had both his legs amputated after a mysterious infection that doctors still haven’t determined its source.

UPDATES:


April 26: This story was updated with comments from Orlando Health.