Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 1:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN DIEGO — A U.S. government attorney says authorities will release roughly half the immigrant children under age 5 who are still in custody after reunifying them with their families under a court-ordered deadline. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

Kristine Silva Dimas

Janette Loera

Kristine Silva Dimas

Janette Loera

Investigators with the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office believe that two Mid-Valley women arrested Saturday after allegedly assaulting and robbing a man may have previously used social media to “lure males to rob them,” according to a sheriff’s office news release.


Janette Loera, 24, of Edcouch, and Kristine Silva Dimas, 23, of Weslaco, were arraigned Sunday on attempted capital murder charges.


A man contacted authorities Friday morning after a meeting with a woman he met on Facebook did not go as planned. He told investigators he met the woman at a home on Milanos Road, located south of Mile 6 Road North, and that he knew her only as “Kayy Loera.”

When he arrived at the house he saw her there in addition to another woman. That woman “pulled a gun on him and walked him over to another residence,” according to Loera and Dimas’ criminal complaint.


The man said both women then hit him in the face multiple times with a shovel before robbing him. He also alleged that “the females shot at his vehicle as he tried to leave the property,” according to the complaint. Investigators discovered his truck had four bullet holes.


The man was robbed of approximately $500, said Deputy Jena Palacios Pacheco, spokesperson for the sheriff’s office.

The woman he knew as “Kayy Loera” matched a photo shown to him of Dimas and he identified Loera through a photo lineup, according to the criminal complaint.


Both Loera and Dimas remain in Hidalgo County jail as of this writing. Each of their bonds were set at $250,000.


The sheriff’s office asks anyone with information about this ongoing investigation to call its criminal investigation division at (956) 383-8114 or the anonymous Hidalgo County Crime Stoppers Hotline at (956) 668-8477.


msmith@themonitor.com



Kristine Silva Dimas

Janette Loera


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.