
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Hot dry pines and erratic wind fueled multiple wildfires burning out of control across more than 100,000 acres of western Colorado Sunday evening, forcing evacuations of thousands of mountain homes, destroying an undetermined number of structures and drawing legions of firefighters who tried to protect buildings and contain flames.

Federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents placed an “immigration hold” on a 52-year-old Danish man jailed on arson charges in connection with the largest of the fires, which expanded to 50,033 acres west of Fort Garland at the edge of the San Luis Valley. This Spring fire was burning eastward over La Veta Pass (U.S. Highway 160). Huerfano County authorities on the east side of the pass were evacuating communities, ordering more than 2,000 residents out of their homes and instructing others as far north as Gardner to be ready depending on wind.

“It is a very active fire, almost unprecedented weather conditions and fire behavior — a very challenging fire,” said Neal Kephart, spokesman for the inter-agency team of 550 firefighters assigned to that blaze.

“We had a very dry winter,” Kephart said. “The fire has been crowning, wind-driven. It gets up into the tops of the trees and moves independently of the fire on the ground. The fire is torching up to the tops of trees in some areas,” he said.

Dozens of houses on the west side of La Veta Pass are thought to have burned.

Other major fires that threatened homes were devouring dry forest and grassland in central Colorado — south of Fairplay, and between Florissant and Cripple Creek.

In southwestern Colorado, the 47,031-acre 416 wildfire north of Durango, burning west of Highway 550, remained mostly out of control but has not threatened structures. “Critically low” moisture in the woods below 10,000 feet elevation has favored the flames this past month.

Firefighters focused on saving homes, relatively powerless where flames gained momentum in forests where conditions were ideal for wildfires.

Four miles south of the Florissant Fossil Beds National Monument, a 1,422-acre Chateau fire was threatening hundreds of homes built in Teller County between Florissant and Cripple Creek, firefighting team spokeswoman Brenda Bowen said. More than 570 homes were evacuated, she said. “Early on, three to five structures burned. … We are just trying to keep it away from structures. There are a lot of homes within the fire area.”


About 6 miles south of Fairplay along Weston Pass, a wildfire expanded to 4,138 acres and was threatening 250 homes Sunday afternoon, firefighter team spokeswoman Pam Wilson said. “We had a spot fire that jumped the line and the fire made an aggressive push to the south.” Park County authorities ordered a  Campground of the Rockies Association community of mobile and fixed homes evacuated.

Wilson said at least one home and an outbuilding south of Fairplay were destroyed.

Flames were spreading toward Highway 285, and firefighters were trying to prevent closure of that road.

“Conditions are very, very dry. As the day heats up, the fire becomes really active. We see plumes of smoke building. … And now the fire is running to the south,” Wilson said.

Denver draws water from that general area, headwaters of the South Platte River. “Anytime there’s a fire, we’re all concerned about the watersheds — because of the ash, the erosion and the potential for mudslides.”

The Spring fire moving east from Costilla into Huerfano County spewed smoke into towns and the city of Walsenberg, raising concerns that there’s little to stop the flames. In La Veta, the volunteer fire protection district crew gathered Sunday night for a meeting with a yellow-clad fire commander, who talked about efforts to contain parts of the fire. District officials forbid the volunteers from speaking publicly, slowing the flow of information.

The federal and state firefighting professionals were planning to attack the wildfire on two sides, working through the night, Kephart said. About 35 firefighting engines and nine helicopters were deployed on Sunday. Fire commandeers called for an air attack, dropping retardant at edges of the fire and on parts of the fire to try to control it.

In Costilla County, ICE officials issued an immigration detention order with jail managers in San Luis for Jesper Joergensen 52, from Denmark, following his arrest on criminal arson charges. That means ICE agents are trying to take custody of Joergensen, if he is released for any reason, to deport him.

A Costilla County official who said he could not give his name told The Denver Post that deputies believe Joergensen accidentally started the fire. “As far as we know, he didn’t do it on purpose,” the official said.

“It is a mess. But we haven’t had any injuries.”