Gallery: Tenant files class-action lawsuit against Newark landlord over rat-infested homes


    
        
            By Karen Yi

kyi@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Fed up with the rats that ran across her children's room at all hours of the night and what she said was inaction from her landlord, Yanira Cortes took her grievances to court last year. 

Her class-action lawsuit against the owners of the federally-subsidized building in Newark alleged a host of safety violations, infestations and neglect. Newly available records in the case show a mold assessor called Cortes' apartment a "mold war zone" and insisted -- back in October -- "the tenants vacate the property as soon as possible." 

Five months later, Cortes remains in the building with her four young children.

The landlord, however, is walking away: Pueblo City Apartments has been sold to a new owner. 

Radiant Property Management, which manages other buildings in the city, will take over the site. A message left with Radiant at its Newark office was not returned on Monday. 

Wayne Fox, who is listed as a partner for Pueblo City Housing Company 1-A, the original owner named in the suit, also did not return a call seeking comment on the sale.

Paula Franzese, a law professor at the Seton Hall University School of Law, said the onus for addressing any safety violations would now fall on the new landlord.

"The buyer steps into the shoes of the seller and is now liable for the deficiencies on site," she wrote in an email. "The new owner is no doubt aware of the pending lawsuit, and perhaps purchased at a reduced rate because of the premises' defects. Regardless, the current owner is responsible for remedying the problems complained of."

Radiant Management, founded by Michael Wieder, is promising significant repairs, according to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, which vetted the buyer. HUD spokeswoman Olga Alvarez said Radiant Management will have a 20-year contract with HUD to provide subsidized housing.

In federally-subsidized apartments, like Pueblo City, tenants pay about 30 percent of rent and HUD pays the landlord the rest of the unit's fair market price.

A serious 'human health concern'

Cortes' complaint was amended last fall to include a 67-page mold inspection, prepared by a New York-licensed mold assessor from Environmental Health Consultants. The October report details high concentrations of black mold in the air and in all rooms of Cortes' apartment based on 21 samples, court filings show. 

Black mold, the report said, "should never be seen in an indoor environment, nonetheless in the air." Black mold produces toxins that cause adverse health effects, according to the report.

Other mold growth was also found inside the walls. "Mold has been there long enough to start forming roots," the report said, calling the apartment a "mold war zone" of serious "human health concern."

When asked about the mold report, Alvarez said the agency did not find mold when its staff went to inspect. No samples were taken, Alvarez added, because no mold was found. 

Radiant is considered an owner "in good standing" and its plans to rehabilitate the building would address any mold conditions, Alvarez said.  

Cortes' fight for better housing conditions spurred efforts by state lawmakers last year to hold landlords accountable for decrepit living conditions. Former Sen. Jennifer Beck, R-Monmouth, and Sen. Ronald Rice, D-Essex, proposed a bill last year to withhold subsidies from landlords when their buildings have safety violations. The bill languished in committee. 

The class-action suit was first filed in September and extends to tenants who have lived there in the last six years. It asks a judge to grant rent abatements and put the building in receivership, which would appoint another party to oversee rehabilitation efforts.

Cortes, 30, declined to comment, citing her ongoing case. Her attorney, Dennis Geier, also declined to comment to on the suit.

"We believe in the case and in our efforts to restore habitable housing to our clients and others similarly situated," he said in an email. 

Karen Yi may be reached at kyi@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter at @karen_yi or on Facebook. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        