Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Four races are decided in the Williamson County primary on Tuesday, with some positions not facing an Democratic opposition in August.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    5 things to know about Franklin
    Wochit

Polls for the May 1 primary will open at 7 a.m.
(Photo: Submitted image)

With less than 5 percent of Williamson County residents voting early, May 1 remains as the last chance to cast a ballot in the upcoming primary election. 


Voters will decide their next local leaders in a handful of races, ranging from the mayor to a couple of county commission seats. The sheriff, circuit county clerk and trustee candidates have no opposition on the ballot. 


This year's county commission races have more than 50 candidates vying for 24 seats. The commission includes 12 districts, with two seats in each district. County commissioners review and vote on budgets for all departments of county government, set the county's property tax rate and review other resolutions related to county needs. 


Because there are two positions on the county commission per district, up to two nominees per political party advance. 


For all other countywide positions, one nominee per political party will go to the general ballot.


Here's what you need to know before you vote. 


At the top of the ballot, residents will decide who is their next county mayor.


The winner of the Republican primary will move to an uncontested general August ballot. 


Voters can decide between longtime Mayor Rogers Anderson and opponent Kenneth Eaton. 


Anderson has served since 2002. If re-elected, he said he would like to continue helping in the planning for the county's explosive growth. 


A former Nashville mayoral candidate in 2015, Eaton is trying his hand in the Williamson County race. Eaton said he felt like the position needed a businessman, and that he wanted to keep the county fiscally accountable. Previously, Eaton also ran for U.S. Senate and Davidson County Clerk. 


In the Register of Deeds race, voters have two choices. 


Julie Hannah and Sherry Anderson will run against each other in the Republican primary. 


Anderson is the current chief deputy in the Register of Deeds office. Hannah is the former Williamson County Republican chairman, and held the position from 2015 to 2017.


The race has seen some of the biggest fundraising of the county's local primary races. Between the two candidates, around $60,000 has been donated. 


A Register of Deeds deals with thousands of property deals and records the legal status of real and personal property. The register also records powers of attorney and collects some revenue.


With no Democratic opposition, the candidate with the most votes will run uncontested in August. 


Two Republicans — Elaine Anderson and Andy Johnson — will try for the position of county clerk. Anderson has held the position since 1998.


Anderson spent the last 50 years of her life in Williamson County government. Johnson, who has run several businesses, said he felt it was time for a new face in the position. 


The county clerk plays a number of roles in local government. Duties include issuing licenses for taxes and marriages, collecting taxes, issuing beer permits, maintaining utility district records, and processing motor vehicle and title registrations. 


The candidate with the most votes in the primary will proceed to the August ballot with no opposition. 


The winners of these primaries will also move to an uncontested general election. 


In District 3, voters have three Republican options to represent the Spring Hill area:  interim commissioner Jennifer Mason, incumbent David Pair and former Spring Hill Alderman Keith Hudson. 


There are four Republican candidates running in District 9, which include Chas Morton, Robert Peterman, incumbent Todd Kaestner and Matthew Williams.


Residents on the southeast and eastern side of Franklin have four choices to pick from in District 12. Political incumbents Dana Ausbrooks and Steve Smith will face Republican novices Kahn Garrett and Ned Williams.


The top two vote recipients from each district will proceed to the general ballot unopposed. 


Residents have to participate in their precinct of residence on Election Day unless otherwise expressly permitted.


A Tennessee or federal photo ID (even if expired) is required to cast a ballot. First-time voters who registered by mail must show proof of correct address when voting. 


Polls are open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.


Here's the full list of who will appear on the May ballot. 


MAYOR


CIRCUIT COURT CLERK


JUVENILE COURT CLERK 


SHERIFF


TRUSTEE


COUNTY CLERK


REGISTER OF DEEDS


COMMISSION DISTRICT 1


COMMISSION DISTRICT 2


COMMISSION DISTRICT 3


COMMISSION DISTRICT 4


COMMISSION DISTRICT 5


COMMISSION DISTRICT 6


COMMISSION DISTRICT 7


COMMISSION DISTRICT 8


COMMISSION DISTRICT 9


COMMISSION DISTRICT 10


COMMISSION DISTRICT 11


COMMISSION DISTRICT 12


Reach Emily West at erwest@tennessean.com, at 615-613-1380; or on Twitter at @emwest22.
