


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A reflective fifth anniversary was planned for Sandy Hook shooting, after relatives of victims spent years advocating for mental health, gun control.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Five years after the Sandy Hook massacre, efforts to improve mental health care for young people have had mixed results. Many reforms included in key piece of federal legislation remain unfunded. (Dec. 13)
    AP

Swimmers exit the water Aug. 5, 2017, at the fourth annual Race4Chase kids triathlon finale in Southington, Conn. The Kowalski family began the Race4Chase program to honor their son, Chase Kowalski, who was among 20 first-graders killed on Dec. 14, 2012 at the Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown.
(Photo: Pat Eaton-Robb, AP)

Thursday marks the five-year anniversary of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and residents planned to honor the day mostly in private reflection after years of activism and advocacy in memory of 20 children and six educators slain.


Gov. Dan Malloy ordered flags at half-staff statewide for the shooting in Newtown, Conn.


Though we will never know the full measure of sorrow experienced by the families who lost loved ones at Sandy Hook Elementary School, we can let them know that we stand with them. Five years later, it is these families who give us hope. https://t.co/FaZVjSPwvr

Churches held morning masses and planned to ring bells about 9:30 a.m. ET, which was the approximate time of the rampage. Town offices will close from 9:30 to 9:45 a.m. for a moment of silence.


Newtown Congregational Church opened at 9 a.m. for prayer, silence, music and support. In the evening, two memorial services at local churches were planned.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Throughout the years, relatives of the victims have dedicated themselves to charity and other activism, in an effort to prevent violence.


Rebecca Kowalski, whose 7-year-old son Chase died in the shooting, began a youth triathlon program called Race4Chase.


“You have two choices,” Kowalski told the Associated Press. “I could be in the bottom of a bottle; I could not get out of my bed. Or, I could do what’s making us heal a little bit every day.”


Nelba Marquez-Greene created the Ana Grace Project for her 6-year-old daughter who was killed to combat bullying and help socially isolated children at schools in New Britain, Conn.


“I want people to remember that Adam, the person who did this, was also once 6 and in a first-grade classroom and that if we had reached out earlier, then maybe this could have changed,” Marquez-Greene told AP.


Scarlett Lewis has also been pushing for emotional support in schools to honor her slain son through the Jesse Lewis Choose Love Movement. The learning program began at four schools in Connecticut, Hawaii, Arkansas and New Mexico, and has been downloaded by many other schools.


“I believe this is an urgent matter,” Lewis said. “I believe it would have saved my son’s life, as well as the lives of other victims across the United States and reduce bullying.”


Sandy Hook Promise was co-founded by several Newtown families, including the parents of first-grade victims Dylan Hockley and Daniel Barden.


The group lobbied for mental health care changes and gun control legislation in the months after the shooting, successfully advocating for state laws limiting sales of some guns in states such as Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois and New Jersey.


A public service announcement from the group went viral this week. The one-minute-25-second video called “Tomorrow’s News” looked like a news broadcast previewing a fictional shooting, with what students, parents and teachers should have mentioned to authorities about the 15-year-old gunman.


"He told some of us that his dad kept a gun in his closet and he always talked about using it on — you know —the people that bullied him," one male student says. "Tomorrow I’ll probably say that I wish I told someone."


A teacher adds: "Tomorrow I’ll probably point out that something has seemed off with him since the beginning of the school year.”


The group had 17 Sandy Hook families lobby 49 senators during seven days in a failed effort in 2013 to get a federal law banning some semi-automatic weapons and expanding criminal and mental background checks for gun purchases.


White roses with the faces of victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting are attached to a telephone pole near the school on the one-month anniversary of the shooting that left 26 dead in Newtown, Conn. (Photo: Jessica Hill, AP)

 


“Shame on Congress for allowing yet another year to pass without action,” Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., told the Hartford Courant in a statement. “Shame on Congress for allowing this tragic anniversary to be followed by so many more—in Sutherland Springs, in Las Vegas, in Orlando, in Charleston, and in our communities each and every day.”


Contributing: The Associated Press
