Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Natalie Musumeci


		
		
		
		
	


									June 27, 2018 | 1:21pm
											| Updated June 27, 2018 | 3:35pm
												

The ex-convict older brother of Giants cornerback Janoris Jenkins has been identified as a “person of interest” in connection to the death of a music producer whose body was found at the football player’s home, according to a new report.

Jenkins’ 34-year-old brother William is “a person of interest in relation to [the] dead body case at his brother’s house,” Ontario County district attorney James Ritts told TMZ Sports, the outlet reported.

Ritts, according to the celebrity gossip website, added that the Bergen County Prosecutor’s Office, which is investigating the death of 25-year-old Roosevelt Rene, “wants to talk to him.”

TMZ Sports reported that William is not currently a suspect in the case.

According to jail records obtained by TMZ Sports, William was arrested in upstate New York hours before the body of Rene was discovered at his brother’s Fair Lawn home.

It appears William was busted for an unrelated parole warrant issue, according to the outlet. 

The death case is being treated as a homicide and the cause of death was deemed “highly suspicious,” separate police sources told ESPN.

The body of Rene, a Jenkins family friend, was found in the basement of the 29-year-old NFL player’s luxury home Tuesday morning while Jenkins was in Florida.

Rene, who produced music under the name Trypps Beatz, had been staying at Jenkins’ six-bedroom home.

The NFL Network reported that police are investigating Rene’s death as a possible strangulation/suffocation incident.

A rep for Jenkins did not immediately return a request for comment by The Post, but multiple sources who have talked to him since the news broke told ESPN that he is “good” and “just waiting for the legal process to play out.”



Jenkins commented on his older brother’s troubled past back in an interview with The Post in May 2016 – while William was locked up in upstate New York on drug charges – saying that his sibling “has been incarcerated since I was 14.”

According to New York state prison records, William was locked up in Dec. 2006 on a charge of criminal sale of a controlled substance and sentenced to 3 years and 6 months in prison.

He was busted again in April 2011 charges of criminal sale of a controlled substance and criminal possession of a controlled substance and sentenced to six years in Livingston Correctional Facility.

William was released on parole in July 2016, records show.


			Read Next
		


			
				Germany embarrassingly crashes out of World Cup			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Germany embarrassingly crashes out of World Cup			
		

Share Selection

52,124

32,139

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						