Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 1:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN DIEGO — A U.S. government attorney says authorities will release roughly half the immigrant children under age 5 who are still in custody after reunifying them with their families under a court-ordered deadline. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

This story was updated to include information from the criminal complaint.

EDINBURG — An Alton pastor was arrested Wednesday after a woman reported that he sexually assaulted her while she was unconscious.


Melquisedec Chan, 52, was arraigned Thursday on aggravated sexual assault and practicing medicine without a license charges.


Chan and his wife, who live in Mission, founded Vida Abundante church in Alton nearly two decades ago, according to its website, which describes him as a surgeon in Mexico. He is not licensed, however, by the Texas Medical Board, and thus unable to legally practice medicine in the state.

His arrest came after a woman reported to police that Chan, a family doctor, allegedly sedated and then sexually assaulted her, according to a criminal complaint.


Chan had been visiting the woman at her Edinburg home since early March “to follow up with her, after a surgery she got done in Mexico in which he was present,” the complaint states.


At some point, the woman alerted her brother of her concern that Chan was sexually assaulting her, telling him “she could not be sure because he was injecting her with something that would put her to sleep,” and which clouded her memory.


On April 9, the brother observed Chan placing his genitals in her mouth "while she was sedated,” according to the complaint, which led to her filing charges against the man.


A sexual assault forensic exam revealed the woman had a drug in the benzodiazepines family in her system. Benzodiazepines are a common anesthetic used by doctors before certain procedures or surgeries.

As of this report, Chan remains in the Hidalgo County jail. His bond was set at $750,000.


Vida Abundante could not be reached for comment.


Investigators believe Chan may have committed this type of crime before and are asking anyone else who believes they may be a victim to file a report with their local police department.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.