Gallery: Wapato jail


    
        
            By Molly Harbarger

mharbarger@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive





There might yet be a last chance for Wapato Jail to become a homeless shelter now that Jordan Schnitzer's management company is part owner.

Schnitzer said Tuesday that he wants to give Homer Williams' nonprofit the first crack at leasing at least part of the 155,400-square-foot facility to run a homeless shelter. The offer is good to anyone in the community who has a viable idea for funding it.

"I want to work with anyone that has an idea that can help this facility that was built with public dollars help the public," Schnitzer said.

Schnitzer bought a stake in Wapato Jail, which sat vacant for nearly two decades, the day after the sale to developer Marty Kehoe closed. The county paid $58 million to build the minimum-security facility. Schnitzer paid $5 million -- the same price Kehoe negotiated from the county commissioners.

Kehoe said Tuesday that he owns the property and Schnitzer's firm, Harsch Investment Properties will manage it. Kehoe said he has not agreed to allowing a homeless shelter to lease the space and that he plans to proceed with his plans to use it for commercial purposes.

Kehoe was criticized by many in the community and Commissioner Loretta Smith, who is running for Portland City Council, for trying to low-ball the county. He had originally offered $10.8 million for the site. But upon studying the site, he tried to back out. When the county asked him what he would be willing to pay, he came back with $5 million.

All commissioners except Smith decided they'd rather have the $5 million to spend on permanent supportive housing to get people off the streets than wait for a possible better offer.



"I've never misled anybody about this," Kehoe said. "I'm a for-profit developer, and I am staying that way."

Schnitzer said his management firm had also looked at the property last year and considered making a $5 million to $6 million offer. So, when Kehoe's deal resulted in a similar price, he approached Kehoe about owning Wapato together.

Kehoe said he didn't know anything about the idea to make it a homeless shelter until he read it in the Portland Tribune. He remains skeptical that zoning issues and operating costs make a shelter feasible.

But Schnitzer said he wants to try.

So, he reached out to Williams, a friend of 40 years, whose nonprofit Harbor for Hope has pitched City Hall on several ideas to help homeless people. None has panned out, except for receiving approval from the city to use land under the Broadway Bridge for a new homeless shelter that Columbia Sportswear CEO Tim Boyle has committed $1.5 million to build.



Williams has not disclosed how he would fund the operation.

Williams said he plans to commission studies to figure out how much homeless services in Wapato would cost, what kind of programming would work in the space and then how to fund it.Williams expects the due diligence to take at least 90 to 120 days.

But, he's optimistic because many people in the Portland area, both residents and business owners, have supported the idea in the past.

"I'm confident the direction we're headed is the right one," Williams said. "So that is a good day."

Mazzioti and Williams made a last-minute bid for Wapato Jail in the weeks before the county voted to sell it to Kehoe. They said they would pay $250,000 up front and fund its own $200,000 feasibility study. If all went according to their hopes, they would buy the jail for $7 million.



Schnitzer said that he expects their decision to be months away. If no one in the community can put together a feasible homeless services proposal, the facility will be used for industrial and commercial businesses.

Smith, who talked with Schnitzer about her desire to see Wapato used as a shelter before the vote, said she is glad to see the idea be revived one more time. She also took a swipe at her fellow commissioners, who supported marketing the facility to developers and closing the deal with Kehoe. She was the lone vote against the deal.

"I commend the group of community leaders stepping up do to what Multnomah County has repeatedly refused to consider -- turning the Wapato facility into a large-scale shelter with on-site services for people experiencing homelessness," Smith said in a statement. 

"As we continue to close existing shelters in the middle of a housing and homelessness crisis, we need leaders willing to work with those in the community to push forward better solutions."

-- Molly Harbarger

mharbarger@oregonian.com503-294-5923@MollyHarbarger


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        