Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Twelve candidates received endorsements because of their experience, background and responses to questions on vision, public trust and  community.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The full event of the gubernatorial forum on rural Tennessee featuring Craig Fitzhugh, Karl Dean, Bill Lee and Randy Boyd.
    

Twelve elected offices are on the Nashville-Davidson County Democratic primary ballot on May 1.
(Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Editor's note: In light of new information received Friday, The Tennessean Editorial Board changed its endorsement in the Criminal Clerk of Court race. Scroll down for more information.


Twelve elected offices are on the Nashville-Davidson County Democratic primary ballot on May 1.


These positions are fundamentally important to run government and uphold the public trust.


They are charged with deciding on legal cases, keeping inmates safe, defending those who cannot afford the cost of a lawyer, collecting taxes, and safeguarding citizens in law and in real estate.


These jobs may not be as well known as the mayor, but they matter to voters’ pocketbooks and protecting their rights. In addition, given recent scandals at city hall and the courthouse (i.e., former Mayor Megan Barry and former Judge Casey Moreland), restoring citizens’ trust in government must be a critical priority for these officeholders.


More: Former Nashville judge Casey Moreland faces five more federal indictments


There is no opposition on the Republican or independent ballot, so the victors will either win the post outright or move on to the general election on Aug. 2 if no one receives 50 percent-plus-1 of the vote. Voters can request any ballot regardless of their party affiliation.


► Read More: Breaking down the races in the May 1 Nashville election


Read More: Plazas: Why can't we be more civil on the Nashville transit debate?


The Tennessean Editorial Board met with 27 of 28 candidates running for these posts April 10-12. We asked them to fill out a questionnaire beforehand and we interviewed them about their qualifications. Keep reading to find our endorsements in each race.


Davidson County Candidate Questionnaires


Here is a description about what these jobs do and who is running for them:


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

We recommend voters wholeheartedly check the box for the four candidates who are running unopposed:


They show a tremendous knowledge and devotion to their offices, either as veterans or newcomers, and will serve the public well.


We commend all the candidates who are competing in the contested races. Competition is healthy for a democracy and provides voters the chance to assess whether they want to see a different direction for a particular office. 


In many of these races, there were multiple qualified and exceptional candidates, but our endorsement went to the person whose experience, background and responses to questions on vision, public trust and dedication to the community were superior, in our judgment.


Key traits for a judge are integrity, efficiency and wisdom. 


Our choice: Anne Martin


Martin, 50, is an attorney with Bone McAllester Norton and an adjunct law professor at Belmont University. With 26 years of practice, she is the most experienced candidate in the race when it comes to practicing in Chancery Court, which is a very specialized court in handling civil cases.


Our choice: Angie Blackshear Dalton


Dalton, 46, was appointed by Gov. Bill Haslam to this post last November. She previously had 11 years of experience as a general sessions judge and worked as an assistant district attorney. She should have the opportunity to continue her service.


Background: Metro Council members appointed the two incumbents in the General Sessions Court seats up for election from among their ranks. Former Councilman Sam Coleman took the Division X spot to replace Casey Moreland, who is facing federal corruption and obstruction charges for alleged misdeeds while on the court. Coleman has worked hard to restore integrity on the bench. Former Councilman Nick Leonardo was appointed judge in January to replace Angie Blackshear Dalton, who had been elevated to the Criminal Court. While both men are capable attorneys and jurists, there are candidates in their races whose experience in the law, not necessarily politics, makes them superior choices.  


Division III


Our choice: Ana Escobar


Escobar, 46, has an array of experiences as an assistant public defender, Metro clerk, in private practice and, most recently, as an assistant district attorney. She also has spent a lot of her career focused on the issue of domestic violence, which is an important part of the docket of this court.


Division X


Our choice: Joyce Grimes Safley


Safley, 63, worked her way in law school as a nurse and worked as a trial or litigation attorney for 29 years. She spent 15 years as an administrative judge traveling the state. She has been in private practice since 2017.


Our choice: Howard Gentry


Howard Gentry, 66, a former vice mayor and council member at-large, has served honorably as the incumbent, with a focus on helping qualified people expunge criminal records. He was appointed in 2011 and has worked to make his office more effective and efficient. The editorial board named him a Notable Tennessean of 2016 for his work on stemming youth violence. 


On Thursday the editorial board announced it had endorsed Gentry's opponent Steven Murff. His experience as a lifelong civil servant, courts administrator in Davidson County Specialty Courts and his work restructuring and implementing programs like mental health and veterans treatment courts proved very appealing. His ideas for modernizing efficiency, technology and community outreach also played a factor in making a very difficult decision in this race. 


On Friday, however, The Tennessean confirmed that Murff had been terminated from his job in Davidson County courts by Judge Melissa Blackburn for "deficient performance of your job duties, including, but not limited to, falsifying your attendance records," according to a letter signed by Court Administrator Warner C. Hassell on April 15, 2016. Murff did not disclose this information to the editorial board either in his questionnaire or during his interview with the editorial board on April 11. In light of this, the editorial board is working to refine and strengthen its candidate endorsement process in the future. We apologize to our readers. 


Our choice: Lonnell Matthews Jr.


Matthews, 38, is a former district Metro Council member and former district executive director for the YMCA with extensive experience and involvement in youth programs. He also is on leave as the director for neighborhoods and community engagement for the mayor’s office. His vision is to take the office beyond records keeper to a community-focused post that plays a part in helping deter youth from entering a life of crime.


Our choice: Karen Johnson


Johnson, 49, has 23 years of records, information systems and human resources management, which is an important experience in the job, and she is currently director of human resources at Mercy Health Services in Franklin. She also has been elected three times to political office as a school board member and Metro Council member. In the latter role, she deals regularly with real estate, zoning and property matters that give her a keen understanding of the office she is now seeking.


Our choice: Daron Hall


Hall, 53, has served as sheriff for 16 years. He said so many inmates who are booked in jail are there either because of substance abuse or mental illness, and he desires to decriminalize mental illness and to use his facilities, in part, for treatment. He has received criticism in the past for cooperating with federal authorities who seek to detain inmates who are in the country illegally. As immigration enforcement continues to increase under the Trump administration, we ask that the sheriff do all in his power and within the law to advocate for policies that avoid harming the dignity of people accused of minor infractions and separating them from their families. He can further become a champion for the powerless and the voiceless as he seeks to keep them safe in detention while under his supervision. 


Opinion and Engagement Editor David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of and in collaboration with fellow Tennessean Editorial Board members Michael A. Anastasi and Maria De Varenne. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.


 
