Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

MISSION — A 17-year-old student was arrested Tuesday morning after sending his friends an alarming message Friday.


The Mission High School student was arraigned later Tuesday on a false alarm or report charge, a state jail felony, according to Mission police spokesman Lt. Jody Tittle.


The teen, who police are not identifying at this time, was subsequently booked into the Hidalgo County jail under a $10,000 bond.

Tittle said the teen posted to a Snapchat group between his friends that there was going to be a gun at school and for everyone to leave and that it was not a joke.


“It freaked out and it scared some people; some were in tears and some called their parents,” Tittle said of the recipients’ reaction.


Regarding the arrest, Tittle added, “This has taken up a lot of students’ time, teachers’ time, administrators’ time and law enforcement’s time. There are days I have to send out half my investigative team to make sure everything is safe. A kid just thinks he’s being funny, but you can’t do that anymore.”

If indicted for the state jail felony, the student faces between 180 days and two years in jail.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.