Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The best news: most kids are in touch with their parents. The worst: no plan or time table for reuniting them.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


U.S. Senator Bill Nelson debriefs with reporters Saturday afternoon after touring the Homestead Temporary Shelter for unaccompanied migrant children to check on those who were separated from there parents at the U.S.-Mexico border. Nelson was returning to the facility after being refused entry earlier this week. With him were Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz and other Florida Democrats. All expressed relief that most of the children are now able to speak with their parents by phone.
(Photo: Patricia Borns/USA Today Network)

Some 70 migrant children forcibly taken from their parents at the U.S.-Mexico border are in good hands in Homestead, Democratic leaders led by U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson and Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz concluded Saturday after touring the shelter where the children are detained with over 1,000 unaccompanied migrant youths.


“It is inexplicable to me why Sen. Nelson and I were not allowed to see it when we asked on Tuesday.”


“The facilities are nice," said Nelson on emerging from the military-style compound after being refused entry earlier this week. “The question is the reunification of the 2,300 children across the country separated from their parents. How long will they be detained?” 


Rep. Debbie Waaserman Schultz arrives at the Homestead Temporary Shelter for unaccompanied migrant youth Saturday to tour the facility after being turned away with Sen. Bill Nelson earlier in the week. (Photo: Patricia Borns/USA Today Network)

Migrating families were torn apart as federal departments implemented the Trump administration's zero tolerance policy without coordination or planning, the senator said. 


The Homestead site encompasses a former Job Corps repurposed in 2015 after some students were charged in the murder of a classmate with a machete.    


Now, although children under existing immigration law can’t be held for more than 20 days, the administration is calling facilities like Homestead a shelter, not detention. 


“I was told that only a handful of the 70 who are here haven’t spoken with their parents yet.”


The good news is that a Department of Health and Human Services employee has been dedicated to helping the kids communicate with their parents.


"I was told that only a handful of the 70 who are here haven’t spoken with their parents yet," Nelson said. 


Parents and kids only get to speak twice a week for 10 minutes, however. 


"I will tell you that after coming out of this facility, it is inexplicable to me why Sen. Nelson and I were not allowed to see it when we asked on Tuesday," said Wasserman Schultz.


The congresswoman – who’s a member of the House Appropriations Committee 
that funds Community Health Services, the private contractor based in Cape Canaveral that provides for the children’s care – called the two-week notice requirement for legislators to conduct their oversight “ridiculous.”


"That’s why I’m introducing legislation on Monday with Sen. Jeff Merkley that would require HHS to give members of Congress access with short enough notice that nothing can be whitewashed or covered up," she said.


Although not allowed to speak with the kids, the group – which included Reps. Frederica Wilson Ted Deutch and José Javier Rodríguez, among others --  said hello to them and learned almost all come from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador. Wilson's staff gave them balloons.


Their living conditions are clean but regimented and  barracks-like, and they get three, ethnically appropriate meals and  two snacks a day, the group reported.


Pastor gives glimpse into possible conditions of Homestead detention center


“They only – and this is most disturbing -- have Health and Human Services personnel here Monday through Friday to unify the children, because Department of Homeland Security doesn’t let personnel work on weekends,” Wasserman Schultz said. 


Getting the two departments on the same page working for reunification will be on their agendas, the delegation said.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The big issue for both sides of the aisle after reunification is how parents and children will be kept together during the criminal proceedings of the Trump administration’s zero tolerance policy. 


A Republican proposal would lift the humanitarian 20-day limit for holding children so they can stay with their parents longer.


Earlier this week, Trump called on the Defense Department to house up to 20,000 unaccompanied migrant youths in Texas and Arkansas military barracks  and to provide over 20 attorneys to help process the backlog of illegal immigration cases.


Rep. Wilson noted the challenge of finding more places to hold undocumented immigrant families long-term. Housing will have to be built for them, she said. 


Rep. Frederica Wilson talks to reporters on a rainy Saturday after touring the Homestead Temporary Shelter holding 70 children separated from their parents at the U.S.-Mexico border. (Photo: Patricia Borns/USA Today Network)

The restriction against interacting with the Homestead children -- nothing more than courtesy communication, the group was told -- concerned the Congresswoman. In Brownsville she had been able to speak in Spanish with them and hold the little ones, she said.


“Criminalizing every illegal entry caused this,” said South Florida attorney Greg Schell. “Now they need federal prosecutors to go to federal court to charge all of these people. It will bog down the court system. The paperwork will overwhelm the federal courts."


Florida has over 44,000 pending immigration cases and an average of over 500 days waiting time to resolve them, according to TRAC Immigration.  


“I would call what is happening with the separation of families an abduction and kidnapping, because many parents still do not know where and who their children 
are," said Elvira Carvajal, an organizer with Farmworker Association of Florida, one of many grass roots groups protesting the zero tolerance immigration agenda.


Although Carvajal, too, heard the children in the Homestead shelter are being treated well, “The psychological impact they will face for the rest of their lives is irreparable," she said.


The children do have access to mental healthcare, Nelson and his retinue learned. Those with obvious or diagnosed issues are sent to facilities that can help them, and group therapy is available. CHS also schools them, but does not use Miami-Dade county's curriculum, as county commissioners said they would wish.


As the afternoon's pelting rain turned to full-fledged downpour, protesters marched up Bougainville Boulevard past the facility chanting "No hate, no fear, immigrants are welcome here."


Follow this reporter on Twitter @PatriciaBorns.


Immigrant children now part of Florida Senate race


Democrats' focus on immigration may hurt them


Did the Obama administration separate families?
