By Noah Feit



                                            nfeit@thestate.com
                                        


                        
                            April 12, 2018 08:43 AM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

 A South Carolina teenager was arrested and charged after he laced a brownie with drugs and gave it to his 89-year-old neighbor before robbing her home, according to authorities.

Christian Ainsley Jellico, 19, was charged with abuse of a vulnerable adult and petty larceny, according to the Charleston County Sheriff's Office.

On April 7, the West Ashley woman ate the brownie given to her by Jellico and began to lose consciousness and soon passed out, live5news.com reported.

With his 89-year-old neighbor unconscious for four hours, Jellico is accused of burglarizing her house, stealing a $300 television and approximately $500 from her purse, according to postandcourier.com.

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

Before the full effects of the drug wore off, the woman attempted to get up, only to fall and cause injuries to her head, face and arm on brick steps, live5news.com reported.

When the woman was taken to the hospital she was given a toxicology test, along with treatment for her injuries, according to multiple reports.

She tested positive for benzodiazepine, which is an anti-anxiety drug, postandcourier.com reported, adding that the woman told authorities she did not take that, or any other drug, and her doctor confirmed she had not been prescribed that medication.

Jellico was taken to the Al Cannon Detention Center. He appeared in court Wednesday when his bond was set at $102,125 for both of the charges.

According to an affidavit, "it is believed from this investigation, that the offender placed this drug in the brownies that (were) given to the victim by the defendant so that he could take advantage of her by stealing her personal items."

"She wants others in similar situations to be smarter about who they trust," the victim’s lawyer told The Post and Courier.


                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    