Dennis Rodman scored a no-jail plea deal in his California DUI case Monday after attending rehab.

The NBA Hall of Fame inductee pleaded guilty to one count of driving under the influence of alcohol, and one count of driving with a blood alcohol level of 0.08% or higher.

He was sentenced to a nine-month alcohol education program, placed on three years' informal probation and ordered to pay $390 in fines, court records show.

"The court made the right call," Rodman's lawyer Paul Meyer said in a statement to the Daily News.

"In issuing the sentence, the court recognized Dennis' intensive inpatient rehabilitation and his commitment to treatment," he said. "Dennis has accepted responsibility for his sobriety and has made great progress."

Rodman, 56, was arrested Jan. 13 after he was pulled over for a traffic violation in Newport Beach and failed a field sobriety test, police said.

The rebound champ who won five NBA titles — two with the Detroit Pistons in 1989 and 1990 and three with the Chicago Bulls in 1996, 1997 and 1998 — submitted to a Breathalyzer test and blew over the .08 legal limit, cops said.

After his release, Rodman quickly made the decision to check into a rehab, his agent and longtime friend Darren Prince told The News.

"He's been dealing with some personal stuff for the past month and a half, two months, much more than usual, and I told him, this gives him an opportunity to shut it down," Prince said. "I've told him, 'put yourself into a rehab center and find out why this is happening. Get to the underlying root.'"

At the time of his DUI arrest, Rodman already was on probation for driving his Range Rover the wrong way in a carpool lane on the I-5 Freeway in southern California in June 2016.

He allegedly drove head-on toward another vehicle, causing the driver to swerve and crash into a concrete wall.

Under his prior plea deal last year, Rodman pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges of driving the wrong way on a divided California highway, providing false information to an officer and driving without a valid license.

Orange County prosecutors dropped the more serious hit-and-run charge.

In that case, Rodman was sentenced to three years of probation, 30 hours of community service and victim restitution.