Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


WICHITA, Kan. (AP) — Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach has complied with a judge's order by fully registering thousands of voters whose eligibility to cast a ballot had been in limbo because of the state's now-defunct proof-of-citizenship requirement, according to court records. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

Miguel Uvalle, 41, of Weslaco, was charged with murder in connection with a murder at LipZtick strip club near Donna.

Miguel Uvalle, 41, of Weslaco, was charged with murder in connection with a murder at LipZtick strip club near Donna.

Hidalgo County sheriff’s investigators arrested a man in connection with a murder at LipZtick strip club near Donna.


Miguel Uvalle, 41, of Weslaco was charged with murder, a first-degree felony, Wednesday afternoon.


Uvalle is accused in the shooting death of Angel Sanchez on Sunday morning.

Investigators continue searching for Gabriel Hernandez, 22, the second suspect in the murder.


Early Sunday morning, sheriff’s deputies were dispatched to the strip club at 121 W. Sioux Rd.


The owner of LipZtick reported hearing a “loud bang” that later turned out to be gunfire, according to a criminal complaint.


Witnesses told investigators that Sanchez was walking out of a restroom when he was “ambushed by a gunman,” according to information provided by the sheriff’s office.


Investigators believe the motive stemmed from an ongoing dispute between Uvalle and Sanchez.

“Prior to the murder, the two had been involved in a separate altercation that escalated from an argument,” the sheriff’s office news release stated.


U.S. Marshals Service Gulf Coast Violent Offender Task Force and sheriff’s investigators arrested Uvalle near Donna.


A judge set his bond at $1 million. He remains at the Hidalgo County jail and could face life in prison if convicted of murder.


This report was updated to correct the name of the individual who was shot while walking out of the club's restroom.

