Gallery: Tony Schneider Jr. sentencing


    
        
            By Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

Sheriff's deputies on Thursday took Tony Dreu Schneider Jr. into custody after he was sentenced to two months in jail and five years' probation for running a stolen-car crushing criminal-racketeering scheme through two North Portland auto yards he operated with his father.

Under heavily negotiated plea deals, both father and son will do limited prison time but were ordered to pay a total of $500,000 in restitution and fines to cover the costs of more than 100 victims who had their vehicles stolen and crushed.

"What was critical here was the criminal enterprise was shut down,'' said Kevin Demer, a Multnomah County deputy district attorney. "In this case, we're going to pay the victims 100 percent of their claims.''

The Schneiders paid cash to buy stolen cars from across the metro area then crushed them for metal, often before victims even discovered their cars were missing, according to police and prosecutors.

A network of illegal tow-truck drivers hauled the cars off area streets and delivered them to the family's auto yards, A-1 Light Truck &amp; Auto Parts and West Coast Car Crushing on North Columbia Boulveard. The car dismantlers would destroy the cars without titles or ownership documents as required by state law, prosecutors said.

A 2014 investigation by The Oregonian/OregonLive found the state DMV and Portland police had evidence dating back at least eight years that the two car crushers were a dumping ground for stolen cars. But neither did anything to stop them. In fact, the operation was such an open secret that police would send people to the two auto yards to check for themselves if their stolen cars had ended up there.



The father and son have so far liquidated about $207,000 in property, and the government previously seized $100,000 from their accounts.

Defense lawyer Tony Schwartz said Schneider Jr., the oldest son, grew up in the family business, describing it as "all he knows.''

"This event has been eye-opening for him. It's been an awakening, and he plans to do things differently,'' Schwartz said, as his client stood beside him. "He accepts responsibility and apologizes to all the victims.''

While Schwartz said no direct evidence showed the younger Schneider stole any cars, he acknowledged the 36-year-old managed and supervised the auto yards. He now recognizes "more diligent'' controls and tracking of paperwork should have been maintained on the cars accepted and crushed for metal sales, Schwartz said.

In late October 2016, Schneider Jr. pleaded no contest to one count of racketeering and one count of operating a vehicle dismantling business without certification.

During the past year, he and his father have been required to liquidate their assets to help cover the restitution. They have had their state-issued vehicle dismantler and towing licenses revoked, dissolved their auto businesses, and were ordered to provide monthly financial information and other account information to state officials during a 10-year period, under the negotiated deals. Equipment seized by law enforcement during the investigation -- including a car crusher, tow trucks and flatbed trucks -- also was expected to be liquidated.

Tony Schneider Sr.'s sentencing was set over until Jan 18. He is expected to serve one year and three months in prison under the negotiated plea agreement. Additional time in custody will be possible if they violate any conditions of their probation.

Their negotiated time in custody is significantly below the maximum sentence of 20 years allowed for racketeering, or the maximum five-year sentence for tampering with a witness.

Key portions of the state's case against the Schneiders fell apart last year after an Oregon Court of Appeals ruling prompted a judge to dismiss one of the two racketeering charges that both father and son faced. The state also moved late last month to dismiss all charges of illegal salvage procedures against the defendants due to legal challenges.

Another factor that hampered the state's prosecution was the failure of the Oregon Department of Motor Vehicles to properly monitor the two businesses.

When the Schneiders entered their pleas, lawyers for the father and son said their clients were alarmed a massive police investigation was launched before any serious attempt was made by state motor vehicle inspectors to enforce their regulations. They also argued that a small percentage of the many thousands of cars taken and processed by their clients were stolen.

The father and son have agreed not to re-enter the dismantling industry without permission from the court. Schneider Jr. may apply in 2½ years to get back into the business, his lawyer said.

As part of the negotiated deal, the prosecutor agreed to drop the pending cases against Schneider Jr.'s wife, Katrina Schneider. Charges against Schneider's Sr.'s wife, Kimberly Schneider, will be dropped after her husband is sentenced. Both spouses were in the courtroom Thursday.

Multnomah County Judge Eric J. Bergstrom mostly listened to the lawyers and just warned Schneider Jr. that if he violates his probation, he could face up to four years in prison. After the sentencing, the judge directed his clerk to call for sheriff's deputies to take Schneider Jr. into custody.

"Mr. Schneider, now's the time to say goodbye to your family,'' Bergstrom said

Schneider Jr. hugged his wife before two sheriff's deputies placed his wrists in handcuffs behind his back and led him from the courtroom as his father looked on.

-- Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com 503-221-8212 @maxoregonian


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        