
    
        
            By Anthony G. Attrino

tattrino@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Lodi man has been arrested in the January hit-and-run death of a 28-year-old pedestrian in Moonachie.

Brandon Bialek, 32, is charged with second-degree knowingly leaving the scene of an accident and third-degree hindering and suppression of evidence, according to Bergen County jail records.

Brian Rossi, of Teaneck, was hit on Route 46 East near the intersection of Industrial Avenue near the Teterboro Walmart on Jan. 5, according to the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office.

Moonachie police were called to the scene about 5:50 a.m. on a report of a pedestrian in the roadway. Rossi was pronounced dead at the scene.

Investigators said evidence found in the street indicated the vehicle was a black Ford Focus, sedan or hatchback, model year 2012 to 2015. The vehicle sustained significant front-end damage, including a broken passenger side headlight and broken passenger side-view mirror, according to the prosecutor's office.

The driver fled east on Route 46 before parking in the rear of a business where the driver was joined by someone in a Mitsubishi Lancer a short time later. The vehicles left together, video from the area showed, police said.

Rossi's sister, Stacey, said Wednesday that police detectives told her family they believe the driver was speeding to avoid a red light when Rossi was struck.

Bialek is a lab aide at Bergen County Utilities Authority, according to his Facebook page. He owns a 2013 Ford Focus, according to his Mylife.com profile.

A woman who answered the phone at the Bialek's Lodi home on Wednesday declined to comment.

As of Wednesday, a GoFundMe page for Rossi had raised nearly $7,000. The family said the money would be used either as a reward for information about Brian's death or for a donation to charity.

Anthony G. Attrino may be reached at tattrino@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TonyAttrino. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        