Clear skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


 

DENVER (AP) — Nikola Jokic and Will Barton grew up worlds apart. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

ACCEPTABLE FORMS OF VOTER ID


&gt;&gt; Texas Driver License issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS)


&gt;&gt; Texas Election Identification Certificate issued by DPS

&gt;&gt; Texas Personal Identification Card issued by DPS


&gt;&gt; Texas Handgun License issued by DPS


&gt;&gt; United States Military Identification Card containing the person’s photograph


&gt;&gt; United States Citizenship Certificate containing the person’s photograph


&gt;&gt; United States Passport (book or card)


With the exception of the U.S. citizenship certificate, which does not expire, for voters aged 18-69, the acceptable form of photo identification may be expired no more than four years before being presented for voter qualification at the polling place. For voters aged 70 or older, the acceptable form of photo identification may be expired for any length of time if the identification is otherwise valid.


SUPPORTING FORMS OF VOTER ID


The following forms of identification that can be presented if the voter cannot obtain, and has a reasonable impediment or difficulty to obtaining one of the forms of acceptable photo ID, include:


&gt;&gt; Copy or original of a government document that shows the voter’s name and an address, including the voter’s voter registration certificate;


&gt;&gt; Copy of or original current utility bill;


&gt;&gt; Copy of or original bank statement;


&gt;&gt; Copy of or original government check;


&gt;&gt; Copy of or original paycheck; or


&gt;&gt; Copy of or original of (a) a certified domestic (from a U.S. state or territory) birth certificate or (b) a document confirming birth admissible in a court of law which establishes the voter’s identity (which may include a foreign birth document).


After presenting a supporting form of ID, the voter must execute a Reasonable Impediment Declaration. For more information, visit the Texas Secretary of State’s website for voting information, www.votetexas.gov.


Click here for your Election Day polling location.


Those with questions, call the Hidalgo County Elections Department at (956) 318-2570. You can also email the department at elections@co.hidalgo.tx.us.


STARR COUNTY ELECTION DAY SITES (PER PRECINCT)


Polls open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., Tuesday, March 6


Starr County Courthouse, Precinct 1


Commissioners Court, 401 N. Britton Ave., Rio Grande City


Old City Hall Building, Precinct 2


101 S. Washington St., Rio Grande City


Escobares Community Center, Precinct 3


4829 Old Highway 83 Escobares, Roma

Abel Gonzalez Community Center, Precinct 4


1501 FM 1017 San Isidro, Rio Grande City


Catholic Church Parish Hall, Precinct 5


1155 N. FM 649, El Sauz


Roma Community Center, Precinct 6


502 Sixth St., Roma


Salineno Community Center, Precinct 7


68 Salineno Road, Salineno


El Cenizo PK. Building, Precinct 8


70 Old Casita Road, La Casita


La Victoria Community Center, Precinct 9


532 Gabriela St. Rio Grande City


La Rosita Community Center, Precinct 10


4192 W. U.S. Highway 83, La Rosita


Those with questions on the early voting and Election Day schedules and locations, call the Starr County Elections Department at (956) 716-4800.

