Sunny skies. High 93F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low around 70F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:54 pm

Rosalia Kaplan was shuffled from family to family in Nazi-occupied Holland.

Rosalia Kaplan was shuffled from family to family in Nazi-occupied Holland.

RICHMOND — On a frigid day in January 1945, the Soviet Army liberated more than 7,000 remaining inmates of the Auschwitz concentration camp in Poland, including an 11-year-old Dutch Jewish girl named Rosalia Cato Kats.


She weighed only 36 pounds and had lost her hair. Sores blanketed her body. Despite starvation, horrific abuse and the effects of Nazi medical experimentation, she was alive.


She was Rosalia Kaplan when she died at age 83 on Monday in a hospital in the Richmond area, where she had lived for the past 14 years.


Mrs. Kaplan, who was honored at a graveside service Friday in Forest Lawn Cemetery in Norfolk, learned to live by her wits at a tender age.


Born in The Hague, she grew up in an architect’s family with her elder brother, Max, in Scheveningen, a beach resort that was part of The Hague. Her paternal grandparents were religious but not Orthodox. Her maternal grandparents were.


“My grandfather was really the one who made sure we went to temple every Friday night and observed everything,” Kaplan said in a 2006 oral history with the Virginia Holocaust Museum.


Hitler’s army invaded Holland in a lightning strike on May 10, 1940, when she was 6 years old. Four days later, Nazi bombers flattened Rotterdam, where her father worked. Dutch forces capitulated the next day.


Kaplan chafed at the yellow Star of David the occupiers forced her to wear.


“I wouldn’t wear it because my mother had just made me a new dress and I wanted to show it to my grandmother. She lived down the street,” Kaplan said in her oral history.


“I ran out of the house and someone recognized me. The Germans picked me up and took me to a house not too far from us. They made me clean bicycles for three days. ... I was 7 years old and very rebellious.”


By 1941, the Germans already had deported her paternal grandparents and a maternal uncle, his wife and their five children.


When it dawned on Kaplan’s mother that it could happen to them, she scheduled surgery to remove a healthy appendix in order to access the Resistance and learn how her family might go into hiding. While she was in the hospital, the Germans took her husband, son and Rosalia to a local deportation center. The week her father was given to get his wife out of the hospital bought them enough time to escape.


“They put my brother in a place, my father in another place and me in another place,” Kaplan recalled. “When I got there, these people put me in the attic and told me I was never supposed to come down. I ran out. These people said they couldn’t keep me because I wouldn’t stay put. They told me I couldn’t see my mommy and daddy. I didn’t want to hear of that, and I cried and cried.”


Kaplan’s mother left the hospital, went into hiding, and Rosalia was left behind, alone. Her maternal grandmother, Hannah Kats, came out of hiding to help Rosalia find another hiding place, but wound up sending Rosalia running out the backdoor as the Germans came to take her out the front door.


Rosalia hid in a neighbor’s closet. Her uncle found her and took her far away to the tiny house of a milkman’s family in Friesland, where she stayed in the attic of an aunt’s former maid while the family slept in closets in the living room.


Because no place was safe for long, they moved her to the maid’s brother’s houseboat, which was easy to hide in tall grasses along the Dutch rivers.


Next came the family of a man who took care of a bridge that opened and closed for ships. By day she lived in his house, and by night she slept in a little rowboat in the river grasses. Eventually, the Germans discovered she was there, came to fetch her and “when they couldn’t find me, they burned the house down, thinking I would run out,” Kaplan said.


“I stayed in the rowboat by myself several weeks. I ate duck eggs from (nests) in the high grass.”


When it was safe, she went to a family who had a printing press in their basement. They printed news from BBC broadcasts, and Rosalia helped distribute it at night.


Always moved in the middle of the night, she was with a 22-year-old member of the underground in the countryside on the way to her next hiding place when the Germans spotted them and gave chase, shooting into the air. They jumped into a ditch, where the young man shielded her with his arms. A bullet killed her protector.


Rosalia fled to a farmhouse, where a family hid her deep into a haystack next to their house. On her trail, the Germans stabbed the stacks with pitchforks, but did not strike her.


Her next family had a hiding place behind a false wall padded with mattresses, so it would ring solid when Germans tested the walls. When Germans came to search their city for Jews, the brother of the farm owner came by night and took Rosalia to safety. The Germans shot the farmer when they could not locate Rosalia.


“They told me once that I had lived in something like 20 different places,” she noted. Rescuers shared meager rations and tried to make their outgrown clothes smaller to fit her.


“I became very distrustful of people,” she said. “People were very good to me where I lived, but I knew I was not going to be staying there long. It’s like children here who go from foster place to foster place. After a while, they don’t know where they belong. I didn’t belong to any of the families. They were all strangers.”


One day she left a safe house and passed a school where they were cooking peas. “I stuck my hand into the burning water to get the peas, and I was so hungry I didn’t even feel it. My skin came off and I was for a long time with a bandage for my hand. You (did) anything to get food,” she said.


Her luck ran out at the end of 1944 when the Germans made a surprise raid at the home of a man who owned a paint store who was sheltering her.


“Someone (in the family) told on us,” Kaplan said.


She ran out of the house, with the Germans shooting at her as she zigzagged down the street. When soldiers appeared at the other end of the street, she was trapped.


She went to jail with the dress she had on and barefoot. The SS officer who ran the jail was sympathetic because he had a daughter of the same age at home: He gave her food and a pair of his slippers . She stayed in several camps before going to Auschwitz.


After the war, her parents went their separate ways, and she became estranged from her mother and brother, but stayed with them until she was old enough to leave. From 1945 to 1952, she was in and out of the hospital, with many surgeries.


To make money, she sewed for a department store and painted Dutch scenes on china. In the early ’50s, she moved out and worked on a cruise ship, a banana boat and anywhere that would pay her. When the cruise ship stopped in New Zealand, she stayed .


In 1956, Kaplan moved to Norfolk with her mother, who returned to Holland six months later. She married and started a family and was active in the Jewish community. She spoke to middle school students about her Holocaust experience from 1962 until 1976.


In the mid-1980s, the brother of the shot-dead farmer who had sheltered her got in touch.


“He said to me, ‘I’m the one that took you from my brother’s house at 2 o’clock in the morning on my bicycle to another place. I always wondered what happened to you,’” Kaplan said.


She said students often asked her why she didn’t hate the people who abused her. “I always say, there were good and bad, and if you hate, you only hate yourself and nobody else cares. You are going to be the one eaten up by it. I want people to know that there were people who hid a child, a little child, and could have lost their lives with it, as one man and a young boy did.


“It wasn’t all camp and German soldiers, but there was good in life, and maybe that’s what made me stronger as a human being, because I realized when I got older that people did that for me, and that is something I want to talk about, to talk about the good these people did.”


When she was asked why she wasn’t bitter, she replied: “If you are bitter or if you feel like they owe you things, it’s only in your mind and your heart and you can become so obsessed with it that you don’t know how you can harm yourself.


“I have been beaten. It took a lot of doctors to put me together again. I have been raped and had to go on with that. I had a lot of obstacles in my life, and no help other than some of the doctors. I left home when I was 17 and immigrated to New Zealand before I came here. You can make it on your own if you have to. If you can’t find it in the center city, work your way out of it and find it somewhere else.


“We haven’t learned much (from the Holocaust). Life is precious. We can’t take it for granted. Everyone is born a good person but we’re made bad by circumstances.”


Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
