Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


WICHITA, Kan. (AP) — Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach has complied with a judge's order by fully registering thousands of voters whose eligibility to cast a ballot had been in limbo because of the state's now-defunct proof-of-citizenship requirement, according to court records. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

Reynaldo Gomez

Reynaldo Gomez

PHARR — A Hidalgo man faces a felony charge after a crash early Sunday morning left one woman dead.


A municipal judge Monday formally arraigned Reynaldo Gomez on one count of accident involving injury or death and set his bond at $100,000, which came a day after Pharr resident Maria Isabel Jimenez, 56, died as a result of injuries she suffered in the crash.


Officers responded to the crash at about 7 a.m. Sunday in the 6700 block of South Cage Boulevard. Jimenez was pronounced dead at the scene by a Hidalgo County justice of the peace, according to a news release.

Police said Gomez, also 56 years old, crashed into Jimenez with his 2005 Ford Explorer, but additional details, or the cause of the crash, remain unknown.


Several calls placed to Pharr police went unreturned as of press time.


Gomez’s attorney, Sergio J. Sanchez, confirmed his client’s bond was reduced to $20,000 after he requested it be dropped, considering the circumstances.


“I presented to the court that my client has no criminal history, and that there were no drugs or alcohol in his system,” Sanchez said late Monday afternoon.


Court staff confirmed Gomez’s bond was reduced from $100,000 to $20,000.

As of Monday afternoon, Gomez remained in custody at the county jail but was expected to be released late that night, Sanchez said.


“This has been a horrible situation,” the attorney said. “From what I understand of the facts, my client left the scene for a period of only a few minutes. He returned and has been completely cooperative with law enforcement. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victim's family.”


If convicted of the charge, a second-degree felony, Gomez could get between two and 20 years in prison.


lzazueta@themonitor.com



Reynaldo Gomez


                                    
                                        Whenever Lorenzo Zazueta posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.