Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 9:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSION — The city council approved an amendment to its nepotism policy that will allow council members’ relatives to serve on advisory committees, a practice that has been ongoing in the city for years. 

DALLAS (AP) — Luka Doncic has signed his rookie contract with the Dallas Mavericks that will pay the third overall pick $5.5 million next season. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Edinburg Vela football coach John Campbell

Edinburg Vela football coach John Campbell

This story has been updated to include information from Campbell's arrest warrant affidavit and a response from ECISD.


A Texas Department of Public Safety trooper arrested Edinburg Vela football coach John Campbell on Saturday afternoon on a driving while intoxicated charge.


Campbell was involved in a one-car crash and fell into a ditch on the side of the road, according to his arrest warrant affidavit. The crash happened at about 5:03 p.m. on Rooth Road near Schunior Road in Edinburg.

“The Defendant had been pulled out of the ditch by passing motorists prior to (the trooper's) arrival,” the affidavit reads. “The defendant said he fell in the ditch but he was fine and ready to go.”


Campbell, who "displayed multiple symptoms of intoxication," was given a field sobriety test, which prompted the trooper to arrest Campbell and transport him to Hidalgo County jail.


Campbell refused to provide a sample of his breath but was required to submit a blood sample.


Campbell’s personal recognizance bond of $2,000 was paid Sunday, and he was released at about 8 p.m., according to Hidalgo County jail records.


Campbell spent most of his coaching career in San Antonio before he was hired as the football coach and athletic coordinator at Edinburg Vela on April 19.

He led Vela to a 12-1 season, with the SaberCats going 7-0 in District 31-6A. After the season, Campbell was named The Monitor’s All-Area Coach of the Year.


ECISD issued the following statement Monday about the coach's arrest: "The district does not comment on personnel matters or ongoing investigations."


Campbell, ECISD Athletic Director Roy Garza and other ECISD officials could not be reached for comment.




                                    
                                        Whenever Saul Berrios-Thomas posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.