Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

A man walks past the entrance of Spain's BBVA bank headquarters in Madrid, on Monday, Dec. 15, 2008.

A man walks past the entrance of Spain's BBVA bank headquarters in Madrid, on Monday, Dec. 15, 2008.

McALLEN — A Rio Grande Valley-based banker was recently promoted to oversee BBVA Compass’s coastal and border regions.


Jon Rebello was named Texas Border and Gulf Coast CEO for the bank, according to a news release issued in January.


Rebello already oversaw the border market, which includes Laredo, El Paso and the Valley; however, he will also oversee Beaumont, Corpus Christi and College Station in his new position.

“There’s a lot of synergy that we can do between our different teams,” Rebello said Friday. “When you put together a bigger team, obviously there’s lots of knowledge and experience from different groups, and I think we can use that to really benefit all those markets.”


A native of Boston, Rebello moved to the Valley in 1996. He worked for another bank previously and then joined then-Texas State Bank in 2001. Texas State Bank merged with BBVA in 2006.


In addition to serving as CEO for those two markets, he will also continue to serve as president of their banks in McAllen, or what they refer to as the Upper Valley.


“ Jon has more than 25 years of banking experience under his belt, and those years included multiple successes,” Jeff Dudderar, BBVA Compass Texas region executive, stated in the release. “Jon’s stellar work ethic and emphasis on client experience have allowed him to excel in the positions he’s held throughout his career.”


Rebello said he believed his experience here would help the bank raise its profile in the area.


“I think my knowledge and experience of the Valley can really help our bank continue to raise its profile in these markets and continue to expand our businesses in the Valley markets and in McAllen, and continue to really give back to the communities that we serve,” he said.


This community, Rebello added, has the obvious distinctive quality of being close to the border.


“So our banks in the Valley and along the Texas border really complement what we have for our banks in Mexico,” he said.


Bancomer, the largest bank in Mexico, is also part of BBVA.

“There are so many good businesses and people down here that are involved with cross-border transactions,” he said, “and we can make it very seamless and easy for them to do business by having financial institutions on both sides.”


On this side, Rebello expressed surprise at how much the market and community has grown.


“ I can’t believe in the 22 years I’ve been down here, how much the market has changed,” he said. “You go up to McAllen now and sometimes you almost think you’re in San Antonio or Austin just because of all the growth that’s happened. It’s remarkable.”


However, unlike those large markets that host publicly traded companies, in the Valley it’s important to focus on small businesses.


“There’s so many good mom and pop, local businesses that we really want to support,” he said. “It’s so important to these markets to really understand what their needs are and be able to cater them and provide them with banking services that fit their needs.”


bereniceg@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Berenice Garcia posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.