Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Phil Mushnick


		
		
		
		
	


									March 1, 2018 | 11:55pm
												

As the NCAA Tournament approaches, one question looms largest: Will anyone be wearing a wire?

This year, teams’ Ratings Percentage Indexes, or RPIs, have been replaced by the FBI.

Let’s start with the Tournament selection and seeding committee, a collection of adults who can’t be the least bit surprised that big-time college basketball, Coast to Coast, has been exposed as college-fronted fraud — with some felony convictions fully anticipated.

This committee this year might have to gauge which schools are most likely to be forced to vacate its wins, return its appearance money and have its coach and/or assistant coaches indicted.

Given all the financial, academic and sexual scandals and FBI arrests and continuing revelations — with much still likely to be revealed then adjudicated — where does the committee seed the implicated, including Duke, Kentucky, Louisville, North Carolina, Michigan St., Arizona, Auburn, Oklahoma St., and Southern Cal?

From a TV standpoint, it seems impossible CBS and Turner will be able to ignore or even minimize recent hard news that big-time college basketball has been positively identified as a resident of the sewer.

But never underestimate TV’s ability to make quick, somber mention of any dark side, then pretend that it has done its duty, now back to the games!

Will CBS continue to chorus “One Shining Moment” when the air is toxically polluted with the stench that few teams representing any school and successful enough to make the Tournament are not radioactive? My guess is that it certainly will try.

On Turner’s NCAA networks, Charles Barkley either will speak boilerplate halftime platitudes — “Gotta rebound better” — or he can repeat his Auburn stories, how he accepted thousands in “loans” in the early 1980s and how Auburn discouraged him from enrolling in “serious courses” to ensure his academic eligibility, an idea soon vastly improved upon by UNC, which awarded A’s to varsity athletes enrolled in no-show courses.

Barkley knows this Tournament — and many before it — is predicated on frauds of every kind, yet, bold as he is, will he say so?

But for perverse comedy, CBS and Turner can draw upon a local institution of highest education, Seton Hall University, which hired a law firm to conduct an “internal investigation” as to how its former recent star, Isaiah Whitehead, and a former assistant coach wound up on the payola list as per the FBI’s findings.

Seton Hall doesn’t need a lawyer. Having made a deal with the devil, it needs an exorcist.

Seton Hall, to get Whitehead on the court, had to place his Lincoln HS (Brooklyn) coach Tiny Morton on the payroll in a package deal. Morton is an unregistered but fully suspected power broker with extraordinary college recruiting influence within the often fetid local AAU basketball scene.

Morton had previously mentored Sebastian Telfair, who went from Lincoln directly to the NBA, but couldn’t shake the habit of illegally possessing loaded handguns and rifles. In 2007 he was arrested then convicted for carrying a loaded handgun in his car. His arrest last year for four loaded weapons and a bulletproof vest remains legally unresolved.

Yet, Morton’s abandonment of his beloved Lincoln kids to take an assistant’s role at Seton Hall by exploiting one of his kid stars passed Seton Hall’s stink test, as did the school’s offer to Morton — provided he deliver Whitehead.

No “internal investigation” is needed. In 2013, as this recruiting plan became apparent, Seton Hall’s president and its board of regents should’ve declared, “Oh, no we don’t!”

Instead, it was a go, a whatever-it-takes; more proof that it takes two to tango. Nothing good, nothing clean, nothing that didn’t stink could follow. 

Shoot, by the time this thing shakes out a 16th-seed may be declared the 2018 NCAA Basketball Tournament champion, the other teams having been forced to vacate their wins and their money, the latter in large part provided by the two networks now charged with televising a college tournament to an audience that increasingly knows what it takes to win — at least until we learn if it counts.

Even by Tiger Woods TV standards, CBS, Sunday, broke new ground.

With the leaders bunched in the home stretch in the final round, playing holes 12 through 14, CBS chose to show them on tape in order to show Woods, well out of it, play 16, 17 and 18, live. Until Woods was finished, CBS treated the tournament and its leaders as intrusions, nuisances.

Listen, I get it. I, too, want to see every shot and putt Woods takes.

But with the leaders on the back nine and Woods out of the hunt, must we watch him walking the fairways, deciding which iron to hit, lining up long putts from both sides? Might he, as opposed to those playing far better and headed toward the wire, be seen on tape? Stupid question. I apologize.

				


The final 45 seconds of Monday’s Pacers-Mavericks lasted 17 minutes as it included three timeouts, two video reviews and four intentional fouls (And thanks to reader Yank Poleyeff for the heads-up).

Again, two easily enacted rules are needed:

1) Each team is allowed only one timeout in the final two minutes, which would eliminate stoppages to coach with every whistle and change of possession, while favoring the better-prepared, better-coached teams.

2) A team can’t call time unless it has possession of the ball, no dead-ball timeouts as frequently called by the team that just scored.

Ryan McDonagh played with a relentless determination that often had me watching him rather than those with the puck. In football, Panther LB Luke Kuechly does the same; in basketball it was David Robinson and Tim Duncan. Eight seasons with the Rangers, McDonagh was what we now call “a good optic.”

Not long ago, the suddenly righteous Yankees wanted thoroughly disgraced steroid cheat and proven liar Alex Rodriguez out, as in immediately and forever, good riddance. Now he’s a special spring-training adviser to the Yankees. And he’s now with FOX and ESPN. But shamelessness is the new norm.

LaVar Ball ’s status-symbol $500 sneakers should come with a guarantee that he’ll attend the funeral of those murdered for them. Heck, kids and young men are still being mugged and murdered for Nike Air Jordans at half the price. As Spike Lee said in Nike commercials, “All you homeboys should be bum-rushin’ to get some.” 

As long as MLB seems eager to adopt or at least consider the ridiculous to move games along, reader Kevin McAuley has a suggestion: the 10th inning should begin with a runner rounding third and the left fielder throwing home.


			Read Next
		


			
				Deontay Wilder shares this touching bond with Luis Ortiz			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Deontay Wilder shares this touching bond with Luis Ortiz			
		

Share Selection

53,582

35,594

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						