Courthouses statewide were closed as Hurricane Irma roared through Florida, but the justice system wasn’t back to normal as soon as skies cleared.


In the Florida Keys, which took a direct hit from Irma, the courthouse is still closed. A judge conducted first appearances last week at a mess hall table at the jail in Marathon. In Orange County, four courtrooms were closed because of water damage and people set to report for jury service Sept. 14, after the courthouse reopened, were excused. And in Seminole County, attorneys came before judges and, one after another, asked for more time.


One lawyer appearing before Judge Debra Nelson described missing important communication from a prosecutor while sifting through a backup of emails. Another said she was waiting on assessments conducted on her client before Irma. And another had just received notice of the hearing that same morning because he hadn’t been able to get to his office.


“Because of the hurricane,” Nelson finished one lawyer’s sentence.


Jury service resumed as usual in Orange and Osceola counties this week. Jurors still having problems getting to the courthouse can request a deferral by following the instructions on their jury duty notices.


The Florida Supreme Court issued 35 administrative orders giving local courts guidance on how to handle proceedings before, during and after the storm.


Courts have deadlines meant to preserve defendants’ constitutional rights — things like appearing before a judge right after an arrest, limiting the amount of time prosecutors have to file formal charges so defendants do not languish in jail, and speedy trial concerns, said Craig Waters, a spokesman for the Florida Supreme Court.


Those responsibilities cannot be shirked when a storm approaches, he said.


“We have been very proud that the state courts around Florida have responded to the storm,” Waters said.


The current procedure for dealing with storms was established after Hurricane Andrew hit South Florida in 1992, and refined after courts suddenly closed during the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks because of security concerns.


Charles Wells, who at the time was the Florida Supreme Court’s chief justice, ordered a commission to study issues that may arise during an emergency and develop plans for extending deadlines, holding hearings and communicating with all parties involved in any cases.


“It gave all of us a road map to follow,” Waters said. “And we followed it and it worked very well, as it was intended to do.”


A trial can be delayed in order to give the parties more time to make preparations they could not complete because of the storm.


“The chief justice’s order extends the speedy trial period for a reasonable time after the storm to basically give the defendants extra time, to compensate for the time lost,” Waters said.


In Central Florida, attorney William Orth said most judges have been accommodating in Seminole, Volusia and Orange counties, where he practices. Nelson, the Seminole County judge, continued two of his cases.


The power at Orth’s Longwood office was restored Tuesday afternoon. Technology experts were restoring his electronic files.


“I unfortunately don’t have any documents until they get restored,” he said.


Orange-Osceola Public Defender Robert Wesley said he was concerned about defendants missing court hearings after the storm because they evacuated out of the region or state and could not get back in time.


Even people who stayed home during the storm could have trouble making court dates or payments if they lost power or their transportation.


He said people who missed a court hearing or payment deadline for tickets or fines should contact their attorneys as soon as they can, or get in touch with their local public defender’s office if they do not have lawyers.


“Contact your lawyer and ask them if they’ve followed up with court to let them know that your absence was unavoidable due to the storm,” Wesley said.


That is not a task people should put off, he said.


“It’s harder if they come in next March and say, ‘that storm was a doozy, wasn’t it?’” he said.


Staff writer Krista Torralva contributed reporting.  glotan@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5774


A 57-year-old man is accused of kidnapping a 16-year-old girl in DeLand after telling her to get in his car and driving her down a dirt road.



A 57-year-old man is accused of kidnapping a 16-year-old girl in DeLand after telling her to get in his car and driving her down a dirt road.

A 57-year-old man is accused of kidnapping a 16-year-old girl in DeLand after telling her to get in his car and driving her down a dirt road.



A 57-year-old man is accused of kidnapping a 16-year-old girl in DeLand after telling her to get in his car and driving her down a dirt road.

The four children killed in Orlando during a daylong standoff last week sometimes witnessed their parents fighting, but the Department of Children and Families had no record of Gary Lindsey threatening them directly. 



The four children killed in Orlando during a daylong standoff last week sometimes witnessed their parents fighting, but the Department of Children and Families had no record of Gary Lindsey threatening them directly. 

Business owners, residents, and visitors to downtown Orlando expressing concerns about ‘aggressive’ panhandling. (Story by Kate Santich • Video by Joe Burbank)



Business owners, residents, and visitors to downtown Orlando expressing concerns about ‘aggressive’ panhandling. (Story by Kate Santich • Video by Joe Burbank)

Casselberry rape suspect Benjamin Hovan tried running away from a police officer who recognized him Thursday morning. But he didn't get far.



Casselberry rape suspect Benjamin Hovan tried running away from a police officer who recognized him Thursday morning. But he didn't get far.