
    
        
            By Anna Marum


                     The Oregonian/OregonLive
                    

A Clatskanie man was in jail Thursday on attempted murder and domestic violence charges, accused of forcing his wife's hand into a pan of boiling oil and trying to suffocate the couple's son, according to court records.

Columbia County deputies arrested Jeremiah D. Crothers, 34, early Wednesday and booked him into Columbia County Jail.

His wife told investigators that Crothers attacked her and her son Sunday and again Tuesday, according to a probable cause affidavit.

Those episodes marked the culmination of weeks of abuse and threats, police said.

Crothers threw her against a wall Sunday while she was holding their son, injuring the 7-month-old's head, she said.

Then on Tuesday morning, Crothers covered their son's mouth and nose, smothering him, according to the affidavit. The infant started to shake his legs and began turning blue, Heather Crothers told authorities.

Worried that her husband would kill their son, she said she grabbed a frying pan and hit him over the head. He let go of their son, and he started to breathe again.

That night around 7:30, she told investigators, she was making fried chicken on the stove when her husband grabbed her hand and forced it into the pan full of boiling oil, she said.

She broke free, but when she tried to put her hand under cold water, he grabbed her hand and pulled it away, according to the affidavit. He told her to stop "playing the victim," she said.

Jeremiah Crothers then punched her in the head and threatened to hurt her if she told anyone what he had done, she told investigators.

Around 8:30 p.m. Tuesday, Columbia County deputies received a report of domestic violence from an advocate and responded to the Crothers' home in the 19000 block of Swedetown Road in the Clatskanie area.

When sheriff's deputies arrived, she came to the door with a knife in her hand, the affidavit said. When she realized it wasn't her husband, she put the knife down and said she was worried her husband was going to find her and hurt her or kill her.

The woman's hand appeared burned and the infant showed signs of being strangled and also had a large bruise and swelling on his left temple, the affidavit said.

Police took her and her child from their home to an undisclosed safe location, where she gave them a statement. The infant was taken to the hospital, where he was treated for his injuries. 

Police arrested Jeremiah Crothers at work in St. Helens. He denied the allegations, the affidavit said.

He was lodged at Columbia County Jail and was arraigned Wednesday on charges of attempted murder, strangulation, second-degree assault, third-degree assault, two counts of fourth-degree assault, coercion and attempted fourth-degree assault. He remains in custody with bail set at $217,750. 

"The allegations in support of this arrest are alarming," Columbia County Sheriff Jeff Dickerson said in a news release. "Domestic violence is a scourge that our deputies frequently encounter. Fortunately, we were able to find the suspect in a timely manner and put a stop to the violence, and give this mom and child a chance to survive."

Those who are experiencing domestic violence can call the National Domestic Violence Hotline at 1-800-799-7233 or visit thehotline.org.

-- Anna Marum

amarum@oregonian.com503-294-5911@annamarum


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        