
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

After all of his Nuggets teammates had retreated to the locker room following Thursday morning’s shootaround, Trey Lyles made his way slowly through the Pepsi Center hallway, tilting his head toward the floor to listen to the coach walking beside him.

Michael Malone’s words for the struggling, 22-year-old forward were simple.

“I said, ‘Trey, you’ve just got to go out there and play,'” Malone told Lyles, who is shooting just 33 percent from the floor and 12.5 percent from 3-point range in the last four games. “‘I know you’re struggling right now, but you’re a good player.’ We wouldn’t be in the situation we’re in right now without Trey Lyles, how he’s played, especially after Paul (Millsap) was out.

“He’s going out there right now feeling like he has to make every shot. I said, ‘You can’t play like that. Just take a deep breath, relax and play your game.”

The role of a coach in the NBA can be as much therapist as Xs-and-Os tactician, especially when guiding a young roster. So as the Nuggets prepared for their game against the Pistons on Thursday, which was set to precede a seven-game road trip, Malone said he’s made a concerted effort to be a calming presence as Denver begins feeling the tight pressure of a playoff race.

The Nuggets entered the game against the Detroit at 37-31 and in 10th place in the Western Conference, a full game behind the three teams — Clippers, Jazz and Spurs — that are tied for spots seven through nine.

“If I’m uptight and if I’m nervous, they’re only going to feed off that,” Malone said. “I think that’s important for myself. The one thing I keep telling myself is, ‘Don’t be negative. Be positive.’ Yes we have to coach and we have hold guys accountable, but make sure we’re keeping it a very light atmosphere, not where it feels like everything is life and death.”

Millsap update. Forward Paul Millsap on Thursday went through shootaround without the brace that has protected the left wrist that was operated on in November.

Millsap said he still plans to wear the brace during games for now.


“I’ll definitely have that for protection, just for the hits and the smacks,” Millsap said. “But the more I can get comfortable without it, it will help me out.”