Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Emily Saul


		
		
		
		
	


									May 14, 2018 | 3:53pm
											| Updated May 15, 2018 | 8:51am
												

Killer Manhattan nanny Yoselyn Ortega was sentenced to the maximum prison sentence of life without parole Monday for fatally stabbing two of her little charges, Lulu and Leo Krim — after the court heard devastating statements from the children’s parents.

Kevin and Marina Krim brought many in the packed courtroom to tears as they talked about their horrific ordeal and how they survived it.

Meanwhile, Ortega remained stone-faced.

Marina first talked about the couple’s only surviving daughter, Nessie, who was 3 when her siblings were killed.

“Each time she makes a wish, it’s always for Lulu and Leo to come back to us. Nessie knows that wish will never come true,” the mom said, struggling to fight back tears. The couple’s two sons, “Felix and Linus, born after the murders, never got the chance to meet Lulu and Leo. But I see Lulu and Leo living within all three of the kids every day.”

She ripped Ortega and her family, who were blamed for setting the Krims up with the deeply troubled woman, lying to get her the job.

“My family and I, we create and built. The defendant and her family, they destroy and ruin,” Marina said. “The defendant set out to destroy what Kevin and I had created and built — an inspired, happy, thriving family. But she failed.

“The defendant’s son, Jesus Frias, sat in front of a traumatized jury, winking and grinning at the jury members as if it were some kind of reality TV show he wants to win,” the mom said. “What is wrong with them?”

Her husband’s statement included what he read at a November 2012 memorial service for their dead children.

“I’m not really giving a eulogy today. Because I want to talk about all our kids. We called them Team Krim,” Kevin said.

He said they called Lulu “Our Little Buddha.”

“We were madly in love” with Leo, too, the dad added.

“We miss them so, so much.

“We miss picking Leo up out of his crib, with a happy ‘Mama’ or ‘Dada’ from him and always a big hug.

“We miss holding their hands as we walked down the sidewalk.

“We miss attempting to argue them out of a Mr. Softee cone, and losing most of the time.

“We miss hearing them call out my name and run to hug me when I got home from work.”

Calling Ortega “an evil and utterly dangerous narcissist and a complete failure,” Kevin addressed Judge Gregory Carro.

“I trust that you do not need this request from Lulu and Leo’s dad after all you’ve heard and seen, but I will make it anyway: In your sentencing decision, please follow the law as you always have … by ensuring that the defendant can never leave prison alive,” the dad said.

“The defendant knows nothing of responsibility or remorse. She should also know nothing of hope.”

He said the only way he and his wife survived their nightmare was through the love of others.

“It’s the people of New York who wrapped their arms around us in our darkest moment — they are what make this the greatest city in the world,” he said.

The only time Ortega showed any emotion was when she whimpered that she deserved mercy because now she was suddenly “sorry.”

“I ask for a good deal of goodness. To God. To Marina. To Kevin,” Ortega said, sniffling as she spoke through an interpreter.

But Carro was having none of it, noting that she had steadfastly refused to apologize since her heinous 2012 crime and calling her case “pure evil.”

Manhattan District Attorney Cy Vance attended the sentencing, as well as at least nine jurors and alternates from the trial.

Vance yawned as Ortega’s lawyer, Valerie Van Leer-Greenberg, claimed that the jury was swayed solely by emotion.

“I still represent to you that she does not know what she was doing any more than an infant, a brute or a wild beast,” Greenberg told the judge of Ortega, pleading for what she called “mercy, not sympathy, but mercy, compassion.”

The jurors looked at one another and shook their heads in disgust when the lawyer claimed that they “did not base their conviction on the cold analysis of the facts.”

Before the proceeding, juror No. 11, David Curtis, a cab driver and actor, said he showed up because “I just needed to see the end of this.

“We started this together as a group, and we needed to finish it,” he said.

“The other day I found myself on the corner of 76th [Street] and Columbus [Avenue], and I just stopped,” he said, tears filling his eyes as he described looking into the lobby of the building where the murders took place.

“It’s profoundly changed the way I look at things, the way I look at the city.”

Alternate juror Chloe Beck added, “When I close my eyes, when I blink, I see those children.”

Marina Krim had described on the stand walking through the family’s darkened apartment, Nessie in tow, looking for her other two children on Oct. 25, 2012.

She finally checked the kids’ bathroom and found her 6-year-old daughter and 2-year-old son’s blood-soaked, lifeless bodies stacked in the bathtub, and Ortega plunging a knife into her own neck.

Kevin also testified in heartbreaking detail about learning that two of his children were dead and seeing their bodies at the hospital.

Ortega could have faced as little as one to 20 years behind bars.

Her lawyer had argued that her client claimed to have been “touched by the devil” when she ruthlessly killed the kids and should therefore be found not guilty by reason of insanity.

But prosecutors Stuart Silberg and Courtney Groves had contended Ortega had full knowledge of what she was doing, leaving behind her cellphone and hanging other important documents on a doorknob in the apartment she shared with her sister and son on the day of the slayings.

“She was putting her affairs in order. Her plan that day was to kill the Krim children and to kill herself,” Groves said in her opening statements.

Over the eight-week trial, jurors were subjected to stomach-churning photos and testimony spanning the children’s final moments, the family’s heartbreak and Ortega’s alleged descent into madness.

Medical experts testified that Lucia fought bravely and sustained more than 30 nicks, slices and stabs from Ortega. Her much-smaller brother had his throat slit from behind, the medical examiner said.

Ortega had worked for the Krims for some two years before she killed their babies. The parents hired her after a relative of Ortega’s provided them with a fabricated reference claiming Ortega had nannied for a child of hers who never existed.

The Krims have since been working on legislation that would make it illegal to falsify references for someone working in the childcare industry.

One alternate juror previously told The Post she now had trouble looking at nannies out with their charges. Another woman said she could no longer bear to take a bath.


			Read Next
		


			
				Parents of slain kids rip 'Killer Nanny' at sentencing			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Parents of slain kids rip 'Killer Nanny' at sentencing			
		

Share Selection

144,361

91,377

53,318

42,010

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters