Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Jackie Salo


		
		
		
		
	


									April 2, 2018 | 7:41pm
												

A California man is accused of stabbing both of his parents, killing his mom, as they consoled him over a breakup, officials said.

Yihong Peng, 30, was arrested Saturday on murder charges after attacking the couple with a knife at a San Juan Capistrano home, according to the Orange County Sheriff’s Department.

Peng’s parents reportedly came to visit Friday following his breakup with his live-in girlfriend.

“Yesterday his parents came to console him he was going through a difficult time,” neighbor Susan Larsen told news station KNBC.

But at some point in the evening the 30-year-old son allegedly turned on the couple, authorities said.

Neighbors called 911 around 10:30 p.m. to report that a man was in the street with a knife.

Authorities arrived to to find Peng’s mother, Wei Ping Shen, 59, dead at the scene.

His father was rushed to the hospital, where he is recovering and expected to survive, according to officials.

Officers arrested Peng when they found him near Ortega Highway, east of San Juan Capistrano, with a bloody knife, KNBC reported.

He was taken into custody at Orange County Jail, where his bail was set at $1 million.

His brother and “League of Legends” star, Yiliang “Doublelift” Peng, asked for privacy on social media following the incident.

“I’m still processing this news and joining up with my dad and little brother to make sure they’re ok and the proper arrangements are being made,” he said. “I’ll likely be quiet on social media while I work through this. I hope you all understand and support me as you always have in the past.”


			Read Next
		


			
				Man shot in head on Facebook Live as friends play with gun...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Man shot in head on Facebook Live as friends play with gun...			
		

Share Selection

148,075

97,634

52,256

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters