
    
        
            By Ron  Zeitlinger


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

Brothers who robbed a man of his cell phone made the mistake of sticking around Journal Square and were arrested Saturday.

A 55-year-old West New York man was at the Journal Square PATH plaza at 6 p.m. on Saturday when he was confronted by the two men and punched in the face, Port Authority police spokesman Joe Pentangelo said. The men, both over 6 feet and 200 pounds, then took the victim's cell phone.

Given a description of the alleged robbers, Port Authority police canvassed the area and found Michael and Jonathan Jackson at the corner of Bergen Avenue and Kennedy Boulevard.

Michael Jackson, 47, admitted to assaulting the victim and Jonathan Jackson, who also had a warrant for assault out of Jersey City, admitted to having the West New York man's phone. Their home address is listed as a homeless shelter in Union City.

The brothers were charged with robbery and conspiracy to commit robbery and they were taken to Hudson County jail, Pentangelo said.

The victim's cell phone was returned.

In August, Jonathan Jackson was charged with assault after two people said he attacked them in the Journal Square PATH Station. Jackson was pepper-sprayed in the incident, and the other two people were also charged.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        