




Chris Beard has maintained that protecting home court is a huge factor in a college basketball team’s success throughout the season.


The second-year Texas Tech head coach has guided his squad to a perfect 10-0 mark, including a pair of wins over ranked teams (No. 22 Nevada, No. 18. Baylor) earlier this season.


And while those are certainly two good statistics to have, the No. 18 Red Raiders will be in a unique situation Tuesday night.


In just its second Big 12 Conference game, Texas Tech will to compete in its first true road game of the season facing off against No. 10 Kansas at 8 p.m. Tuesday inside Allen Fieldhouse. The game is slated to be televised on ESPN.


"The word around our camp (Sunday), (Saturday) and, eventually, (Monday) is opportunity," said Beard, whose squad is 12-1 overall and 1-0 in Big 12 play heading into the Tuesday tilt. "You get into this to play against the best, to coach against the best. And this is a great early conference game for us to see where we stack up against one of the best teams in the country."


In some ways, the then No. 22-ranked Red Raiders got a small taste of a road-like atmosphere when they played a neutral-site game against Seton Hall inside Madison Square Garden in New York City. The blue-clad Pirates fans created a home atmosphere and energized the Seton Hall players during offensive lulls or during a big defensive stop on the way to an 89-79 loss.


The same fervor can be expected from when Texas Tech treks to play the Jayhawks (11-2, 1-0), who have won their last 11 consecutive home openers dating back to the 2006-2007 season.


"The atmosphere, the crowd was involved," Tech senior guard Stevenson said of what he remembered from last season’s game in Lawrence, Kan. "It’s a great place to play."


More than just being a great place to play, the Red Raiders may use Tuesday night’s game as a proving ground for their confidence. Texas Tech struggled on the road last season — touting a 1-9 mark, including a winless road record in Big 12 play — away from United Supermarkets Arena.


It doesn’t get any easier for the Red Raiders, who are 0-17 against Kansas when playing inside Allen Fieldhouse. On top of that, Kansas owns a 16-game winning streak against Texas Tech in the overall series.


"I don’t know if you can ever prepare for Kansas until you actually play them," Beard said. "But I do think we’ve played teams with multiple shooters on the floor at one time. So maybe we can draw a little bit from those experiences. But when you play Kansas, especially in Allen Fieldhouse, it’s a whole ‘nother monster."


The Red Raiders are hoping to lace up with Zach Smith, who rolled his left ankle in a win against No. 18 Baylor last week. Smith, a 6-foot-8 forward, was limited to four minutes of playing time due to the injury.


Senior forward Tommy Hamilton, who has been a spark off the bench the past five games, is confident another teammate can step in and fill up the state sheet if Smith is not available to play.


"We have guys that’s ready," said Hamilton, a 6-11 post player who has grabbed seven or more rebounds in his last three games to increase his average from 3.4 to four per contest. "We’ve got guys that come off the bench, come in right away and contribute. Obviously, Zach, that hurts us a lot. But he’s doing everything he can to get back on the court. We’re looking forward to having him back."


Texas Tech’s Keenan Evans (16.6 points), Zhaire Smith (10.7) and Jarrett Culver (10.4) have been leading the way on offense. Zhaire Smith and Culver, who come off the bench, have also been vital on the defensive end as they’ve helped the Red Raiders average 9.2 steals per game.


Kansas counters with five players —Lagerald Vick (17.4 points, 6.4 rebounds), Devonté Graham (17.2), Svi Mykhailiuk (16.6), Udoka Azubuike (15.3 points, 8.4 rebounds) and Malik Newman (10.6) — averaging double figures.


The Jayhawks also take care of the basketball, leading the Big 12 and ranked fifth in the country in assist-to-turnover ratio (1.67) while also averaging 11.2 three-pointers per game which is ninth in the country.


"They’re a great team, we’re expecting their best," Stevenson said. "And we’re going to give them our best."


Beard is looking forward to his team doing just as much, while also not becoming intimidated by the road test ahead.


"There’s two different ways to look at it," he said. "I think a lot of teams have pulled up their on Naismith Drive, in front of Allen Fieldhouse, over the years. And you get off that bus, you walk down the stairs, you walk in there. … I think a lot of players, a lot coaches don’t give themselves a chance with their mental outlook when they walk in the gym.


"You’ve got to believe that you can play with these guys. You’ve got to believe that you can belong. And I do. And here’s why I do: I think we’ve got really good players. I think our players can play with Kansas players. … Whether or not we can be successful in the game is yet to be seen. But, mentally, we feel good about our chances in this game because we have a lot of confidence."


Just the facts


Who: No. 18 Texas Tech men’s basketball vs. No. 10 Kansas


When: 8 p.m., Tuesday


Where: Allen Fieldhouse, Lawrence, Kan.


Records: Texas Tech 12-1; Kansas 11-2


Last game: No. 22 Texas Tech 77, No. 18 Baylor 53


Updates: Follow Carlos Silva Jr. on Twitter at @cmsilvajr


TV: ESPN


Notable: Texas Tech is looking to snap a 16-game losing streak to the Jayhawks. The Red Raiders last win came back on Jan. 16. 2010.


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse Sports

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							Lubbock Avalanche-Journal  ~ 710 Avenue J, Lubbock, TX 79401 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service