


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Serial abuser Larry Nassar, identified as federal inmate No. 21504-040, isn't the first high-profile inmate to take up residence at Arizona facility.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Disgraced sports doctor Larry Nassar has been sentenced to 40 to 125 years in prison in Michigan, his last punishment in a decades-long sex abuse scandal. (Feb. 5)
    AP

Larry Nassar has been transferred to a federal prison in Arizona to serve his 60-year prison sentence.
(Photo: Matthew Dae Smith/Lansing State Journal)

Larry Nassar, the disgraced former Michigan State University and USA Gymnastics doctor, has been transferred to a federal prison in Tucson currently housing one of the 21st century's most infamous kidnappers and a police detective turned Mafia hit man.


On Saturday, the serial sex abuser was listed as an inmate at U.S. Penitentiary Tucson, a high-security facility that houses 1,387 inmates along with a 149-inmate minimum-security satellite camp in Pima County, according to its website. 


Operational since 2007, the prison — among 17 high-security federal lockups in the country — is part of a federal correctional complex near the Arizona State Prison Complex in south Tucson, about 2 miles from Interstate 10. 


This is a photo of the new Federal Correctional Institution Tucson at 9300 S. Wilmot Road west of Interstate-10  in Tucson on Nov. 22,  2005. (Photo: Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Star)

Nassar, identified as federal inmate No. 21504-040, isn't the first high-profile inmate at the facility in the southern Arizona desert 


Brian David Mitchell, the Utah street preacher convicted of kidnapping Elizabeth Smart, who later wrote about surviving her nine-month abduction and Mitchell's brutal assaults as a teen, is currently serving a life sentence there.


So is Louis Eppolito, a former New York Police Department detective-turned-hit man who worked on behalf of the Mafia.


James J. “Whitey” Bulger, the south Boston crime boss, resided at the Tucson facility before being transferred to a facility in Florida. Convicted mass shooter Jared Loughner also spent time in the prison before being transferred. Loughner is now serving a life sentence at the Federal Correctional Center in Rochester, Minnesota, for a shooting rampage in 2011 near Tucson that killed six people — including a child and a federal judge — and left 13 others, including former U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, injured.


And former U.S. Congressman Randy “Duke” Cunningham, R-Calif., was released from the prison in 2013 after serving a seven-year sentence for tax evasion and conspiracy to commit bribery and fraud that funded an extravagant lifestyle. 


Nassar, 54, was transferred Thursday morning from the Eaton County jail near Lansing, Michigan, to the Milan Federal Correctional Institution near Ann Arbor. He was sentenced on Monday in Eaton County on sexual-assault charges. 


Since September 2016, when the Indianapolis Star detailed sexual-assault allegations against Nassar, more than 260 women and girls have told law enforcement that Nassar sexually abused them. 


A judge in January sentenced Nassar to 40 to 175 years in prison on seven sexual-assault charges. Another judge sentenced him on Feb. 5 to 40 to 125 years in prison on three sexual-assault charges. He must serve the entirety of his federal sentence before he can serve his state sentences.


As of Saturday, the Federal Bureau of Prisons lists his release date as March 23, 2069.


He would be 105 years old. 


The Lansing State Journal contributed to this article. 


Reach the reporter at 602-444-8515, jpohl@azcentral.com or on Twitter: @pohl_jason. 


READ MORE:


Coach helped to protect gymnast MyKayla Skinner from Larry Nassar abuse


Recap: Day 2 of Larry Nassar's sentencing hearing in Eaton County


Expert: In federal prison, Larry Nassar is 'going to have to watch his back'


Larry Nassar sentenced to decades in prison, gets 40 to 125 years in criminal case


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.