FROM PALMETTO

HEALTH TUOMEY

February is American Heart Month, and Palmetto Health is offering a series of free screenings, seminars and events led by cardiac providers with expertise in their fields.

Free Health Screenings for  …

This item is available in full to subscribers


				
					Click here to log in
				
			


				If you're a print subscriber, but do not yet have an online account, click here to create one.
			


				If you aren't yet a subscriber, 
				click here to start a new subscription.
			


					You also have the option of purchasing 24 hours of website access, for just 99 cents. *
					Click here to continue.
				


					
						* Full access is available from time of purchase through 11:59pm the following day
					
				

FROM PALMETTO

HEALTH TUOMEY

February is American Heart Month, and Palmetto Health is offering a series of free screenings, seminars and events led by cardiac providers with expertise in their fields.

Free Health Screenings for Women

Heart disease is the No. 1 cause of death for women nationally and is the second-leading cause of death for all women in South Carolina. Unfortunately, it also is the leading killer for black women in the Palmetto State, according to results from the Department of Health and Environmental Control.

According to the American Heart Association, cardiovascular disease kills twice as many women over the age of 25 as the next seven causes of death combined, including all forms of cancer. Women are much more likely to die of a heart attack than men because their heart disease often goes undiagnosed. The Women at Heart program looks to educate women so that they can take control of their lives and feel great doing it.

To help identify women who are at risk, free heart health screenings are available Thursday from 8 to 11 a.m. Registration is required along with a 12-hour fast. Call (803) 296-CARE (2273) to schedule your screening. The screenings will take place at Palmetto Health Tuomey, 129 N. Washington St., in Classrooms 1 and 2.

Free Heart Seminars

Two free heart seminars will be offered at Sumter Opera House City Centre, 25 N. Main St., on Thursday, Feb. 15, and Tuesday, Feb. 27, from 6 to 7 p.m. with light refreshments provided.

Thursday's seminar will cover the unique symptoms of heart disease that women face and ways to reduce your risk. Tuesday's seminar will discuss how heart disease can lead to heart attack, heart rhythm problems and other life-threatening conditions. Learn the risk factors and how to prevent them.

Cameron Thomasson, NP, Rosey Gilliam, M.D., and John Rozich, M.D., will speak at seminars on various heart-related topics. Space is limited, so registration is required. Call (803) 774-CARE (2273) to reserve your spot.

Women at Heart

This year's free Women at Heart event is Saturday, Feb. 24, from 8 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. at Columbia Metropolitan Convention Center, 1101 Lincoln St., in Columbia. Free transportation will be provided from Palmetto Health Tuomey, and breakfast and lunch will be provided on the bus.

"The party starts when you step onto the bus," Palmetto Health Tuomey Process Engineer Kimberly Rauschenbach said.

Women at Heart is designed to increase heart health among women in the Midlands and attracts more than 1,000 participants each year.

Keynote speakers include motivational speaker Bertice Berry, Ph.D., and Anil Yallapragada, M.D., medical director of Palmetto Health Stroke Center and neurologist at Palmetto Health-USC Neurology. Berry will help inspire women to find purpose and meaning in their lives. Yallapragada will discuss the connections between diabetes and stroke. Breakout sessions featuring Palmetto Health experts and Palmetto Health-USC Medical Group physicians will include topics on depression and stress, hypertension and healthy eating habits.

Other Women at Heart event activities include ask-the-doctor sessions, healthy cooking demonstrations, fitness activities, door prizes and more.

To register for the bus and the event, visit PalmettoHealth.org/WomenAtHeart or call (803) 774-CARE (2273).


        More Articles to Read
      


		
			More Obituaries			
		
	


          



            36 W Liberty St, Sumter, SC 29150
            803-774-1200
            webmaster@theitem.com
          