Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:52 pm

Leaders of the Nebraska Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 8, which represents Douglas County correctional officers, outside the Douglas County Jail. From left: Treasurer Dan Glazebrook, President Dave Aldrich and Vice President Patrick Sullivan.

Thanks for subscribing to the Omaha World-Herald and supporting local journalism. As a subscriber, you have exclusive access to articles that carry the Subscriber Plus logo (left). 

Leaders of the Nebraska Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 8, which represents Douglas County correctional officers, outside the Douglas County Jail. From left: Treasurer Dan Glazebrook, President Dave Aldrich and Vice President Patrick Sullivan.

Mandatory overtime shifts are placing further stress on corrections officers at the Douglas County Jail — a staff that already is worn thin by a shortage of officers and an unusually high inmate population, union leaders say.

The officers often are ordered to work double eight-hour shifts to meet mandatory staffing levels in the jail, said Lt. Dave Aldrich, president of Nebraska Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 8, which represents the corrections officers at the jail. It’s not unusual that they have to work another 16 hours the following day, he said.

“Our staff are worn down,” Aldrich told The World-Herald. “They’re tired. The double shifts are killing them.”

He said the overtime, along with higher pay that lures officers to neighboring county jails, is worsening a staff shortage that Douglas County Corrections Director Mark Foxall raised a red flag about earlier this month.

Aldrich likened the problem to Nebraska state prisons’ well-documented difficulties in hiring and retaining officers.

He and fellow union members plan to speak about the issue to the Douglas County Board when it meets Tuesday morning. As annual budget season approaches, County Board members are likely to be faced with finding money to pay for higher wages and possibly better retirement benefits to attract and retain corrections officers.

Right now, starting pay for corrections officers in Douglas County is $17.35 an hour. Starting pay in Pottawattamie County is $20.94 an hour, and it will go up to $21.53 in July. Aldrich said Sarpy County offers similar starting pay.

Union leaders said they are going public with their concerns to make sure elected officials understand and to win public support so County Board members don’t face political pushback if they support more spending.

“It’s important that the public understand that what the law asks of the county ... is to incarcerate people — and a lot of people — and that costs money,” said John Corrigan, a lawyer for the union. “This is a public necessity, to make sure the jail is properly staffed. And if it costs money to do that, then it’s money well spent.”

The jail is 42 officers below its authorized strength of 374, a number that is set by the County Board. Meanwhile, the jail is crowded: It has a recent average inmate population of 1,275, close to capacity.

The union and county administrators are in negotiations over wages and benefits. County Board members appeared receptive when Foxall discussed the staffing concerns earlier this month. Board member Marc Kraft said the board might have to raise taxes to address the problem.

No other board member has gone that far. In an interview, board member Mike Boyle said he and the board are not getting involved in the negotiations as the union talks with county administrators. But board members are listening to what the union has to say, he said.

The level of staffing at the jail “has slowly unraveled for a lot of reasons,” Boyle said. “One is the rate of pay ... (and) benefits are very important as well. So those are real critical issues.”

The Douglas County Department of Corrections has undertaken a recruitment drive to attract officers. It is running back-to-back training classes for new officers. The county ran four such classes last year, said Foxall, the corrections director. It expects to hire four more classes of recruits this year.

Unless a lot more people apply, those classes won’t be enough to bring the staffing up to its authorized strength. The next class has 12 trainees.

And with low unemployment and competition from other jails and prisons, Douglas County is having trouble attracting qualified candidates, the union leaders said. The State of Nebraska, for instance, has offered hiring bonuses to officers.

Foxall said his department has yet to recover from losing the 20 corrections officers the Omaha Police Department recruited away in 2015. Aldrich said the jail lost two officers to Sarpy County and two to Pottawattamie because of wages. Eleven officers left in January for various reasons, including pay and mandatory overtime, erasing any hoped-for gains in staffing numbers from a class of 11 new officers that started work Feb. 12.

To deal with the staffing shortage, Aldrich said officers had worked a combined 11,009 hours of overtime in January.

In one week this month, from Feb. 11 to Feb. 16, 124 mandatory overtime shifts of up to eight hours each were ordered, Aldrich said. Some officers have taken to volunteering to work four hours of overtime to avoid the risk of having to do an extra eight.

The officers are paid time-and-a-half for the overtime, but the personal cost of so much overtime is outweighing the attraction of the extra cash, he said.

“The money’s nice, but people are ... wore out, they’re tired, there’s a lot of disgruntled employees now,” Aldrich said.

Sgt. Dan Glazebrook said it’s wearing on the officers’ families, too.

“Spouses consider themselves a single-parent home anymore because their loved one’s always at work,” said Glazebrook, the union treasurer.

Foxall said he’s working with the union to find ways to move staff around to reduce the mandatory overtime, as well as on longer-term fixes. He and union leaders said no incidents have occurred at the jail as a result of the staffing shortage, and that injuries had not increased.




Douglas County is having a hard time hiring and keeping enough correctional officers to manage a growing number of inmates in its jail, County Corrections Director Mark Foxall told the board this week.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Chris Burbach covers the Douglas County Board, Planning Board and other local government bodies, as well as local neighborhood issues. Follow him on Twitter @chrisburbach. Phone: 402-444-1057.


                                    
                                        Whenever Chris Burbach posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

The county board shouldn't have any problem raising wages for these officers, after all they gave themselves a big raise not long ago.  Tired officers create dangerous situations inside a jail


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


