


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A guide to parenting resources around the state.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Specialty license plates that help fund child abuse prevention programs across Arizona have been available for purchase since 1999.
    Wochit

Early childhood development specialists man Southwest Human Development's Birth to Five helpline.
(Photo: Courtesy of Southwest Human Development)

With challenges at every level of parenting, it's important to know what resources are out there. Organizations throughout Arizona offer various classes, workshops and services that can help. Here are eight:


Birth to Five Helpline: This parenting helpline (877-705-5437) provided by Southwest Human Development offers advice and tips to parents. Callers speak with a child development specialist who can answer questions about anything from sleep patterns to concerns about developmental disabilities. For more information, visit: swhd.organd click on "For Families."


The Fiat House located in Phoenix. (Photo: Courtesy of Maggie's Place)

Maggie's Place: This organization offers hospitality for pregnant and parenting women in the greater Phoenix area. Six locations are available in Phoenix, Tempe, Glendale and Mesa that provide immediate shelter, food and clothing. In addition, support services, counseling and easy access to additional resources, such as education programs, are available. For eligibility requirements, visit: maggiesplace.org


Stronger Families Project: Offered by Arizona Youth Partnership, this seven-week program is based on the national Strengthening Families Program curriculum. Parents and children attend a weekly class that focuses on topics like substance abuse prevention, goal setting and family enhancement. Each class is followed by a family dinner that promotes good communication and family cohesion. For more, visit: azyp.org and click on "Programs."


Teens graduate from the Maricopa Center for Adolescent Parents' and receive their GED. (Photo: Renee Bibby | Child and Family Resources, Inc.)

Maricopa Center for Adolescent Parents: This service offered by Child &amp; Family Resources, Inc. allows teen parents ages 16-21 to receive their GED, as well as parenting and life skills. Childcare is available on-site for children up to three years old, as well. To learn more or make a referral, visit: childfamilyresources.org/families/


Healthy Families Program: Parents can participate in home visits offered by various organizations across the state. This voluntary program connects willing families with child specialists that provide in-home support and resources. Visits are typically once a week for about six months, but can be altered depending on family situations. To learn more or to register, visit: strongfamiliesaz.com/program/healthy-families-arizona/  


Never Shake a Baby Arizona: Shaken baby syndrome is one of the leading causes of infant deaths each year. Never Shake a Baby works to educate parents about the dangers of shaking a baby. The voluntary program provides parents with a tip sheet about how to deal with a crying baby and requires them to watch a video about shaken baby syndrome before signing a form acknowledging they were educated. More information can be found at: pcaaz.org/never-shake-a-baby/       


The Arizona Department of Child Safety. (Photo: Department of Child Safety)

Child Abuse Hotline: The Arizona Department of Child Safety's Child Abuse Hotline (1-888-767-2445) is available to call if any type of child abuse or neglect is suspected. When should you report? From the DCS website: "A report should be made when any person  reasonably believes that a child under 18 has been abused, neglected, exploited or abandoned. A report of suspected abuse, neglect, exploitation or abandonment is only a request for an investigation. The person making the report does not need to prove the abuse. Investigation and validation of child abuse reports are the responsibilities of child protective service workers." For more information, visit: dcs.az.gov/


Parenting Classes: Offered by a number of organizations across the state, parenting classes provide families with extra support or knowledge. Child Crisis Arizona offers classes in positive discipline, single parenting, child development and more. A complete list can be found at: childcrisisaz.org/what-we-do. Additional classes and workshops are offered at multiple organizations throughout Arizona, as well. 
