




A former Delaware County Sheriff's Office deputy who sued the county for wrongful termination and allowing a sexually charged workplace has lost her case in federal court.

Janine Senanayake, 39, claimed she was repeatedly harassed and then unjustly fired from her patrol job five years ago. It was the last of several similar allegations and lawsuits that Senanayake had brought against three northeast Ohio communities and Delaware County.

Senanayake had claimed that shortly after she was hired in 2010 as a corrections officer in the Delaware County Jail, she was sexually harassed by a fellow officer and that complaints to her superiors went unheeded.

Amid the allegations, she said she began receiving negative evaluations, and a year later was fired.

An audio recording by Senanayake in which she describes her harasser as "like a brother" and shows affection for him, was among evidence used by a jury to unanimously rule against her Sept. 20 in U.S. District Court in Columbus. Senanayake testified at the trial but her defense called no other witnesses.

Senanayake had admitted to a sexual relationship at the time with former Sheriff Walter L. Davis III. An investigation of that relationship led to charges against Davis for misuse of public funds and his resignation in 2012.

Senanayake was also fired from the Perry Township police department in Stark County in 2009 after she was caught on an in-cruiser camera kissing and fondling township Police Chief Timothy Escola as they drove together. At the time, she was married to a Medina County Sheriff's Office deputy.

She filed a gender-discrimination complaint against the township that was validated by the Ohio Equal Employment Opportunity Commission a year later. The commission agreed that it was discriminatory that Escola was allowed to resign while she was fired.

She also had filed complaints against departments in Medina County and Montville Township in Geauga County.

Her former attorney, Avery Friedman, of Cleveland, had said that Senanayake has been the scapegoat when men have misbehaved.

“When men act badly, if there’s a woman involved, for some reason, the women get the blame," Friedman said.

But attorney Maribeth Meluch,who represented Delaware County in the case, said her pattern of repeated harassment claims cost Senanayake her credibility.

Meluch  said Senanayake, a native of Sri Lanka, put herself in inappropriate on-the-job situations in Delaware that became her downfall.

"She was getting increased favoritism and the morale was terrible," said Meluch. "She was a terrible cop."

Meluch said the case should be a warning to other agencies. Senanayake's two previous terminations were included in her background investigation before she was hired in Delaware County.

Law enforcement should pay better attention to background checks and keep detailed records to ward off similar lawsuits, said Meluch.

dnarciso@dispatch.com


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.