Sunny. High 94F. Winds SW at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low near 70F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:52 am

Reporter - Regional/state issues

LINCOLN — Douglas County is defending the $600,000 it receives in annual fees off of jail inmate phone calls in the wake of an ACLU report criticizing such profit.

And a representative of a company that provides phone services for 25 jails across the state said Friday that its fees are not excessive, though he said some other companies do charge too much.

Don Peeler of La Vista-based Encartele said that his company would welcome a suggestion made by the ACLU of Nebraska to place legal limits on the amount that inmates and their families can be charged for jail calls.

“Certainly we’re not for excessive fees,” Peeler said. “In my opinion some of our competitors are charging excessive fees.”

On Thursday, the ACLU of Nebraska issued a report charging that some county jails are earning excessive fees from exorbitant charges imposed by for-profit companies for telephone calls made from behind bars.

Douglas County earned the most money from such fees, more than $600,000 in 2016, according to the ACLU. Its report said that counties should not profit from such services, which are essential for inmates to rehabilitate and remain connected to family members.

In a statement issued Friday, a spokeswoman for the Douglas County Department of Corrections said that the main reason it led the state is because it is the largest correctional facility in the state, with an average of 1,355 inmates.

Leia Baez, a spokeswoman for the county, said that county inmates made 1.5 million telephone calls in 2016.

She said the fees given to the county were not used for roads and bridges but for services for inmates, such as re-entry programs to prepare them for their return to the community. Such classes teach life skills, literacy and job readiness, Baez said.

The ACLU report said that while a state prison inmate can make a 15-minute call for $1.50, those detained in the state’s county jails can expect to pay much more, from $7 to up to $19 for the same call.

Peeler, of the telephone provider, said that jail calls cost more because they must be recorded and retained in case they are needed for law enforcement investigations. Jail phones, he said, are often damaged, which also increases costs, he said.

Encartele, Peeler said, can justify the fees it charges. He said that counties get a share of the profits to cover some of their extra expenses for phone calls.

paul.hammel@owh.com, 402-473-9584




The civil rights group said the “unconscionably” high fees for phone calls charged by counties impede inmates from a “basic need” — the ability to talk with their children, families and lawyers.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Reporter - Regional/state issues

Paul covers state government and affiliated issues. He specializes in tax and transportation issues, following the governor and the state prison system. Follow him on Twitter @PaulHammelOWH. Phone: 402-473-9584.


                                    
                                        Whenever Paul Hammel posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


