Partly cloudy. High 93F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear skies. Low 76F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — A Missouri Republican is warning voters that "our way of life is at risk" in a new television ad that seizes on the Supreme Court vacancy to mobilize voters against Democratic Sen. Claire McCaskill. 

EDINBURG — Amid the whir of construction still a few weeks from completion, Bert Ogden Arena officials announced Monday that WWE Live will be coming to the venue on Sept. 14, marking the first non-musical act scheduled for the new facility. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

Deval "Pino" Shah

Deval "Pino" Shah

McALLEN – Deval “Pino” Shah lives his life surrounded by what he describes as blessings. At 53 years old, dressed in a crisp white shirt, blue jean shorts and sandals, a passerby might notice him with a digital camera to his eye as he tries to capture the perfect setting of a church, hotel, park or library.


As a world heritage photographer and now author of five photography books, Shah plans to use his knowledge and written words to educate the next generation about history and preservation.


Originally, a native of India, ‘Pino’, what he prefers to be called, who currently lives in McAllen officially began is world-wide journey and eventually landing in the Rio Grande Valley in the 1980s after knowing a close friend, who went to the same university as he did in India and was already attending (Pan American University) now known as the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley in Edinburg.

“I was 22 and came with two suitcases, I’m a vegetarian, so one was full of food and the other was clothes,” Shah said. “They (family) were very supportive, back then in ’87, it was a big thing; come for a higher education, better life the whole nine yards.”


In India, Shah received his Bachelors in Accounting and Finance and received his Master’s in General Business at Pan American University.


“I started doing troubleshooting in the school of Business because I realized computers came natural to me,” he said. “The first job after I graduated was network administration for an agency called ‘Tropical Texas Center for MHMR.”


He eventually crossed over to I.T. (information technology) consulting during the late 1990s to early 2000s where he travelled around the states to assist the set-up of different hospitals that were moving from older facilities to newer builds like the Doctors Hospital of Laredo to McAllen Medical Center and Edinburg Regional Medical Center.


He wrapped up his job as a consultant in the mid-2000s and decided to return to India, for six months, but couldn’t find a placement after living here for several years, so he returned the United States and landed in Dallas with a newspaper agency.


“I took a few months off to try to figure out what to do, so this was the end of 2015 and three things happened that year,” he said. “I called it, my trifecta year – that’s the year my mom passed away, who was my emotional responsibility, I lost my job and I turned 50.”


In the spring of 2016, after knowing he wanted to venture into photography, he used his IT knowledge to set up the photography business. He also traveled Europe for two weeks and during that period he knew photography would be his calling.


“There’s lots of photographers down here in the Valley and that was the challenge then, so how do I make myself stand out,” he said trying to figure out a niche. “I really didn’t want to do the usual, the quinceañera’s, the weddings, the proms and whatever; how do I get myself a target audience, which mine was architecture.”


“The building doesn’t move, you don’t have to tell it to hold a pose or hold a smile or a look,” he said about shooting architecture.

In the fall of that year, he held an exhibition at International Museum of Arts and Science (IMAS), that lasted until the spring of 2017, he then complied the photographs that were used, which included La Lomita Chapel in Mission, Point Isabel Lighthouse in Port Isabel, and the Echo Hotel in Edinburg and with the assistance of Stephan Fox, an architectural historian and lecturer from Rice University in Houston, they formed a book called the ‘Architecture of the Lower Rio Grande Valley’, which covers all four counties.


Others books that he has done have been, “Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque, an Islam mosque in United Arab Emirates,” “Quinta Mazatlán: A Visual Journey,” “Galveston Architecture: A Visual Journey,” and his newest “Brownsville Architecture: A Visual History.”


Shah also hopes to educate the children by taking his books into the school districts, libraries and any educational facility across the valley by preserving the past.


“I want people become aware of the architectural treasures of the Valley because I call myself a world heritage photographer and to me the world heritage is global and architecture, culture, arts and music is part of heritage,” Shah said what he wants others to know about the book. “Architecture tells us things that are unspoken.”


“People can take their kids to San Antonio and other places for new experiences, but taking them to their own backyard and to showcase them the different things in the Valley,” he said teaching using the books as a teaching tool. “These school children, they’re going to be our future civic and corporate leaders and they’re the ones that are going to be making the decisions of a building whether it should be kept or torn down.”


For more information on the books or a view of the photographs, visit, www.artbypino.com.

