Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Volunteers prepare dinners as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during the 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017, in McAllen.

Volunteers deliver dinners as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017.

Jose Angel Torres, 4, looks over his plate as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017.

Pumpkin pie slices are prepared as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017.

Volunteers prepare dinners as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during the 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017, in McAllen.

Volunteers deliver dinners as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017.

Jose Angel Torres, 4, looks over his plate as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017.

Pumpkin pie slices are prepared as attendees enjoyed a traditional Thanksgiving meal during 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday, Nov. 12, 2017.

McALLEN — Empty stomachs and a mouth-watering meal met Sunday for the 27th annual H-E-B Feast of Sharing held at the Convention Center.


Approximately 10,000 families attended, waiting in line for about two hours before the doors opened to attend the annual holiday tradition made from the grand kitchen of H-E-B.


The home-style free meal consisted of sliced turkey with gravy and cranberry sauce along with sides of cornbread dressing, mashed potatoes, vegetable medley and a roll; for dessert a slice of pumpkin pie.

“Giving back to the community is at the heart of who we are as a company,” said Linda Tovar, H-E-B Public Affairs Senior Manager. “The Feast of Sharing gives us a wonderful opportunity to bring the McAllen community together to give thanks and get the holiday season off to a festive start.”


As the families sat waiting for their meals, volunteers from the Doctors Hospital at Renaissance, The Family Church, Rio Grande Valley Vipers Basketball Team in conjunction with high school students from various school districts stood all in a row waiting to begin serving the families.


Volunteer Robert Estrada, a senior at Robert Vela High School and National Honor Society student said he was assisting because he wanted to give back and put a smile on someone’s face.


“We (National Honor Society) all helped out because we like to showcase our school and how much we care for the community and I think we all have a very passionate feeling toward helping out people,” Estrada said.


Another volunteer, Stephanie Ramos, a South Texas College Valley Scholar, said we have many things to be grateful for, but being together is the utmost important.


“We enjoy giving back to the community and it’s an honor and a privilege for H-E-B to give us this opportunity to give the community their meal for Thanksgiving and we’re very thankful to be here,” Ramos said. “Our whole purpose is to bring a smile to the rest of the community and share this moment and just be thankful to God for us to be all together.”

Mission resident, Leonor Segovia has attended the event with her family for about 16 years said they come for the warm meal and family time.


“We’re part of the H-E-B community and we love H-E-B since they started in the old civic center,” Segovia said. “It’s fun for the family and to see how people get together and my kids look forward to it every year.”


Additionally, H-E-B also helps out those who can’t make it to the feast, especially the elderly so they don’t get left out; H-E-B has a program called Homebound Delivered Meals, where those in rehab and nursing facilities also get their meal served to them.


As the families ate their holiday meals, they enjoyed live entertainment with various activities for the whole family, such as a clown making balloon animals, coloring for the children and a portable planetarium by the International Museum of Art and Science (IMAS). H-E-B Pharmacy also provided free flu shots to guests.


Founded in 1989, the H-E-B Feast of Sharing dinners are an important part of H-E-B’s Food Bank Assistance Program, which works year-round to prevent hunger in Texas and Mexico. The annual holiday feast includes more than 250,000 meals served during 33 dinners held throughout Texas and Mexico.


H-E-B will be continue its Feast of Sharing on Wednesday, Nov. 15 at Port Isabel High School, Fort Ringgold Elementary in Rio Grande City on Thursday, Dec. 7 and in Weslaco at St. Joan of Arc Parish on Dec. 16.

