


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

As reports surface about problems at  shelters for migrant children, Arizona officials question who is ensuring the kids are safe.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Exterior of Southwest Key in Tucson, on June 20, 2018. Southwest Key, a non-profit, runs shelters for immigrant children.
(Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

State lawmakers concerned about the welfare of immigrant children in Arizona shelters want to join first lady Melania Trump's tour Thursday of a Southwest Key facility.


They are motivated by reports of child maltreatment and want to see for themselves how children are being treated in the state-licensed shelters.


"I’m not sure we want them in our state if we can’t be sure the kids are safe and getting proper nutrition," said state Rep. Bob Thorpe, R-Flagstaff.


He, along with Democratic Rep. Kelli Butler of Phoenix, sent a request earlier this week to the CEO of Southwest Key, asking for a tour of their facilities and information on shelter operations, such as staffing and the number of children being housed there.


READ MORE: Melania Trump expected in Arizona on Thursday


Their concerns echo those of others, both inside and outside the political world, about what is going on behind the closed doors of the facilities.



    Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar says his department still has custody of 2,047 migrant children separated from their parents. That's only six fewer children than the 2,053 HHS had said were in its custody as of last Wednesday. (June 26)
    AP

State Sen. Steve Farley of Tucson, a Democratic candidate for governor, is calling on Republican Gov. Doug Ducey as well as the state departments of Child Safety and Health Services to do wellness checks on every immigrant child in an Arizona shelter and to investigate any instances of abuse and neglect.


So far, their requests have gone nowhere.


READ MORE: Arizona shelters housing 328 separated children


On Wednesday, Ducey and his wife, Angela, toured a shelter just south of downtown Phoenix. And Butler said she got assurance from a Southwest Key official that they would request to have the lawmakers join the first lady's tour.


The duty to check on allegations of abuse and neglect involving the children falls to the state Department of Health Services.


DHS says when it learns of complaints, it notifies law enforcement. The agency didn't respond to a request for how many times it has done so since the start of 2017, although it did say it investigated 3,000 complaints since then.


READ MORE: Judge orders families reunited within 30 days


Meanwhile, the agency's rules put the responsibility for reporting child abuse and neglect at these facilities on the buildings' operators, who presumably would then notify DHS.


Thorpe and Butler questioned whether that is an adequate safeguard. There is a "human instinct" to sweep problems under the rug, especially when lucrative federal contracts could be at risk, Thorpe said.


“Are they going to jeopardize that kind of money?” he asked, noting the $1.5 million in compensation for Southwest Key's CEO.



    Reporters were allowed to tour a facility in Texas that holds more than 300 children separated from their migrant parents. A facility administrator said the main complaint he hears from the children is that the tents get too cold sometimes. (June 26)
    AP

Butler said she worries that some complaints might not be treated seriously.


“What if it’s neglect if it doesn’t rise to the level of a crime?" she asked. "What if they’re just yelling at them (the children), or locking them in rooms?”


Answers to such questions, they say, deserve more transparency.


Thorpe has been raising questions about conditions in immigrant facilities since 2014, when a wave of unaccompanied minors crossed the border, filling federally contracted shelters with children.


He said a whistleblower, whom he declined to identify, told him at the time of a child who had been sexually molested at a Southwest Key facility. However, there was no report to police, he said, again citing the whistleblower.


READ MORE: Administration racing to reunite 2,000 kids with parents


DHS' oversight of the facilities, both the safety of the premises and the children's welfare, is driven by complaints, said Will Humble, a former director of the agency.



    A judge in California on Tuesday ordered U.S. border authorities to reunite separated families within 30 days, setting a hard deadline in a process that has so far yielded uncertainty about when children might again see their parents.
    Time

The state relies on inspections done by an accreditation agency to determine whether an operator merits a state license. The establishments that are housing immigrant children — both unaccompanied minors and the recent addition of children who were separated from their families — are licensed as behavioral-health facilities.


A review of DHS records showed a number of deficiencies at these facilities in the last three years.


READ MORE: Migrant girl in viral recording is in Phoenix


Most notable was a Christmas Day 2016 incident at a Southwest Key facility in which staff improperly restrained a resident, in violation of state rules that plainly forbid use of restraints.


The report showed the resident was restrained for 21 minutes, released for one minute, then restrained for another 16 minutes. It occurred at Southwest Key's Glendale facility.


The report does not specify if the resident was an immigrant, and names are not disclosed to protect the child's privacy. All of Southwest Key's services are for youth, including charter schools and alternatives to incarceration.


DHS fined the facility $500 for violating the restraint rule. In April 2016, DHS confirmed that Southwest Key had updated its policy manual on the use of restraints.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Other citations involving behavioral-health facilities included the failure by a Southwest Key facility in Mesa to obtain the required fingerprint-clearance cards of three employees before hiring them. One of them worked for nearly four months without applying for a fingerprint card.


DHS fined Southwest Key $1,000 for the violation last October, records show.


READ MORE: Timeline: How family separations at border unfolded


Pool chemicals were improperly stored at A New Leaf shelter in Mesa, DHS found. The problem was corrected within two days and no fine was levied, records show.


The most common citation was for facilities that failed to file their renewal application in the time frame specified by state law. For this, various facilities were fined $250.


Reach the reporter at maryjo.pitzl@arizonarepublic.com and follow her on Twitter @maryjpitzl.


READ MORE:


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.