Partly cloudy. High 94F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


VIDEO: McAllen baby semifinalist for 'Live with Kelly and Ryan' cute photo contest 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

A panel of U.S. members of Congress and local leaders give statements concerning the separation of immigrant children from their families in a roundtable discussion with members of the press at D'Gala Event Center on Monday, June 18, 2018, in Brownsville.

A panel of U.S. members of Congress and local leaders give statements concerning the separation of immigrant children from their families in a roundtable discussion with members of the press at D'Gala Event Center on Monday, June 18, 2018, in Brownsville.

U.S. Sens. John Cornyn and Ted Cruz will join more than 25 members of Congress this weekend on another visit to the Rio Grande Valley as President Trump’s “zero-tolerance” policy continues to separate immigrant families who cross the U.S.-Mexico border unlawfully.


Schedules are still being finalized but Cornyn and Cruz will likely tour immigrant detention facilities in Cameron County on Friday. Cornyn is then hosting a roundtable at the U.S. Border Patrol station in Weslaco, according to McAllen Mayor Jim Darling.


Officials with U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Border Patrol, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Health and Human Services and the Office of Refugee Resettlement are expected to attend in addition to mayors from several Valley cities. Specifically, local leaders from Cameron, Hidalgo and Starr counties will participate in the roundtable.

Non-governmental organizations are also expected to participate, including Catholic Charities, Proyecto Azteca and Valley Interfaith.


U.S. Reps. Vicente Gonzalez, D-McAllen, and Filemon Vela, D-Brownsville, are also hosting colleagues from across the country on Saturday for a tour of the Border Patrol’s centralized immigrant processing center in McAllen and an ICE detention center in Cameron County, according to Vela’s office.


The list of members of the House who attending is still being finalized, but Democrats expected to visit thus far include Karen Bass, Mark DeSaulnier and Anna Eshoo of California; Anthony Brown and Katherine Clark of Maryland; Joe Courtney, Elizabeth Esty and Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut; as well as Diana DeGette of Colorado, Adriano Espaillat of New York, Lois Frankel of Florida and Marcy Kaptur of Ohio.

Democrats Jackie Speier, Mark Takano, Norma Torres and Barbara Lee of California are also expected to be on-hand, as well Ann McLane Kuster of New Hampshire, Brenda Lawrence of Michigan, Sheila Jackson Lee of Houston, Grace Meng of New York, Gwen Moore of Wisconsin, Chellie Pingree of Maine, Tim Ryan of Ohio and Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida.


While the members have questions about Trump’s policy, Trump reportedly said Wednesday that he plans to sign an order ending family separations at the border. This trip is following various visits from other members of Congress, including multiple senators, on Sunday and Monday.


mferman@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Mitchell Ferman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.