Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The suspects were all members of the Central York High School football team.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    As the #MeToo campaign continues to grow, well-known women in the York community join their voices and share their stories.
    Jason Plotkin, York Daily Record

Three 16-year-old boys from Manchester Township have been charged with raping a 14-year-old girl at gunpoint after leaving the York Fair, according to court documents.
(Photo: Submitted)

West York Police say three teen boys raped a 14-year-old girl after leaving the York Fair. Here's what we know about the alleged assault:


Full story: Teen boys raped 14-year-old girl after leaving York Fair, West York Police say



    West York police detective Michael Mendez, talks about the three teens charged with raping a 14-year-old girl they lured from the York Fair on Sept. 16.
    York Daily Record

The assault occurred on September 17, the last day of the York Fair, according to a search warrant for the case from West York Borough Police.


Police interviewed the victim on Sept. 27, 2017, according to an affidavit of probable cause.


Full story: Teen boys raped 14-year-old girl after leaving York Fair, West York Police say


Here is the timeline of events, according to the affidavit:



    Three 16-year-old boys from Manchester Township have been charged with raping a 14-year-old girl at gunpoint after leaving the York Fair.
    Sean Heisey, York Daily Record

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Full story: Teen boys raped 14-year-old girl after leaving York Fair, West York Police say


The affidavit states:


 


If you or someone you know in York County needs help in a domestic violence situation, contact ACCESS-York at 1-800-262-8444 or 717-846-5400 or YWCA Hanover Safe Home at 717-632-0007.


You can call the National Domestic Violence Hotline at 1-800-799-7233.


Victims of sexual assault who need immediate assistance may also contact the Pennsylvania Coalition Against Rape's toll-free hotline at 1-888-772-7227.


Video from the fall football season shows Mercedes recovering a fumble for Central York:



    Central York's Kelvin Mercedes recovers a fumble against Cumberland Valley Sept. 8, 2017.
    

See also: York County Most Wanted list


 
