Gallery: Nathan Williams murder trial


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- Jurors in the trial of a Jersey City man charged with murdering the mother of one of his children in 2014 were shown autopsy pictures this morning of injuries the she suffered and heard a medical examiner testify that she had been strangled to death.

Nathan Williams III, 36, is accused of killing Marilyn Albizu, 33, on June 17, 2014, in the Old Bergen Road home they shared, although they were no longer a couple.

During opening statements yesterday, the prosecution said Williams became enraged because Albizu told Lenisha Murray, the mother of one of Williams' other children, that he was with a third woman. Murray said she went to the home and found him in bed with the third woman on the morning of the murder.  

Jurors were shown images of bruising on the sides and back of Albizu's neck, her back and shoulders, as well as bruises on her face and a cut near her chin. She had blood smeared on her hand. Asked if the bruises on her neck could have been cause by someone squeezing the area, Dr. Di Wang, a medical examiner, testified "Yes."



But the doctor said there was more conclusive internal evidence that included hemorrhaging of muscles in her neck and a fractured bone in her throat. He also said her tongue and lip bled, as had the underside of her eyelids. He said many of the injuries were consistent with a struggle for her life.

Wang said toxicology tests showed there was PCP in Albizu's system, but he said he found no evidence that contradicted his determination that she was strangled.

Wang noted that investigators had placed bags over Albizu's hands to protect any evidence on them and said he clipped her fingernails to preserve any evidence that might be found there as a result of the struggle.

Under cross-examination by defense attorney Max Novel, Wang agreed that it was possible that due to the struggle, the killer's DNA could be in the matter under Albizu's nails. When Novel asked him if the nail clippings were tested for DNA, Wang said "Not by me."

Novel also pointed out a strand of hair seen on Albizu's hand in an autopsy picture and asked Wang what happened to it. The doctor said he did not remember.

"Doctor, this is a homicide and you don't remember what you did with the hair on her hand?" Novel responded. 

In his opening statement yesterday, Novel said investigators did no DNA testing and blood on the walls and floor of the apartment was not tested either. He also noted that there were no witnesses to Albizu's murder.

The prosecution intends to show security video from the block showing who came and went from the apartment that day.

On the morning Albizu was killed she called police and told them Williams assaulted her, but she then refused both medical attention and a restraining order. Police issued a warrant for Williams' arrest and when they returned for a welfare check around 6:30 that night, they found Albizu's body.

Williams was arrested later that night after a police chase that ended with him jumping off an overpass in Newark and breaking his legs and one hip.

The 911 call was played for the jury this morning and they heard Albizu say "He just hit me in my face. ... He left. He's not even here." She tells the operator she has a bump on her head and "He's going to jail. I swear to God he's going to f--- jail, yo."

When the trial resumed after the lunch break, Jersey City Police Officer Joseph Vangelakos was expected to take the stand. He responded the Old Bergen Road home Williams and Albizu sharged after the 911 call was placed that morning.

Defense attorney James Lisa is also representing Williams. Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor David Feldman represents the state. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        