Gallery: Hoboken SantaCon 2017 


    
        
            By The Jersey Journal

There were cheers at a school that staved off closure and tears at another that couldn't. There was a plane crash that looked like a scene out of a movie. The most powerful politician in New Jersey went on trial. The Jersey City Police Department was under the microscope after a controversial high-speed chase, six guilty pleas and four more officers being charged.

Two deaths at the county jail garnered national attention and a bar crawl in Hoboken got out of control.

That -- and much more -- happened in Hudson County in 2017. Here are the top stories as picked by the staff at The Jersey Journal.

Like Philly football fans, Hoboken is booing these Santas

Some 55 people were sent to the hospital and Hoboken police responded to 289 calls, but this was no attack on the city or even a train crash. It was SantaCon 2017. The bar crawl on Dec. 16 got a little out of hand, to say the least, with police issuing 32 motor vehicle summonses and 51 summonses for violations of Hoboken's local ordinances. There also were 17 arrests. The wakeup call after the hangover? New Mayor Ravi Bhalla will look into keeping SantaCon out of Hoboken in the future.

Fighting for survival at Marist High

Marist High School students held a dance-a-thon and the school even reached out to the pope, and in the end the Catholic school in Bayonne convinced the Marist Brothers to keep the school open beyond the 2016-17 school year.

Like so many other Catholic schools, Marist has suffered from dwindling enrollment and increasing operating costs. Even though an ambitious $1.5 million fundraising campaign fell short, Marist Brothers said the campaign "did raise a significant amount which has secured the school to be open for the next academic year."

Triple homicide in Jersey City

A Jersey City neighborhood was rocked in January 2017 by a triple homicide, with one of the victims pregnant with her second child. Quadel Chisolm, 31, was found dead with a gunshot wound to his chest in the hallway of a Fulton Avenue building and Ishear Bailey, 26, and Janaya Lee, 25, were found dead in an apartment, with multiple gunshot wounds to their torsos and upper bodies. The Hudson County Prosecutor's Office released a video and still shots of suspects, but no one has been charged nearly a year later.

150 years and counting at The Jersey Journal

The Jersey Journal celebrated its 150th year of serving Hudson County in 2017 and produced a keepsake 64-page magazine to mark the May 2 anniversary of the first edition in 1867. Starting in Exchange Place, then Greene Street and eventually Journal Square and Secaucus, the newspaper has remained the steadfast voice of the people of the county.

"Tonight is not about us, it is rather about you, the readers,'' Journal Publisher David Blomquist said in opening the celebration program at the Landmark Jersey Loew's Theatre on April 29. "The role you all play in making community journalism is so important to this community, and there's no better place to celebrate this than this historic theater."

Fulop wins in a landslide

Jersey City residents gave Steve Fulop a resounding vote of confidence on Nov. 7 when the incumbent mayor easily defeated mayoral challenger Bill Matsikoudis with 78 percent of the vote. Not many would have thought it possible 18 months earlier, when it was fully expected that Fulop would run for governor instead.

If you build it, ...

From West New York to West Hudson, real estate development was a driving force in Hudson County again in 2017. For example, in September, Harrison celebrated the opening of Urby, a 409-unit development just steps away from the Harrison PATH station. In Weehawken in May, officials held a ceremony to mark the topping out of the Avora, an 11-story, 184-unit luxury condominium building that is expected to open early in 2018.

Bayonne appears ready for a population explosion, with a number of abatements granted and other projects in the works; and Jersey City's building boom is still going strong with openings of buildings like Journal Squared and the Lenox, to name just two.

Bail reform law has major impact

The Criminal Justice Reform and Speedy Trial Act took effect Jan. 1 and the changes could be seen almost immediately -- no more bail. People charged with a crime would be released after their first hearing unless the state asks for a detention hearing and the detention is approved by a judge. Under old bail rules, the poorest of the accused would sit in jail awaiting trial if they could not afford bail.

The results were stunning, with the jail showing a sharp decline in the number of inmates. But the bail reform needed a little reforming of it own when law enforcement officials were critical of the new system not detaining all those charged with gun offenses.

Emergency landing on Avenue E

Some cars were damaged and some power lines were mangled, but miraculously there were no injuries or loss of life when a small plane crashed on Avenue E in Bayonne on Feb. 19. The pilot told authorities that the plane began to experience mechanical problems when he was near the Statue of Liberty.

Hudson County hospital war

Two hospital groups in Hudson County fought a pitched battle for the hearts and minds of Bayonne and south Hudson residents throughout the summer. At issue was a satellite emergency department proposed by Jersey City Medical Center parent group RWJBarnabas Health within walking distance of CarePoint Health's Bayonne Medical Center -- who staunchly opposed the move. It got ugly, with claims of racism against JCMC and a media campaign against the satellite ER, which needed state approval to open. In the end, the state OK'd JCMC's satellite ER.

Famed St. Anthony High closes doors

St. Anthony High School in Downtown Jersey City, most known for its national powerhouse basketball team and Hall of Fame coach, closed in June because of a lack of funds and dwindling enrollment numbers.

Over the years the school -- mostly on the back of basketball coach Bob Hurley, with the help of famous alumni and friends -- put on enormous fund-raising drives to keep the school afloat. But the school finally ran out of miracles.

Take that, President Trump!

Jersey City, one of the most diverse cities in the country, took a stand against President Trump when it declared itself a "sanctuary city" in February. "We won't be bullied and we won't be mistreated," Mayor Steve Fulop said, referring to the executive order that barred city police officers from picking up illegal immigrants if requested by ICE officials, among other things. Trump later threatened to pull federal funding from sanctuary cities, but Jersey City has held its ground.

Bayonne police brutality on trial

The federal case against Bayonne Police Officer Francis Styles may have ended in a mistrial, but it gave the public some insight into how police officers work -- and how they might be able to get away with roughing up a suspect. Styles was accused of covering up for fellow Police Officer Domenico Lillo, who had pleaded guilty to striking Brandon Walsh during an arrest.

The case likely would have never seen a courtroom if not for a surveillance camera capturing the assault by Lillo.

2 deaths spark closer look at conditions at county jail

Two Hudson County inmates died within a four-week period between June and July, prompting a closer look at the conditions inside the jail in Kearny and promises that changes would be made.

Rolando Meza-Espinoza, an immigrant detainee who was held in what his lawyer called a case of mistaken identity, suffered "gastrointestinal bleeding" and died on June 10 after he was transferred to the Jersey City Medical Center. An autopsy was never performed.

A few weeks later, Jennifer Towle, 48, who was serving a six-month sentence for DWI, died in the jail and was found to have inedible objects in her stomach.

Hudson County officials say that problems at the jail pointed out in a recent report have been addressed.

Union City baby dies in fire started by dad and pal

All homicides are senseless, but the story of a baby dying in a fire because his father and his father's friend were playing with fire was especially outrageous.

Eddie Gonzalez Jr., who was 1, died in the March 4 fire and his father, Eddie Gonzalez Sr. and Edwin Diaz, 20, were both charged. Diaz has pleaded guilty and will testify against Gonzalez.

The fire started at 1404 Summit Ave., spread to two more residential buildings and then the embers ignited the steeple of Sts. Joseph and Michael Parish across the street.

The accused money-launderer and the fatal hit-and-run

A woman fatally struck at a bus stop in North Bergen led police in two New Jersey counties and New York on a trail of clues that led to money-laundering charges and the recovery of $1.25 million in cash, bags of diamonds, gold and fake IDs.

Olvy Torres and two women were charged in the case that began with the hit-and-run crash that killed Luisa Valdez, 59, on Sept. 26.

A high-speed chase, a fiery crash and the fallout

An incident that drew national attention started with a high-speed chase through Jersey City and included shots fired at the driver in a fleeing car. But it did not end with the fiery crash that left an innocent bystander badly burned.

The June 4 incident has led to four police officers being charged for how the chase was handled. The suspect police were chasing was also charged; and now the victim in the crash, who was kicked in the head by cops while he escaped the fiery wreckage, has filed a claim to sue Jersey City and the police department.

Mosque is denied in Bayonne

Bayonne received some national attention when a battle filled with undertones of bigotry raged throughout the first half of 2017. A Bayonne Muslim group, which had met and prayed in a Catholic church hall for years, proposed to build a community center that included a mosque in the city. The bid was denied by the city Zoning Board and a federal lawsuit was filed by the Muslim group, citing discrimination.

While overcrowding and parking issues were raised, many who commented at the Zoning Board meeting brought up religion and one began negatively citing Quran verses as reasons against approving the application.

Turbulent year for 1 Journal Square project

The on-again, off-again 1 Journal Square project is apparently on again after a turbulent year in which the development garnered world-wide attention.

The $800 million, two-tower Kushner Companies project hit a snag in the spring when Nicole Kushner Meyer, Jared Kushner's sister, cited her family ties when luring foreign investors who could help fund the program in exchange for visas through a controversial program. Jared Kushner, President Trump's son-in-law and senior adviser, was the company's CEO until President Trump took office in January.

But that wasn't the only problem for the long-promised development. There was the loss of major investor and planned tenant WeWork, the expiration of a critical state tax break and Mayor Steve Fulop's announcement that the city would not support a package of city subsidies. The good news: Revised plans for the project were approved in September.

"To those who were digging my political grave ..."

The state's most powerful politician, Sen. Robert Menendez, declared victory when his lengthy corruption trial ended in a mistrial in November. The former Union City mayor was accused of accepting lavish gifts from a Florida eye doctor, and friend, in exchange for governmental favors. No word yet on whether or not he will be retried. But the mistrial elicited one of the best quotes of the year: "To those who were digging my political grave so they could jump into my seat, I know who you are and I won't forget you," Menendez said.

'Guilty,' say nine Jersey City police officers

The Jersey City Police Department took a couple more hits during 2017 with the guilty pleas of eight officers involved in an off-duty work detail scheme. In January a dozen officers were placed on modified duty and later suspended. Four other officers, including a captain and a lieutenant, were charged with falsifying time sheets. One officer scheduled for trial pleaded guilty and will testify against the others.

A historic night in Hoboken

Hoboken voters made history on Nov. 7 when they elected Ravi Bhalla as the next mayor. Bhalla, who will took office on Jan. 1, is the first Sikh to be elected mayor in Hoboken and the state.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        