Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

✓ Unlimited access to trib.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (866) 981-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:27 pm

Miller

Taylor

Crime and Courts Reporter

Miller

Taylor

Two Natrona County men were arrested in the past week on suspicion of aggravated assault in separate incidents involving makeshift weapons.

The Natrona County Sheriff’s Office said Wade C. Miller, 45, who lives on Moki Road near Wyoming Highway 220, broke out a man’s glass patio door and attacked him with a pick axe and a spade on Saturday. The alleged victim was left with a bloodied hand and head.

The sheriff’s office also said David Taylor, 28, of Edgerton, on Wednesday night attacked another man with a claw hammer after the man refused to hug Taylor. The alleged victim was hospitalized with a head wound.

According to court documents, a resident of Okeepa Road spotted Miller and another man urinating into a gas tank on the resident’s property.

The man told deputies that he opened his patio door and confronted the two micturating men. After a confrontation ensued, the property resident went back into his home and closed the door, according to the documents.

Miller then grabbed a pick axe from the property and broke out the glass door, the documents allege. He entered the property and hit the resident, who shielded himself with his arm while the other man watched.

Miller dropped or discarded the pick axe and hit the man with a fence post before picking up a spade, according to the documents. After the alleged victim yelled “gun!” Miller and the other man left.

The other man cooperated with the sheriff’s department and had not been charged by Monday morning. Miller was arrested and booked into Natrona County Detention Center. He had been bailed out by Monday morning.

According to court documents, Taylor was drunk on Wednesday night at another person’s house in Edgerton. After another man repeatedly rebuffed Taylor’s attempts to hug him, the man told Taylor to leave.

The two men pushed Taylor toward the door, according to the documents. After one man left the room thinking Taylor would leave, he heard a crash. When the man returned he saw Taylor and the third man wrestling on the floor. The third man was holding a framing hammer and bleeding profusely from his head.

The third man later said Taylor had struck him in the head with the hammer, causing the wound.

After Taylor fled, the witness called 911. The alleged victim was taken to Wyoming Medical Center where he was interviewed by sheriff’s deputies.

Sheriff’s deputies found Taylor on Thursday morning at another location. He was arrested and booked into Natrona County Detention Center. He was still in jail Monday morning.

Both Taylor and Miller were expected to appear in court Monday afternoon for their initial appearances.

Follow crime reporter Shane Sanderson on Twitter @shanersanderson



Miller

Taylor

A Wyoming man pleaded not guilty to a charge alleging he drunkenly attacked another man with a hammer. 

Crime and Courts Reporter

Shane Sanderson is a Star-Tribune reporter who primarily covers criminal justice. Sanderson is a proud University of Missouri graduate. Lately, he’s been reading Cormac McCarthy and cooking Italian food. He writes about his own life in his free time. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Shane Sanderson  posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Probation here we come.....too old for boot camp.  

judge roy bean  where are u when we really need ya?

respect for others  isn't  a variable intoxicated or not,

once blonigen gets this, it will be, the perp was "just a happy drunk taping on the door to get in". To bad the victim didn't have a side arm like the Marine did in 2013. But blonigen would charge the victim with  2nd, stack the jury with a lawyer, find the victim guilty of protecting himself and received 30 to 50  for capping  blonigens protege, out on the catch and release program!!

I guess it's time to pass some "Common Sense" Pick-Axe, Spade and Claw Hammer legislation.  And toughen the Garden Implement and Carpentry tool background checks.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 