Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Elizabeth Guerrero sits in a wheelchair as she is charged with murder during her arraignment at the Hidalgo County Detention Center on Saturday, Nov. 11, 2017, in Edinburg.

Elizabeth Guerrero sits in a wheelchair as she is charged with murder during her arraignment at the Hidalgo County Detention Center on Saturday, Nov. 11, 2017, in Edinburg.

EDINBURG — A woman who allegedly fatally struck her granddaughter’s former common-law husband with an SUV faced a justice of the peace Saturday afternoon at the Hidalgo County jail to hear the charge against her.


Elizabeth Guerrero, 68, of Donna, appeared before Justice of the Peace Jaime “Jerry” Muñoz in a wheelchair. She bowed her head as she was wheeled in to the jail’s small arraignment room and turned her head away from the television cameras present as Muñoz informed her of her rights.

Guerrero was charged with the murder of Gilberto Gaytan, 20, and Muñoz set her bond at $1 million.


Guerreo, who did not have legal representation, requested a court-appointed attorney.

Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office investigators believe Guerrero struck Gaytan with her vehicle in rural Mission on Thursday morning after a custody dispute arose between Gaytan and her granddaughter, Elizabeth Morales, 22. Guerrero and Morales subsequently fled the scene with Gaytan and Morales’ 2-year-old daughter.


As of press time, Guerrero and Morales remain in jail, the latter on a previous possession of a controlled substance charge. The toddler is in Child Protective Services custody.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.