
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

After 10 weeks on the sideline, Paxton Lynch has a chance to suit up and be active for the Broncos on Sunday. 






Lynch received reps with the second-team offense — and some with the first team — as the team continues to monitor the progress of his right shoulder as well as that of Brock Osweiler now, too. 

“We gave Paxton No. 2 reps today to kind of see where he’s at with his shoulder and he did fine,” coach Vance Joseph said. “He threw the ball fine today.” 

Osweiler injured his right shoulder during the Broncos’ second series of last Sunday’s loss to the Patriots. On a second down in the red zone, he scrambled left to evade pressure, threw the ball away and was pushed to the ground by defensive lineman Deatrich Wise. Though Osweiler wanted one, no flag was thrown on the play. 

“Unfortunately, I just have a little injury, but it’s no big deal,” said Osweiler, who admitted he knew immediately that something was wrong. “It was something I was able to play the entire game with — didn’t miss a single snap. I’m going to be ready to go Sunday and it’s not going to cause any problems.” 

Osweiler was limited in practice Wednesday but is expected to throw more Thursday and still start against the Bengals. 

His backup, however, will be determined later in the week. 

Lynch came off the injury report in late October, but has remained inactive on game days as the Broncos suit up only two quarterbacks — Osweiler and Trevor Siemian. The Broncos have been cautious with Lynch’s return since the injury to his throwing shoulder. Originally, he was projected to miss “a couple games” but only resumed light throwing about three weeks ago. 


Wednesday, the Broncos tested Lynch’s shoulder a bit more to see how he would hold up throwing deep passes. 

“I feel good. I know that the training staff is monitoring and the coaches are monitoring me,” Lynch said. “I think they’re just watching how I practice, how I throw the ball and they’re evaluating from there. But I felt pretty good.” 

Lynch suffered the shoulder sprain in the third week of the preseason, against the Green Bay Packers, and has been out since, limiting him to “mental reps” and rehab. 

“Since I couldn’t be out there practicing while I was in the training room … it was just a big emphasis for me being on my iPad the whole time since I couldn’t be out there getting the reps,” he said. “I felt like, mentally, I’ve taken a step forward.” 

Osweiler was signed to a one-year contract in September to, in part, fill the void as Lynch recovered. The Broncos needed a backup and wanted an experienced veteran well-versed in Mike McCoy‘s system. 

Much has changed in the Broncos’ quarterback room since Osweiler was signed, and now it may change again. 

“I’m excited, but I know Brock’s the guy this week and I’m doing everything I got to do to support him being in the position I am, and that’s what I’m going to do,” Lynch said. “I’m just taking it day by day, week by week.” 

Asked if Lynch would get a shot at the starting job this season once he’s fully recovered, Joseph said he’s only looking ahead to Sunday against the Bengals. But should Lynch be called upon to play at all Sunday, Joseph said he would be comfortable putting him in. 

“Obviously, if you’re going to ask me if I could play, I’m going to say, ‘Yes,'” Lynch said. “I would have said that when I got hurt. But it’s up to the trainers and the coaches. Like I said, they’ve done a good job so far and I feel great, so I’m just going to continue to leave it up to them.” 

BUY TICKETS: Cincinnati Bengals at Denver Broncos 