Sheila Keen Warren was arrested last September in the 1990 shooting death of her husband Michael Warren’s then-wife, 27 years after initially coming under suspicion by local detectives.



Sheila Keen Warren was arrested last September in the 1990 shooting death of her husband Michael Warren’s then-wife, 27 years after initially coming under suspicion by local detectives.

The takedown came out of the blue for Sheila Keen Warren, the suspected killer clown.


She and her husband, Michael Warren — who used to be married to the victim — were heading home from a road trip.


Five minutes from their home, deputies stopped their Cadillac SUV. Keen Warren did not resist and Michael Warren could only watch as the cuffs were slapped on his wife and she was whisked away in a patrol car.


And that spelled the end of her 27 years of relative calm since Marlene Warren’s slaying in Wellington.


Interviews with police, lawyers and friends revealed a more detailed account Wednesday of the woman accused of being a killer. Until her arrest Tuesday, Keen Warren, now 54, had forged a peaceful life with the victim’s husband in a lakeside home in rural southwest Virginia, neighbors said.


On May, 26, 1990, the killer showed up at Marlene Warren’s home, disguised in a wig, white face paint and red bulb nose. The clown shot her dead.


Questions remain of why investigators, who gathered a mountain of evidence in the 1990s, weren’t able to make an arrest long ago. Among investigators’ alleged evidence then:


— Keen Warren had worn a clown costume before — at a Pahokee auto parts store.


— Employees from a store less than a mile from Keen Warren’s home identified her as the woman who bought flowers and balloons about 90 minutes before the killing.


— A search of Keen Warren’s home yielded fibers from a bright orange wig. And similar fibers were found in the getaway car, which was ditched in a parking lot at Okeechobee and Royal Palm Beach boulevards.


On May 26, 1990, Marlene Warren answered the door of her home in Palm Beach County and was fatally shot by someone wearing a clown disguise.

After 27 years, authorities charged Sheila Keen Warren with the killing. Keen Warren is married to Marlene Warren's husband, Michael Warren.

Retired sheriff’s detective Bill Williams, who worked with other investigators on the Marlene Warren homicide, recalled Wednesday that they pressed prosecutors to go forward with an arrest years ago.


“I know we presented the case, and we had ongoing meetings with assistant state attorneys and it was always, ‘Go back and get more,’” Williams said. “And you can’t blame them for wanting more [evidence] to build a more solid case. They could have rolled the dice and lost, and you could have never charged her again.”


Palm Beach County authorities have from the beginning suspected Michael Warren and Sheila Keen Warren — they were accused of having an affair at the time of the murder that shook Wellington and even prompted a fear of clowns.


Records show Michael Warren married Sheila Keen in Las Vegas in 2002, several years after his release from prison on multiple charges of racketeering and odometer fraud from an investigation into his business dealings that began after his former wife’s murder.


Michael Warren, who was allowed to drive off on his own this week after his wife was picked up, was not charged. Palm Beach County Sheriff’s detectives haven’t said whether any charges will be brought against him, citing the open case.


Marlene Warren’s mother, Shirley Twing, 87, had doubted an arrest would ever happen. She learned it did when a Sun Sentinel reporter called her in Las Vegas on Tuesday.


She was flabbergasted to hear that her daughter’s former husband was now married to the accused.


“He married the killer?” asked Twing. “Son of a gun.”


Marlene Warren’s stepfather, Bill Twing, 75, said he accepted the wait for justice.


“I’m not angry that it took so long because I understand why,” Bill Twing said. “I will feel peace when the hammer falls at guilty.”


It was a Saturday morning when Marlene Warren answered the door to accept a bouquet and balloons from a clown with a painted-on smile.


“Oh, how pretty,” the victim reportedly said, before the killer shot her in the face.


Next, the clown walked to a convertible Chrysler LeBaron, missing a license plate, and drove away from the victim’s home in the wealthy Aero Club community, which has a private landing strip with taxiways to each home.


Soon after Marlene Warren was shot, a deputy called the Twings with the news of the shooting.


The Twings, who were visiting friends in Phoenix, flew to Las Vegas, then to West Palm Beach and went to the daughter’s hospital bed. The attractive woman with the long blond hair was fading.


“She was on life support,” Bill Twing said. “And everything was normal: Pulse, respiration. But she was gone.”


Michael Warren at the time owned a car business called Bargain Motors Inc. on North Dixie Highway in West Palm Beach.


Marlene Warren managed rental properties the couple acquired during their 18 years of marriage.


Sheila Keen, then 27, was married at the time to a man named Richard Keen, who was 18 years older. She worked for Warren’s dealership, repossessing cars.


Sheila and Michael frequently took long lunches together, and he paid for her rent after her separation from her husband in 1990, detectives said, according to news accounts.


There were some promising leads early in the investigation.


Employees at a West Palm Beach costume shop said that a woman had recently bought a clown costume two days before the murder. Two store clerks picked Sheila Keen Warren out of a photo lineup.


Yet another lead: The car was reported stolen from a car-rental agency and ultimately was tied to Michael Warren’s car business, authorities said.


Death came knocking at Marlene Warren’s door disguised as a clown.

And for 27 years the bizarre case of the Wellington clown murder remained unsolved — kind of; detectives had the alleged killer in their sights within three months of the slaying.

It was a Saturday morning, May 26, 1990 when Marlene...

The judge in Warren’s 1992 fraud case rebuked the State Attorney’s Office for its “selective prosecution” of Warren, considering that he had been labeled a prime suspect in his wife’s death.


But no charges were ever filed in the murder case — until now.


The Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office dusted off the file in 2014 and went to work on it again.


They sent the DNA back to the lab, and also found out about the Warren-Keen nuptials. It turned out they were settled in Abingdon, Va., in the Blue Ridge Mountains.

“These people pretty much tried to stay off the radar,” said Joshua Cumbow, top prosecutor in Washington County, about halfway between Roanoke, Va., and Knoxville, Tenn.


The couple owned and operated a popular drive-thru restaurant, called the Purple Cow, in nearby Kingsport, Tenn., until late last year. The establishment serves a full menu, from peanut butter and jelly sandwiches to steaks to ice cream cones.


“We didn’t know the previous owners,” general manager Stephen Pugh said of the Warrens.


Keen Warren and her husband lived in a neighborhood with nice views, by South Holston Lake. The couple lived in a three-bedroom house on 1.89 acres in Abingdon, Virginia, according to property records.


The residence has two large brick columns and ‘no trespassing’ signs.


Neighbors Rocky and Brook Blevins said they got to know Keen Warren through the years, according to the Bristol Herald Courier newspaper.


“She’s a great person,” Rocky Blevins told the newspaper of the woman they’ve known for nearly 15 years. “We trust her with anything we’ve got.”


Similar sentiments were shared by Keen Warren’s defense attorney, Wayne Austin.


“She’s well-liked and well-respected in the community,” said Austin, who is only handling her extradition.


Cumbow, the Washington County prosecutor, said Keen Warren didn’t make any statements during a five-minute court hearing Wednesday. Keen Warren is expected to be moved from custody in Virginia to a Palm Beach County Jail within the next 10 days, after telling a judge she won’t fight extradition.


Tuesday’s arrest was meant to catch her by surprise, he said.


Authorities were aware the Warrens were coming home from a trip, and sure enough, the couple were pulled over about 5:30 p.m. along Good Hope Road. They were just five minutes from their home.


“A plan was put in place to arrest her before she got back to the house,” Cumbow said.


Detectives credited a DNA breakthrough for Keen Warren’s arrest following an Aug. 31 grand jury indictment. They haven’t elaborated about that breakthrough.


Williams, the retired detective, praised the current detectives for reviving the cold case, because “back in the day we didn’t have DNA. It would have been nice.”


The most recent time Palm Beach County prosecutors pursued a DNA based case in a decades-old murder, they pursued the death penalty. A jury convicted Rodney Clark in a Lake Worth-area woman’s 1987 slaying, but the panel this month voted for a life sentence.


Michael Edmondson, spokesman for State Attorney Dave Aronberg, said he was unable to comment on whether the death penalty would be sought for Keen Warren until after she is in local custody.


Staff researcher Barbara Hijek and reporter Tonya Alanez contributed to this report.


mjfreeman@sun-sentinel.com, 561-243-6642 or Twitter @marcjfreeman