
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		




Owners and employees of the Triple J Armory gun store clean up after the business was burglarized in a smash-and-grab involving a Jeep Cherokee that plowed through the front entrance in the early hours of Wednesday morning.

courtesy Denver7


A tow truck arrives on the scene of a gun store attempted burglary early Wednesday morning.

Helen H. Richardson, The Denver Post


Mel "Dragonman" Bernstein holds an M249 SAW, or Squad Automatic Weapon, as he poses for a portrait amongst his many automatic and semi-automatic weapons he has for sale at Dragonman Gun Shop  on Oct. 5, 2017 in Colorado Springs. Recently, the ATF has formed a strike force and has collaborated with state agencies and owners of gun clubs to arrest suspects responsible for a string of smash-and-grab burglaries. Mel Bernstein, owner of Dragonman Gun Shop, was himself a victim of a smash and grab burglary where he lost 84 automatic and semi-automatic guns from his shop. He is a class III dealer licensed to sell fully automatic guns. Bernstein has become known as the most armed man in the America because of the amount of guns, ammunition, automatic and semi-automatic weapons that he sells at his store east of Colorado Springs.  He sells machine guns, automatic weapons, hand guns, rifles and silencers. He also has shooting ranges from 25 feet to 220 yards.

Steve Nehf, The Denver Post


Owners and employees of the Triple J Armory gun store clean up after the business was burglarized in a smash-and-grab involving a Jeep Cherokee that plowed through the front entrance in the early hours of May 24, 2017.




Officers patrol the area surrounding a strip mall in Tinley Park, Ill., on Saturday, where five women were killed at a Lane Bryant store. A helicopter and dogs helped in the hunt for the gunman. Authorities suspect robbery as the   motive.      




Thieves who take guns or ammunition during a burglary in Colorado could face a stiffer prison sentence and heftier fines under a measure that passed a House committee Thursday, with prosecutors, victims of gun violence and lawmakers from both parties backing the legislation.

Currently, firearms theft during a second-degree burglary can be a Class 4 felony, which carries a sentence of two to six years in prison.

House Bill 1077 would up that to a Class 3 felony and allow a judge to impose a fine of up to $750,000 and between four and 12 years behind bars.

“These thefts are no ordinary burglaries, and therefore there should be some form for enhanced consequences for theft of deadly weapons,” said Rep. Larry Liston, a Colorado Springs Republican who is sponsoring the bill alongside Rep. Donald Valdez, D-La Jara. 

The legislation comes in the wake of a spate of gun-store burglaries in the past two years across the state in which rifles and other powerful weapons were stolen. A handgun stolen during one of the break-ins was used in the accidental 2016 Edgewater shooting of a 13-year-old boy, according to federal authorities and police.

Also, 18th Judicial District Attorney George Brauchler testified that he has seen stolen weapons used in homicides and other violent crimes.

“It is the right step to take,” he said of the legislation. “… It gives me, as a prosecutor, another tool in my toolbox to try to distinguish between someone who might steal a laptop and someone who might steal something that could be used to take another person’s life.”

The Colorado District Attorney’s Council, Colorado Ceasefire and gun-store owners also testified in support of the measure. Tom Sullivan, whose son Alex was killed in the 2012 Aurora theater shooting while celebrating his 27th birthday, also spoke in approval of the legislation.

Legislative analysts estimate that each year there would be about 20 cases eligible to face charges under the bill. They also noted that, if passed, the measure would increase prison costs because more people would be incarcerated.


House Bill 1077, which passed the House State, Veterans and Military Affairs Committee by a 7-2 vote, with two Democrats rejecting the measure over concerns about not putting enough resources toward preventing gun thefts in the first place, now heads to the House Appropriations Committee for further consideration.

The measure’s passage comes a day after a shooting at a south Florida high school left at least 17 people, including students, dead. The AR-15, assault-style rifle used by the suspect — according to authorities — was purchased legally, per reports.

Lawmakers in both the Colorado Senate and House recognized the victims of the Florida massacre on Thursday, with Democratic legislators calling for action.

“On this tragic day when we confront the aftermath of (another) school shooting in our nation on the 46th day of this year, I do not feel like praying,” said Rabbi Joe Black, of Denver’s Temple Emmanuel, as he opened the House proceedings with a prayer. “Our prayers have not stopped the bullets. Our prayers have changed nothing.”

… "May those in this room who have the power to to make change find the courage to seek a pathway to sanity and hope. May we hold ourselves and our leaders accountable. Only then will our prayers be worthy of an answer."

— Jesse Aaron Paul (@JesseAPaul) February 15, 2018



On Wednesday, the Senate’s State, Veterans and Military Affairs Committee advanced a measure on a 3-2, party-line vote that would allow Coloradans to carry a concealed weapon without a permit.

“The idea behind constitutional carry is that you should be able to carry a concealed handgun without applying for government permission or paying an expensive fee, if you are otherwise legally able to carry a firearm,” state Sen. Tim Neville, a Littleton Republican who is bringing the legislation, said in a written statement. “Law-abiding Coloradans already can carry openly in most parts of the state, except Denver, and they shouldn’t have to jump through additional hoops, or pay what amounts to a tax, because they choose to carry their means of self-defense in a pocket or a purse or otherwise out of sight.”

Neville’s measure, Senate Bill 97, now heads to the Senate Appropriations Committee for consideration.

The map shows gun store burglaries in 2017 (red) and 2016 (purple), according to news reports (it is not a complete list). Note: The Triple J Armory was burglarized twice: May 24, 2017 (11 handguns stolen) and June 22, 2016 (20-30 guns stolen). Circle size represents number of guns stolen: unknown-10, 11-25, more than 25. Click a map marker for details.

Source: Denver Post research