BOSTON — The Red Sox ambushed Yankees ace Luis Severino like they knew what was coming.

And maybe they did.

But this time, there was no need for an illegal Apple Watch.

ESPN analyst Rick Sutcliffe suggested that the 24-year-old flamethrower was tipping his pitches during the four-letter network's broadcast on Tuesday night at Fenway Park.

Severino was tagged for four runs in the first two innings, as Boston jumped out early and ultimately embarrassed its AL East rival later on.

The final: Red Sox 14, Yankees 1.

The gleeful chant from the home crowd as things unraveled for the Yanks in a nine-run sixth inning for the Sox: "Yankees Suck! Yankees Suck!"

If only there was a mercy rule.

"Just a crappy night all around," said first-year manager Aaron Boone, whose championship-or-bust team is off to 5-6 start.

The Sox, meanwhile, have won nine in a row to open up an early 4.5-game lead in the AL East.

And Giancarlo Stanton's swings and misses was supposedly the biggest concern in The Bronx.

The Bombers were dominated by Chris Sale, but that was nothing out of the ordinary.

On this night, their pitching needed to step up. It didn't.

Severino didn't have his wipeout slider — and was all over the place. When he was in the zone, he was getting tagged by the likes of Mookie Betts, Andrew Benintendi and Hanley Ramirez.

The Sox sure looked more potent offensively — with the addition of slugger J.D. Martinez helping their cause.

"I don't know if I was tipping or they saw something, but the game isn't the time to work on that," said Severino, who had looked dominant in his first two starts of 2018. "I need to go to the bullpen or maybe see video."

Aaron Boone wouldn't confirm if the team addressed pitch tipping with Severino on Tuesday night, but did say it's something they've spoken with him about in the past.

Last season, Twins hitters insinuated Severino was tipping his pitches during the AL wild-card game, when he imploded and recorded only one out.

But Severino isn't the only Yankee hurler with issues.

Tommy Kahnle's velocity was down, and he got shelled in the sixth, as his ERA rose to 7.11.

Kahnle, who was a dominant force down the stretch in 2017, left the mound barking at himself.

"I'm not worried," said Kahnle, who claims to be healthy. "I'm more trying to figure out why. I think it's mechanical. I've been kind of all over the place lately. So I'm just trying to find it."

The Bombers have already had to deal with injuries, bullpen meltdowns and games they gave away and lost in extra-innings.

With so many expectations, adversity has come quickly. In the sixth, they fell apart. The lowlights were Miguel Andujar's error and Chasen Shreve surrendering a grand slam to Betts, who had the best game of his career.

"It sucked," Austin Romine said.

Boone's message to his team at the time: "Fight. Grind. No excuses. No sulking."

"Just continue to fight the fight and know that looking around at each other eventually we'll get it rolling because of the guys in that room and the quality of players that we have," Boone said.

Stanton twice added to his MLB-leading strikeout total — which now stands at 22 — but he did drill a single and a double. And Aaron Judge had three hits — all of them off Sale, who he had been 0-for-12 with 10 strikeouts (two walks) no less — including a 444-foot solo shot.

So there was that. But not much else.

Gary Sanchez went 0-for-4 and his early-season funk has now reached 2-for-36.

Basically, the Yankees have a lot of problems right now.

All you can pretty much say about it is this: it's still early.