Sunny skies. High 93F. Winds SW at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies early. Scattered thunderstorms developing later at night. Low 67F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:56 pm

Matthew R. Paige, 27, of Mansfield, is sentenced to jail Wednesday in Attleboro District Court.

Matthew R. Paige, 27, of Mansfield, is sentenced to jail Wednesday in Attleboro District Court.

ATTLEBORO — A 27-year-old man was sentenced to jail Wednesday after pleading guilty in Attleboro District Court to a series of housebreaks in Mansfield.

Matthew R. Paige, 27, of 20 Copeland Drive, Apt. 2, was sentenced by Judge Daniel Dilorati to concurrent 2 ½-year jail terms, the maximum a district court judge can hand down.

Dilorati agreed to the recommendation, reached by lawyers for both sides, but also insisted that Paige be required to wear a GPS bracelet while he is on probation for two years after his release from jail.

“I want to know where Mr. Paige is when he’s out,” the judge said.

Paige, who is currently serving a jail term at the Norfolk County House of Corrections for a break-in in Stoughton, was also ordered to stay away from the victims in the case.

Paige was arrested in February after he was sent to Good Samaritan Hospital in Brockton for suspected drug intoxication after he was caught in Easton with items stolen in one of the four Mansfield break-ins, according to police.

The break-ins and one attempted break-in occurred between Dec. 18 and Dec. 29 on Warren Avenue, Bella Vista Avenue and Rumford Avenue.

The break-ins on Warren Avenue and Bella Vista Avenue and an attempted break-in on West Street are a short distance from his apartment.

Some jewelry, a pair of headphones and an iPad were recovered. Also recovered was a 1970 high school ring which the owner did not realize was even stolen, according to police.

Police say Paige had a criminal record of prior break-ins and was a known drug user.

Dilorati urged Paige to participate in program while in jail to deal with any drug and alcohol issues he may have.

“If you don’t,” DiLorati told Paige, “you’ll be doing life on the installment plan.”

David Linton may be reached at 508-236-0338.

MANSFIELD — A suspect has been arrested in connection with a series of housebreaks in a three-week period in December as well as similar crime…


                                    
                                        Whenever DAVE LINTON posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.
