
    
        
            By Ron  Zeitlinger


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

Two men were charged with shoplifting in separate incidents in Secaucus last week, town police said.

Dennys Narvaez, 29, of Newark, was charged with stealing more than $400 in video games from Walmart, located in the rear of the Harmon Meadow complex, on April 12, Secaucus police Capt. Dennis Miller said. Narvaez, who was arrested at the store at 7:33 p.m., was processed, issued a summons and released.

Two days later, police responded to Burlington Coat Factory on Hartz Way after it was reported that a man had shoplifted from the store and fled, Miller said. Police were given a description of the man's vehicle, and William Gerena, 30, of Jersey City, was arrested after a motor vehicle stop.  He was processed and transported to Hudson County jail.

Secaucus police also made multiple arrests last week of people wanted on outstanding warrants.

-- On April 9, a 30-year-old Union City man was was arrested for an outstanding warrant of $150 from Haledon in Passaic County after a motor vehicle stop. The man posted bail, was issued four motor vehicle summonses and then released.

-- Also on April 9, police were dispatched to Washington Township in Bergen County to take custody of a 31-year-old Newark man for an outstanding warrant of $500 from Secaucus.

-- On April 10, a 24-year-old Kearny woman pulled over on a traffic stop was arrested for an outstanding warrant from the Essex County Sheriff's Office. The woman was issued three summonses and then released to the custody of Essex County sheriff's officers.



-- Also on April 10, during a motor vehicle stop, a 32-year-old from Hoboken was arrested for an outstanding warrant in the amount of $99 from Hoboken. The man was issued three summonses.

-- On April 11, police responding to a public dispute at Red Lobster in the Harmon Meadow complex arrested a 23-year-old from Middlesex on two warrants, one for $1,000 from Bridgewater and another for $750 from North Brunswick.

-- On April 15, a 26-year-old Union City woman was pulled over by police for motor vehicle infractions and was arrested on an outstanding warrant for $300 from Closter.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        