


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Two Phoenix vigils highlighted the recent deaths of two migrants, one killed by a border patrol agent and the other died while in ICE custody.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Two Phoenix vigils highlighted the recent deaths of two migrants, one killed by border agents and the other died while in ICE custody.
    Nathan J. Fish, The Republic | azcentral.com

Two Phoenix vigils highlighted the recent deaths of two migrants, one killed by border agents and the other died while in ICE custody.
(Photo: Nathan Fish | The Republic)

A transgender woman from Honduras named Roxana Hernandez, 33, died May 25 at a detention center in New Mexico after traveling to the U.S. as part of a migrant caravan.


A teen from Guatemala, Claudia Gomez Gonzalez, 19, was shot by a U.S. Border Patrol agent in a south Texas town May 23 after crossing the border illegally.


Both women were remembered in vigils in Phoenix on Wednesday.


The vigils were held in front of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement headquarters and the Sandra Day O’ Connor Courthouse.


MORE: Transgender women in migrant caravan face new struggles seeking asylum.


About 50 people outside ICE offices near Central Avenue and McDowell Road paid tribute to Hernandez as a transgender woman, lighting candles and chanting their mantra, "Ni una mas muerte trans!" meaning "Not one more trans death!"


"I'm a transgender woman," said Karyna Jaramillo, a spokeswoman for Trans Queer Pueblo. "I feel really, really angry and sad. There are too many things going on in my head because I don't know what I can do, but I can come here and scream and show my voice." 


Two Phoenix vigils highlighted the recent deaths of two migrants, one killed by border agents and the other died while in ICE custody. (Photo: Nathan Fish | The Republic)

Jaramillo said she feels connected to Hernandez as she too was detained in an ICE facility after coming to the United States from Mexico in 1982. 


"I was there before and I felt exactly what she felt. I was put in the same rooms with the men," she said.


Puente Arizona, a migrant advocacy group, focused attention on the shooting of Gonzalez as more than 100 people gathered outside the courthouse on Washington and 4th Streets with flowers and solemn faces.  


"There's a lot of people that are heartbroken and there's a lot of mourning," said Mimi Salvador Lucero, a member of the Kichwa Nation, an indigenous people in Ecuador who attended the vigil. "This mourning is becoming more of an intergenerational trauma."


"We're here collectively to show that this death is not going to go ignored," Lucero said.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Hernandez was part of a caravan of Central American migrants that traveled to the U.S. border through Mexico. Hernandez presented herself to U.S. border officers at the San Ysidro port of entry in San Diego May 9, seeking asylum after traveling with the caravan more than 2,000 miles, according to Pueblo Sin Fronteras, the transnational group that organized the migrant caravan. 


ICE said Hernandez was being held in the transgender unit at the Cibola County Detention Center in Milan, New Mexico when she began suffering from complications related to HIV.


Hernandez was hospitalized at Cibola General Hospital and then airlifted to a hospital in Albuquerque, where she died, according to ICE.


MORE: Transgender woman from migrant caravan dies in ICE custody


Advocates say immigration authorities do not do a good job of protecting transgender migrants from abuses or providing them with medical care while in custody seeking asylum. They are fleeing persecution and violence in their home countries when they arrive in the U.S., advocates say.


Hernandez had entered the country illegally three times between 2005 and 2014, according to ICE. She was convicted of theft in 2006, convicted of prostitution in 2009 and convicted of illegal entry in 2014, ICE said.


Transgender migrants have told The Arizona Republic they face persecution in their home countries and are forced to work in the sexual servitude industry, or prostitution. 


Dominga Vicente touches her forehead during a press conference at the National Migrants Commission headquarters in Guatemala City, Friday, May 25, 2018. Vicente is asking for justice for her niece, 20 year-old Claudia Patricia Gomez Gonzalez, who was allegedly killed by an agent of the U.S. Border Patrol in Nuevo Laredo, Texas, on Wednesday. (AP Photo/Moises Castillo) (Photo: Moises Castillo, AP)

Gonzalez left Guatemala telling her mother that she was going to provide a better life for her family.


"Her dreams were met with a bullet," a release from Puente Arizona said. 


Along with a group of three other juveniles from Guatemala, Gonzalez made the journey to the U.S.


Gonzalez was shot and killed in Rio Bravo, Texas, a small town outside of Lorado, by a Border Patrol agent. 


The agency initially said the lone agent fired his gun after being attacked "by multiple subjects using blunt objects." Border Patrol later said that the group ignored the agent's demands to get on the ground and "rushed him."


The first statement describes Gonzalez as "one of the assailants," while the second calls her "one member of the group."


The incident is under investigation by U.S. Border Patrol.  


Dominga Vicente shows a photo of her niece, Claudia Patricia Gomez Gonzalez during a press conference at the National Migrants Commission headquarters in Guatemala City, Friday, May 25, 2018. (Photo: Moises Castillo, AP)

Dominga Vicente, an aunt of Claudia Patricia Gomez Gonzalez, said her niece migrated to escape poverty.


After graduating as a forensic accountant, Gonzalez was unable to attend college or find a job so she left Guatemala, Vicente said.


"Both of them (Gonzalez and Hernandez) are women who lost their lives because they came for asylum because they were looking for their freedom for a better life," said Francisca Porchas, a spokeswoman for Puentes Arizona. 


Hernandez is the sixth detainee to pass away in ICE custody since October 2017, according to ICE.


Porchas said that Gonzalez and Hernandez are not the first and they're not going to be the last to die trying to cross the border. 


"This is the way this country is treating people that are presenting themselves at their border, asking for asylum, asking to be free, asking for a better life," Porchas said. 


Republic reporter Daniel González and the Associated Press contributed to this story 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE: 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.