Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The May 1 Nashville election isn't just the transit referendum. Here's the other races at stake.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The May 1 local primary Metro election is headlined by Nashville Mayor Megan Barry's referendum on a $5.4 billion mass transit plan.
(Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The May 1 local primary Metro election is headlined by Nashville Mayor Megan Barry's referendum on a $5.4 billion mass transit plan. 


But there are also multiple judicial races at stake as well as open elections for Davidson County public defender, register of deeds and Juvenile Court clerk, all of which are led by incumbents opting against re-election. 


The deadline to qualify to run was Feb. 15. Candidates had an additional week, through noon Thursday, to remove their names from contention.


With that period now over, here are the candidates who will appear on the ballot. Early voting begins April 11.


Each candidate is running in the Democratic primary. No Republicans are running in any of the races, meaning each primary winner will be a shoo-in to win the general election in August.


Candidates: Martesha Johnson


Martesha Johnson (Photo: Submitted)

Breakdown: Martesha Johnson, an assistant at the Nashville Public Defender's Office, has a clear, uncontested path to be Nashville's next top public defender. In the race to replace Nashville Public Defender Dawn Deaner — who has held the office since 2008 — Johnson was the only candidate who submitted papers to qualify. After Deaner's October announcement that she won't seek another term, Johnson was quick to mount her campaign and gather support, including from Deaner. It paid off, clearing the field. Johnson would be the first African-American woman to hold the office.


►More: Martesha Johnson to run for Nashville Public Defender


Candidates: Richard Exton, Pam Murray, Councilwoman Karen Johnson


Richard Exton (Photo: Submitted)

Karen Johnson (Photo: Submitted)

Breakdown: After Register of Deeds Bill Garrett's decision to retire last year after two decades in office, a three-person race emerged between Antioch-area Councilwoman Karen Johnson, real estate appraiser Richard Exton and Kim LeGate, chief deputy of operations for the Register of Deeds Office. LeGate ended up passing on a run. But another third candidate has suddenly emerged: former East Nashville Councilwoman Pam Murray, who is perhaps best known for becoming the only elected official in Nashville history to be ousted in a recall election. That occurred in 2009.


Candidates: Jeff Crum, Lonnell Matthews Jr., Michael Joyner, Rep. Sherry Jones, Metro school board member Tyese Hunter


Breakdown: As expected, it's a crowded field vying to replace retiring Juvenile Court Clerk David Smith, who was first elected to the office in 2010. The top-tier candidates are mayor's office neighborhoods director Lonnell Matthews Jr., a former Metro councilman; as well as longtime Nashville state Rep. Sherry Jones; and Antioch-area Metro school board member Tyese Hunter. Jones, a state representative since 1994, hasn't decided whether she will file to qualify to run for the House next year. But she said she doesn't plan to stay in her state seat if she wins the Juvenile Court clerk primary in May. 


►More: Lonnell Matthews Jr. to run for Davidson Co. Juvenile Court clerk


►More: Nashville state Rep. Sherry Jones to run for Davidson County Juvenile Court clerk


Candidates: Daron Hall, Kenny Hardy


Breakdown: Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall, who has held that position for 16 years, is a virtual lock to win a fifth term against Kenny Hardy. Hall faced the same political unknown opponent in 2014, winning by an overwhelming margin of 80 percent to 19 percent.


Daron Hall (Photo: George Walker IV / File / The Tennessean)

Candidates: Brenda Wynn


Breakdown: Brenda Wynn, who has served as Davidson County clerk since 2012, is running unopposed in her second re-election for the seat after being appointed by the Metro Council to replace former clerk John Arriola.


Candidates: Howard Gentry, Steven Murff


Breakdown: Howard Gentry, who has served as Criminal Court clerk since 2011, is a heavy favorite to beat Steven Murff, former director of the Davidson County Specialty Courts. Gentry, former Nashville vice mayor and a onetime candidate for mayor, was appointed Criminal Court clerk by the council in 2011 to replace David Torrence and is now seeking his second election for the seat. Murff was among four others who unsuccessfully vied for the council appointment in 2011.


Howard Gentry (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

Candidates: Charlie Cardwell


Breakdown: Metro trustee since 1993, Charlie Cardwell has worked in Metro government for decades and is running unopposed for a seventh term in the office. 


Candidates: Richard Rooker


Breakdown: Richard Rooker, Davidson County Circuit Court clerk since 1993, is running unopposed.


Candidates: Anne Martin, Joy Sims, Scott Tift


Anne Martin (Photo: Anne Martin)

Breakdown: The campaign for Chancery Court judge got underway early. A big question was answered last week when Chancellor William "Bill" Young — a Republican judge appointed by Gov. Bill Haslam in 2016 to replace retired Chancellor Carol McCoy — announced he won't run for the seat and is instead returning to private practice. As a Republican running in heavily Democratic Davidson County, Young would have been an underdog in the general election in August. His decision leaves three Democrats seeking the seat: Anne Martin, an attorney at Bone McAllester Norton; Scott Tift, an attorney at Barrett Johnston Martin &amp; Garrison; and Joy Sims, the lone African-American candidate of the three who works out of her own law firm in East Nashville. 


Scott Tift (Photo: Courtesy of Scott Tift)

Candidates: Judge Angelita Blackshear Dalton, Joy Smith Kimbrough


Breakdown: Former Davidson County General Sessions Judge Angelita Blackshear Dalton was appointed by Haslam in November to replace Judge Randall Wyatt, who announced his retirement earlier last year. Dalton, judge of General Sessions Division III since 2006, faces an immediate election test just months after taking over the seat. She's being challenged by Joy Smith Kimbrough, a Nashville attorney who lost to Criminal Court Judge Steve Dozier in 2014.


Judge Angelita Blackshear Dalton (Photo: Jae S. Lee / The Tennessean)

Candidates: Judge Nick Leonardo, Ana Escobar, Newton S. Holiday III, Sheryl Guinn


Breakdown: In one of the most intriguing races of the election cycle, Judge Nick Leonardo will look to fend off Escobar, whom he beat in January to win the Metro Council's appointment to the seat, and two others. The judgeship opened when Dalton was appointed to Criminal Court. Leonardo, a sitting council member, was picked by the council over Escobar — an assistant prosecutor at the Davidson County District Attorney's Office — by a 21-16 vote, but he will now have to win the seat outright in May to continue serving past August. Other candidates are Newton S. Holiday III, a senior partner at Cain and Holiday LLP, who had initially applied for the council appointment, and Sheryl Guinn of the Law Office of Sheryl Guinn.


Nick Leonardo (Photo: Submitted)

Candidates: Judge Sam Coleman, Frank Mondelli Sr., Joyce Grimes Safley, Tillman Payne 


Breakdown: Coleman, a former Metro councilman, was appointed by the Metro Council in May to fill the unexpired term of former Judge Casey Moreland, who resigned amid federal corruption charges earlier in the year. He's facing challenges from three opponents, including Frank Mondelli Sr., a partner at Mondelli Law. Mondelli is the brother of General Sessions Judge Michael Mondelli. Other candidates are Joyce Grimes Safley, a former administrative judge who leads her own own practice, and Tillman Payne, who has a private practice in Nashville and Carthage. 


►More: Nashville Judge Sam Coleman draws 2 election challengers


Judge Sam Coleman (Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean)

Reach Joey Garrison at jgarrison@tennessean.com or 615-259-8236 and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 
