Intervals of clouds and sunshine. High 96F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

A few clouds overnight. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 8, 2018 @ 11:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) — Jimmy Tosh's sprawling hog farm in rural Tennessee is an unlikely battleground in the fight for control of the U.S. Senate. 

LAS VEGAS (AP) — These are highly uncertain times for the San Antonio Spurs. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

We celebrated our nation’s independence on Wednesday, but I wonder how many of us stopped to think about what it means to be an American. 

Gasoline prices are too high 

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

PHARR — The man found dead inside a home here Friday was identified Tuesday as 32-year-old Arnulfo Gaitan.


A suspect in Gaitan’s murder was arrested Friday night and remains in Hidalgo County jail on a $1.4 million bond.


According to the criminal complaint tied to the arrest of 29-year-old Gregory Alexander Ortega, Ortega and Gaitan were roommates. The victim’s family told investigators that Ortega “portrayed himself as a brother to the victim.”

It’s unknown when Gaitan died, and the criminal complaint indicates Ortega fatally shot him in the head at some point between March 28 and March 30. It noted that when “people would walk up to the house he would crack the front door slightly and when asked about the victim he would tell them that the victim was not at home and then closed the door.”


After Ortega was taken into custody, he waived his right to remain silent and “provided a statement of the accused implicating himself in shooting the victim causing murder,” the complaint states.


He told investigators that after the shooting he “got scared and hid the body and began to clean up evidence in the house.”

In addition to murder, Ortega faces evidence tampering, engaging in organized criminal activity and unlawful possession of a firearm charges. The gun used in the shooting belonged to the victim.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.