Nearly 100 immigrants flown in from San Diego on Wednesday are being housed at an upstate New York jail, and local authorities say it's an unprecedented number.

Albany County Sheriff Craig Apple was expecting up to 20 or 30 detainees as he waited for the federally chartered plane at Albany International Airport. But the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement landed with a staggering 99 migrants to be booked on unspecified “low-level charges.”

He believes most of them entered the country without legal permission.

“I don’t get too much information from the feds,” Apple said.

Albany County Sheriff Craig Apple says 99 immigrants from San Diego have arrived at the Albany County Jail. He says feds have told him they have all been charged with low level crimes. pic.twitter.com/FiacSI0xio

He booked 50 men and 49 women in the Albany County Correctional Facility, where another 40 migrants and 520 jailed U.S. citizens were in custody. The jail can hold 1,040 inmates.

“I’ve been housing immigrants for years, just not at this volume,” Apple said. “I’d rather take them because I know the good we can do as opposed to a tent in the desert.”

The jail is now scrambling to track down translators for the wide-range of immigrants, most of whom hail from China, Bangladesh and much of Central America.

The large influx of arrested immigrants — brought to the jail on two chartered buses — is not normal for Apple.

He said Homeland Security contacted the New York State Sheriffs’ Association in mid-June looking for jail beds and he answered the call.

The Albany County Sheriff’s Office stands to earn $16,541 daily for the 139 immigrants — $119 daily per inmate — being housed at the jail. It’s unclear how long the group is expected to stay as their cases proceed through the courts.

The sheriff said ICE told him none of the adults were members of families separated from their children at the U.S.-Mexico border.

Apple panned the federal crackdown and treatment of immigrants as “appalling” and hopes to give the inmates better access to medical care, phones and legal aid.

“We could have stuck our head in the sand and let them fly over Albany,” Apple said.

An ICE spokesman did not respond to requests for comment.