Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 9:54 pm

The Great Seal of the Commonwealth of Virginia in the basement of the state Capitol.

Surovell

Surovell

The Great Seal of the Commonwealth of Virginia in the basement of the state Capitol.

Fairfax lawmaker files bill to restore parole eligibility

RICHMOND — A Northern Virginia state senator has submitted a bill to change the state’s three-strikes law to restore parole eligibility in certain cases.

Sen. Scott A. Surovell, D-Fairfax, confirmed to The Virginian-Pilot that he submitted the proposed legislation Monday. The bill would amend a 1982 law that allowed offenders convicted of rape, robbery or murder to be deemed ineligible for parole if their three crimes were committed in a single string, even if they had not been to prison before.

The amendment would allow only those who had been out of prison between each of their three convictions to be deemed ineligible for parole.

As many as 260 people are currently in Virginia prisons under the 1982 law.

A new three-strikes law targets recidivists but does not apply to those who previously lost parole eligibility.

Teen accused of attacking officer wants to apologize

VIRGINIA BEACH — A teenager charged with attacking a police officer with a knife now wants to apologize to the law enforcer.

Riley Miller told a Virginia Beach judge that he wants to tell the injured officer he’s sorry, The Virginian-Pilot reported. The 17-year-old suspect made the comments at his first court appearance on charges of attempted capital murder and malicious wounding of an officer.

Police said the officer was treated and released from a hospital the same day he was allegedly stabbed by Miller.

Only the broadest outlines of the stabbing have been released. But the newspaper reports that “large splatters” of what appeared to be blood could be seen where officers responded to a domestic incident.

Miller was being held without bail at the Virginia Beach Juvenile Detention Center.

Jury pays fine it imposed after convicting woman

FAIRFAX — A Northern Virginia jury has chipped in to pay the fine of a maid it convicted of stealing three rings from a house she was cleaning.

Jury foreman Jeffery Memmott told The Washington Post that he gave 19-year-old mother of two Sandra Mendez Ortega $80 the jury collected after it convicted her of felony grand larceny. The trial was in July. Sentencing was Dec. 8 in a Fairfax County court.

The jury fined Mendez Ortega $60, her daily pay as a maid. Memmott said “the general sentiment was she was a victim, too,” and had made a youthful mistake.

The case began when Lisa Copeland discovered her rings, worth at least $5,000, missing in September 2016. Copeland said she was outraged and that she “didn’t think $60 equated to the crime at all.”

Revamped Va. Beach hotel plans to reopen in February

VIRGINIA BEACH — A historic Virginia hotel is preparing for its February grand opening after four years of repairs and restoration.

The Cavalier Hotel at the Virginia Beach Oceanfront, which originally opened in 1927, will feature 85 guest rooms, three restaurants, a spa and a distillery.

The Virginian-Pilot reported that a job fair will be held Tuesday for 225 hospitality positions.

— From wire reports

Surovell


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




