Partly cloudy. High 94F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear skies. Low 77F. ESE winds at 10 to 20 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


McALLEN — The owner of a Houston-based Chicago-style pizzeria may have played a role in drug trafficking and money laundering, according to an indictment unsealed last month. 

MINNEAPOLIS — When Bank of America Stadium opened in 1996, the Carolina Panthers didn’t imagine that fans would pay hundreds of dollars for a seat behind the player’s bench, with a blocked view of the field. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Gasoline prices are too high 

Emilio Zavala

Emilio Zavala

McALLEN — A Hidalgo County Sheriff’s deputy was arrested Saturday morning for alleged injury to a child, a state jail felony.


Emilio Zavala was arrested on a warrant issued by the McAllen Police Department, according to a statement Sheriff J.E. “Eddie” Guerra posted to Facebook.


Zavala was released later the same day on a $5,000 bond.

“I hold my employees to a high standard of public service and representation to this office, both on and off duty, which is why I am greatly concerned at the reported arrest of one of my deputies,” Guerra’s statement read.


Zavala, who joined the Hidalgo County Sheriff's Office in February 2017, has been placed on administrative leave pending further investigation of the incident, which Guerra said “is not related to his duties for the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office.”


“We will thoroughly investigate any and all allegations of employee malfeasance to maintain accountability and transparency to you the citizens we serve,” his statement read.

If found guilty, Zavala could face 180 days to two years in jail, in addition to a possible $10,000 fine.


msmith@themonitor.com



Emilio Zavala


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.