


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A look at some of the best high school boys basketball games around the state Tuesday night

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Nico Mannion and Phoenix Pinnacle High School take on Clark High during the AFI Hoophall West at Chaparral High School on Dec. 9, 2017 in Scottsdale, Ariz.
(Photo: Jennifer Stewart/USA TODAY Sports)

A look at Tuesday's boys basketball action across the state as teams get ready for the tournaments.


RELATED: AIA boys, girls state tournaments schedules


MORE: Girls basketball players of week: Jan. 22-27


Phoenix Pinnacle clinched the 6A Desert Valley Region championship with a 73-40 rout of Glendale Mountain Ridge, setting up its last two games against tougher competition that should get the Pioneers ready for the state tournament. Led by sophomore point guard Nico Mannion, Pinnacle plays at top-ranked (6A) Phoenix Brophy Prep on Friday night before what is expected to be an overflow crowd in one of the state's largest high school gymnasiums. Expect playoff-fevered-pitch basketball as Mannion, Trent Brown and Spencer Rattler try to disrupt the strong backcourt of Brophy's Ian Burke, Marques White and Jaxson Baker. On Tuesday, Pinnacle showed how unselfish it is spreading the scoring among Mannion (15 points), Rattler (13), Mason Johnson (10) and three others with eight each. The game is set for a 7 p.m. tip off.


RELATED: Brophy riding high with soccer, basketball teams


The 6A Conference is packed with sleepers, teams that could surprise at state, particularly Goodyear Millennium and Gilbert Perry. Both of those schools are more likely a year away from contending for a state championship, but their young players have really grown up over the course of the season.


Millennium clinched the Southwest Region title with a 67-58 win over Tolleson, winning its eighth game in a row to improve to 12-11. Freshmen Justus Jackson and Coleman Fields both had 17 points against Tolleson. DaRon Holmes, another freshman who is already 6-foot-8, has been a double-double machine for the Tigers.


Millennium Boys Basketball clinched the 6A Southwest Region Title tonight with a win over Tolleson. The Tigers are currently on a 9 game win streak and 8-0 in Region. @GreggRosenberg1@azc_obert@AZPreps365@TyAmundsenpic.twitter.com/8uUxtTHaa5

Meanwhile, don't be misled by Perry's 13-12 record. Coach Sam Duane Jr., knows what he's doing. Remember, he's the guy who led Tempe Corona del Sol to four consecutive 6A state championships, before taking a year off. He is re-energized, and Perry is coming off a 65-46 rout of a Chandler team that twice this season took No. 1 Brophy into overtime.


Jok Jok is the talk of the block at Phoenix Moon Valley. The 6-foot-7 senior had another double-double (20 points, 11 rebounds) in a 57-54 win over Peoria that clinched the 4A West Valley Region championship for the Rockets. On Thursday, Moon Valley plays host to Phoenix Greenway as the Rockets honor their 1997-98 team that was led by Player of the Year Richard Jefferson, who, 20 years later, is still playing in the NBA. Greenway was Moon Valley's biggest nemesis that season as Jefferson vs. big man Chad Prewitt was the go-to showdown every time they faced off. Moon Valley is having one of its best seasons (20 wins) since then. John Boie, Moon Valley's coach in '98, will be honored at halftime, along with players from that team. Jefferson isn't able to make it because he has a game with the Denver Nuggets.


RELATED: Boys high school basketball Super 10 rankings


The 2A East is a beast and Morenci joined this brutal mix of teams not giving up an inch to each other after dispatching of Thatcher, 59-44. Morenci moves into second place in the East, behind Pima, which earlier this year beat Scottsdale Christian. Morenci has a good inside game that is going to make it difficult for teams in 2A. Junior center John Olmsted had 22 points and 15 rebounds and Diego Mendoza, a freshman point guard, had 13 points, nine rebounds and five assists.


Tempe McClintock has what coach Sam Dentz believes his most complete team. The Chargers had no emotional hangover from a last-second win over defending 5A champion Phoenix Sunnyslope in a 76-50 rout of Maricopa on Tuesday. Maricopa also beat Sunnyslope in the final second this season. On Tuesday, once again, McClintock  was led by guard Josh Baker's 20 points. He was among five players who scored in double figures. "Guys are buying in and we are starting to roll," Dentz said. "Most encouraging is the fact that our key players are sophomores and juniors. We will be returning 90 percent of our scoring next season."


- Phoenix Horizon (16-6) is enjoying its best season in the Jerry Conner four-year coaching era. It won its seventh game in a row, beating Anthem Boulder Creek 85-67. The Huskies have risen to No. 8 in the 6A power rankings and have three more games, all at home, against Mesa Skyline, Chandler Hamilton and Pinnacle, before the playoffs start.


- Gilbert Williams Field secured its region title in 5A with a 56-48 win over Queen Creek, as Duane Tate had 17 points and Nick Cupp-Allen 16.


- Peoria Liberty got eight 3-pointers and 26 points from Connor Ray and beat Phoenix Sierra Linda 88-54. Next Tuesday's game against Peoria Centennial will be for a region championship in 5A.


- Phoenix Mountain Pointe had no trouble beating Mesa Desert Ridge 83-53, as the Pride went on a 26-5 third-quarter run. All 11 players scored for the Pride, which was led by sophomore DeAndre Henry's 18 points and 14 rebounds.


- Top-ranked (Super 10, 4A) Phoenix Shadow Mountain beat Scottsdale Saguaro 78-45 with Antonio Reeves nailing three 3s in a row to open the game and scoring 21 first-half points.


- Glendale Ironwood defeated Glendale Raymond S. Kellis 69-28, as Dominic Gonzalez had 15 points, Ajang Aguek 12 points, 10 rebounds, and Tyrese Eugene 10 points, nine assist and five steals. Eugene is 12 steals away from breaking the school's season record. Ironwood also turned in this ferocious alley-oop:



    Glendale Ironwood boys basketball alley-oop: Tyrese Eugene tosses one of the backboard to teammate Ajang Aguek during a 67-58 win over Tolleson.
    

- Buckeye Youngker picked up some big power points with a 41-40 4A win over Flagstaff Coconino, as Randy Bernal preserved it with a blocked shot in the final second. It was one of three blocks on the night for Bernal.


- San Carlos captured the 2A South title with a 53-49 win over Tucson St. Augustine. Aloysius had 20 points and 12 rebounds, and Michael Antonio had 18 points, making six of nine 3-pointers.


- Globe, led by junior guard Robert Burries Jr.'s 29 points, beat rival Florence 70-62 in a 3A game.


- Mesa rolled past Mesa Dobson 74-49, behind seniors Mark Hatch (18 points) and Xavier Fuller (17 points, eight rebounds). Zach Hobbs had 15 points.


- Mesa Red Mountain, coming off an upset of Mesa, beat Mesa Skyline 76-39, as Andre Harris had 21 points, seven rebounds and five assists; and Timmy Allen added three monster dunks in his 16-points, nine-rebounds, four-assists performance.


To suggest human-interest story ideas and other news, reach Obert at richard.obert@arizonarepublic.com or 602-316-8827. Follow him at twitter.com/azc_obert.


LIVE EVENT: azcentral Sports Awards is set for June 10


NOMINATE: Girls and Boys Soccer Players of the Year


CAUGHT ON TAPE: Share your favorite high school sports video highlight


I AM SPORT: Tell us about a high school student athlete committed to giving back to the youth in their community
