Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

A rehabilitated peregrine falcon is released into the wild Wednesday morning near Palo Alto national Historic Battlefield in Brownsville.

A white-tailed kite is released into the wild Wednesday morning in Brownsville by Gladys Porter Zoo Senior Veterinarian Thomas W. DeMaar.

A rehabilitated peregrine falcon is released into the wild Wednesday morning near Palo Alto national Historic Battlefield in Brownsville.

A white-tailed kite is released into the wild Wednesday morning in Brownsville by Gladys Porter Zoo Senior Veterinarian Thomas W. DeMaar.

After being cared for and rehabilitated by the Gladys Porter Zoo veterinary staff since late August, a peregrine falcon and a white-tailed kite were released Wednesday back into the wild at the intersection of Old Port Isabel Road and Highway 550.


The falcon was injured at the beach on South Padre Island and was transported to the zoo by U.S. Fish &amp; Wildlife on Aug.30, and has been under care for almost a month and a half, officials said.

During its stay at the zoo, the falcon was recovering from a broken leg bone.


Gladys Porter Zoo Senior Veterinarian Thomas DeMaar said the white-tailed kite was found in Brownsville, and it was a little slow in feeding itself. The veterinary staff had been taking care of the white-tailed kite since July.

“So what we did is feed it and give it a little extra time to grow up,” DeMaar said. “It may have been separated from its parents a little bit young and it wasn’t injured but was unable to fly.”


The falcon and the white-tailed kite were released in open land because they like to hover over the fields and dive in to catch their prey.


kcontreras@brownsvilleherald.com

