
    
        
            By Anthony G. Attrino

tattrino@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Three restaurant workers are accused of sexually assaulting a woman who was incapacitated and physically helpless after drinking a large amount of alcohol, authorities said.

Rene Jimenez, 29, Luis Tenecela, 20, and Emeterio Castelan, 35, all of East Rutherford, are charged in an attack on the woman Feb. 5 in East Rutherford, according to Bergen County Prosecutor Dennis Calo.

"After she consumed a large amount of alcohol to the point that she was asleep (the defendants) knew or should have known (she) was physically helpless, mentally defective or mentally incapacitated," according to the criminal complaints.

N.J. diner employee carjacked while leaving restaurant

The woman called 911 after the assault and local police called investigators with the county Special Victims Unit, Calo said.

The alleged assault occurred in a Park Avenue apartment shared by two of the men, Calo said.

Jimenez, Tenecela and Castelan are each charged with aggravated sexual assault of a person while aided by a co-defendant, aggravated sexual assault of a person who is physically helpless or mentally incapacitated and aggravated criminal sexual contact of a person who is physically helpless.

The three were held without bond Wednesday in the Bergen County Jail.

The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has placed detainers on Jimenez and Castelan, who are both citizens of Mexico, according to jail records.

Anthony G. Attrino may be reached at tattrino@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TonyAttrino. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        