Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Living
					

By Laura Elvin, SWNS


		
		
		
		
	


									March 15, 2018 | 4:22pm
											| Updated March 15, 2018 | 7:20pm
												

These incredible photos show the transformation of a little girl whose bowed legs were twisted completely backward.

Justine, 11, suffered from a growth disorder that left her feet facing 180 degrees in the wrong direction.

Her condition did not stop her skipping, playing soccer and climbing trees — but meant her 2-and-a-half-mile walk home from school took her hours.

Surgeons from the charity Mercy Ships cut the bones in each leg, untwisted her limbs and set them back in place with plaster casts.

Five months later, she proudly walked down the gangway of a hospital boat all by herself and can now go to school and play the same as all her classmates.

The smiling schoolgirl, from Yaounde in Cameroon, said: “There’s nothing I can’t do now.”

Justine was born with Blounts disease — a growth disorder of the shin bone which causes the lower leg to angle inward.

It is understood her severe case got worse as she grew older until her feet were facing completely the wrong way.

She was carried up the gangway of Mercy Ships by nurses in September 2017, hoping to get treatment.

The charity uses hospital ships to deliver free, world-class health care services to less-developed parts of the world, and this trip was Canadian-funded.

A spokesperson for the charity said: “Justine was the first patient up the gangway at the start of Mercy Ships field service in Cameroon.”

“Her favorite hobbies are running, playing jump rope, playing soccer, hide and seek, climbing trees — all very physical, hands-on activities — she didn’t let her severe limitations hold her back from them.

“But Justine had to have special transportation arranged for her to be able to go to school, and on the days it fell through, she had to walk two and a half miles to school and back by herself which took a very long time.”

“Kids were often mean to her; would tease her and run because they knew she couldn’t chase them.”

Justine was on the ship for surgery, and pre-op and post-op care, and also stayed at the off-ship Hospital Out Patient Extension Center.

Five months after her first surgery, Justine took her last steps down the gangway in February and returned home completely transformed.

Orthopedic surgeon Dr. Frank Hayon said: “Justine had an extreme case of Blount’s disease with angular and rotational deformities of both legs rotating her feet 180 degrees or essentially backward.

“To correct the deformity required us to do osteotomies or cut the bones in each leg and untwist her legs.

“She was held in long leg walking cast until the bones were healed.

“Once out of cast she worked with the rehab team prior to discharge.”

Mercy Ships was founded in 1978 and has worked in more than 70 countries.


			Read Next
		


			
				Inside the impressive repair shop at the Paralympic Games			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Inside the impressive repair shop at the Paralympic Games			
		

Share Selection

143,318

90,955

52,942

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters