Inmates got a chance Tuesday to question a half-dozen candidates vying to be the next Suffolk District Attorney during a wide-ranging forum that touched on bail, court fees and medical marijuana in lock-up, in what’s thought to be the first-ever jailhouse event of its kind.


Few moments of the two-hour event at South Bay House of Corrections unearthed disagreements between the candidates who largely back the state’s latest round of criminal justice reform. 
  


Responding to a question from inmate Chante Graham about prosecutors pressuring defendants to take plea bargains, state Rep. Evandro Carvalho, a Democrat, said the system is designed to get people in jail.


“The reality is the criminal justice system and law enforcement community as a whole for past three to four decades have been about locking people up,” Carvalho said.


The forum included four other Democrats — Linda Champion, Greg Henning, Shannon McAuliffe, and Rachael Rollins — and independent Michael Maloney.


The six candidates fielded questions from the inmates and the moderator about voting restrictions for incarcerated people, plea bargains, juvenile records, re-entry programs, deportation, police accountability, alternative addiction treatments, high bails, court fees, and combating opioid epidemic.


Inmate Tyquannya Tyson asked whether undocumented immigrants convicted of non-violent offenses should be deported. 


“No,” said McAuliffe, a veteran defense lawyer. “What we need to do is have (assistant district attorneys) who are going to take into consideration what consequences are of a conviction and make sure there is no unintended horrific consequence.”


Rollins, a former state and federal prosecutor who also worked as legal chief at the MBTA and MassDOT, said she’d file an injunction if federal immigration officials come to Suffolk County courthouses.


Maloney, a defense attorney and entrepreneur, disagreed, saying the job of the district attorney is to “protect the people the county, and it’s not the job of prosecutors to entertain or consider the immigration consequences they may face on the back end.”


All but candidate Greg Henning, a longtime prosecutor in the Suffolk DA’s office, agreed jails like South Bay should offer medical marijuana for inmates as a possible opioid addiction treatment or to manage other issues.


“In situations like this where the difficulties people face in correctional facilities with introducing something that can be traded or sold … isn’t a good idea,” Henning said.


Others backed the idea, including Carvalho, Rollins, McAuliffe, Maloney and Champion.


Carol Rose of ACLU Massachusetts, which put on the event with the Suffolk County Sheriff’s office, said hearing from inmates is critical to a debate about criminal justice.


“It’s really important to raise the voices of people incarcerated,” Rose said. “They have the lived experience of the power prosecutors have.”