
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A Jersey City man wouldn't budge when police were breaking up a crowd blocking the sidewalk and was later arrested on marijuana charges.

The 18-year-old resident of Irene Carson Court should have gone while the going was good but instead, he was charged with possession of two bags of marijuana on Tuesday around 3 p.m., according to a criminal complaint.

Officers on patrol saw about seven people at the intersection of at Old Bergen Road and Neptune Avenue blocking pedestrian traffic in front of a convenience store and told them to disperse. The 18-year-old and two others refused, the court document states.

The cops patted him down for weapons and found one medium sized bag of suspected marijuana in his pocket and a smaller one. Rather than moving along like most of the others, he was charged with drug possession, handcuffed and taken away, the complaint says.

He was also charged with possession with intent to distribute within 1,000 feet of a school zone and within 500 feet of public property, according to the complaint.

He made his first appearance on the charges Wednesday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution. A detention hearing is set for Monday before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        