


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

U.S. Customs and Border Protection is working to recruit new hires as understaffed ports of entry are driving up costs of produce and grocery imports.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Workers at the Valencia International warehouse in Nogales, Arizona, unload a truckload of tomatoes from Mexico on Jan. 16, 2018. Millions of pounds of produce cross into the country through Nogales during the winter time to supply markets across the United States.
(Photo: Rafael Carranza/The Republic)

NOGALES — Workers in black fleece and bright orange vests zip around on forklifts, maneuvering pallets of fruit and vegetables stacked inside a frigid, 90,000-square-foot warehouse.


It's peak winter produce season and truckloads arrive from Mexico daily at J.C. Distributing. From here, they'll head to supermarkets across the country.


Company President and Owner Jaime Chamberlain says even though his business has continued to grow over the past 30 years, he's hit limits on how much he can import.


The reason? For years, the international ports of entry in Nogales, where Chamberlain's produce enters the U.S., and others along Arizona's border with Mexico have been chronically understaffed.


"My expectation is that the federal government keeps up with the growth of business, the way we have. And unfortunately they haven’t done it," he said. "Our port of entry right now is working as best as it can with what they have. Is that adequate? Not really. We expect more; we should expect more."


With U.S.-Mexico trade in the spotlight, as the longtime economic partners are renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement, one trade barrier that can cost businesses and consumers on both sides of the border has gotten far less attention: understaffed ports of entry.


There are over 1,100 unfilled customs officer positions nationwide, according to U.S. Customs and Border Protection. Several hundred of those vacancies are in Arizona.


MORE: Border agents, officers dealing with 'dangerously low' morale


Businesses like Chamberlain's bear the brunt of the situation.Too few customs officers means longer waits at the border, leading to higher shipping costs. Those costs can ultimately show up in the prices Arizona consumers pay at the store, experts said.


The federal agency is trying to address the staffing shortages at Arizona's six border crossings.


"The focus in Arizona is specific because ... we have a greater number of vacancies in the state of Arizona than compared to Texas and California," John Wagner told The Arizona Republic. He is CBP's deputy executive assistant commissioner for the Office of Field Operations, the agency that staffs ports of entry.


As part of the effort, CBP will shift from recruiting locally to nationwide. Recruiters across the country will focus first on filling Arizona vacancies.


The agency brought more than 30 CBP recruiters to southern Arizona in mid-January to craft strategies to better sell the state to potential recruits.


U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers check on the trucks that bring produce imported from Mexico to the Mariposa Port of Entry in Nogales, Arizona, on Aug. 9, 2017. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

A group of about 30 recruiters, including from as far away as Puerto Rico, gathered in a Tucson hotel conference room. They were to spend a week here. Nearly two-thirds said they had never visited southern Arizona.


"What is the perception that you've heard of Arizona?" Felipe Garcia, the director of tourism group Visit Tucson, asked them.


"It's dangerous because of its proximity to Mexico," one recruiter said.


MORE: Assaults against border agents surge despite decline in illegal immigration


"It's isolated," another added. "There are small towns, not a lot of infrastructure."


Garcia, with representatives from border counties, spent 90 minutes answering questions about quality of life, amenities, and other issues that might help recruiters pitch the state. They also tried to dispel perceptions that southern Arizona is unsafe and overrun with crime.


The push to prioritize hiring at Arizona's ports began several months ago, as a result of meetings Sen. Jeff Flake organized with CBP and local government and business leaders in southern Arizona.


In Nogales, by far the state's busiest land port of entry, pedestrian crossings are down by nearly half over the past 10 years, chased away by strengthened enforcement and growing wait times. But passenger and commercial traffic is on the rise, according to statistics from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics.


Flake praised CBP for taking steps to address staffing shortages and the impact on trade and residents.


“I’m pleased to see CBP following through on the commonsense policy changes that I secured last summer," he said in a statement. "Changes that should go a long way toward boosting manpower at Arizona’s strained ports and putting more boots on the border.”


“As the government, I would like to see them analyze all of their investments and say ... our best investment quickly is to staff our ports of entry correctly.”


For locals like Guillermo Valencia, the efforts could not come at a better time. He heads the Santa Cruz County Port Authority, which advocates for development along Nogales' three international land crossings.


"Customs is doing a tremendous job with the staff that they have," Valencia said. "They’re overworked, they’re overstressed. But they’re doing a tremendous job in protecting us, keeping our border secure and also processing cargo."


MORE: Aid workers who leave water for border crossers banned in Arizona


But hiring more customs officers would significantly aid the local and national economy, he said.


He cited a 2013 study by the University of Southern California's National Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events, which showed hiring one customs officer at the Mariposa commercial crossing would generate an additional $2.3 million for the local economy and $2 million for the rest of the United States.


"Imagine what we could do for businesses if we had more inspectors," Valencia said. "Anytime you stop cargo, or you slow cargo down, or you make them wait in line, it’s costing somebody money."


Chamberlain, who attended the meetings between Flake and CBP, said it's a matter of having the federal government work with the private sector to keep up with growth.


"It only makes sense to me to analyze your best return on your investment. I do that as a business," he said. "And as the government, I would like to see them analyze all of their investments and say ... our best investment quickly is to staff our ports of entry correctly."


U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers check on mangoes imported from Mexico at the Mariposa Port of Entry in Nogales, Arizona, on Aug. 9, 2017. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

CBP said its efforts to recruit to Arizonawill take some time to show results.


Some recruiters acknowledged certain locations in the state will be a tougher sell than others, especially smaller, more remote ports of entry.


"My thought is Lukeville; that's gonna be my hardest sell," said Eric Laroche, a recruiter from Miami. The port of entry, across from Sonoyta, Sonora, and within the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, is the only crossing not located in an Arizona city or town.


Laroche wanted to know where officers live and what their life is like.


THE WALL:  2,000-mile journey in shadow of border wall | A wall won't stop border crossers | No fence has stopped drug traffickers


CBP officials said staffing remote locations has always been a challenge, not exclusive to Arizona. To boost the number of applicants, the agency has offered incentives for "mission critical locations," places with the greatest need — essentially all of Arizona's ports.


Those incentives include a 25 percent increase in starting salary for the first three years, according to job postings. That comes out to approximately $41,700. On top of that, officers are eligible for up to $45,000 in additional overtime pay.


Wagner said selling the job is also “defining what makes CBP unique, and then tailoring that down to the local level. What will you experience at a place like Lukeville?”


To address the shortage, CBP recently began sending customs officers assigned to airports and other locations in the interior of the country to ports along the U.S.-Mexico border, for months at a time.


But the practice has raised concern about safety at the locations where the officers were originally assigned.


Wagner said it's only a temporary fix.


"These are not long-term strategies to address the workload and the nature of those enforcement threats coming through those ports," he said. "We want to fill these with permanent staff."


“There’s a lot of responsibility that we place on a CBP officer," he said. "We need a process that is getting us the best people.”


The Office of Field Operations has faced many of the same hiring problems as its sister agency, the U.S. Border Patrol, which has 1,900 vacancies.


STUDY: Border Patrol agents far more likely to be fired than other agencies


And like Border Patrol, OFO also has had a high rate of applicants turned away because of a failed polygraph exam.


Arizona's congressional delegation has pushed for legislation to reduce processing times and facilitate hiring at the border, including waiving the polygraph test in some cases.


In 2015, President Barack Obama signed into law a bill U.S. Rep. Martha McSally authored that instructed CBP to expedite the hiring of veterans concluding their military service.


Last year, the House passed a bill McSally drafted to waive the polygraph exam for certain applicants with military and law-enforcement experience. However, a Flake companion bill in the Senate has languished after committee approval over the summer.


Wagner said CBP is looking for ways to reduce processing times, including how they administer the polygraph test, and streamlining the application process. But in the meantime, they will be "sufficiently strict" as they fill vacancies in Arizona, he said.


"There’s a lot of responsibility that we place on a CBP officer," he said. "We need a process that is getting us the best people."


READ MORE:


Timing of Border Patrol's arrest of ASU instructor called 'suspicious'


Border Patrol accused of vandalizing water aid stations in the desert


‘Mass disaster’ grows at the U.S.-Mexico border, but Washington doesn’t seem to care


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
