Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSION — The city council approved an amendment to its nepotism policy that will allow council members’ relatives to serve on advisory committees, a practice that has been ongoing in the city for years. 

BOSTON (AP) — J.D. Martinez hit his major league-leading 28th home run, Steve Pearce added a two-run shot and Eduardo Rodriguez pitched 5 2/3 innings on Monday night to lead the Boston Red Sox to a 5-0 victory over the Texas Rangers and their seventh straight win. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Motorists fill their tanks with gas at an Exxon on the corner of Pecan Avenue and Bicentennial Boulevard on Monday, May 21, 2018 in McAllen.

Gloria Gabriel walks with her attorney Brian Berryman following a news conference about her alleged misdiagnosis by Dr. Jorge Zamora-Quezada Monday, May 21, 2018, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. Zamora-Quezada was recently indicted on charges relating to health care fraud and money laundering.

Runoffs to be decided today in Hidalgo and Starr counties


The March primary runoff is set for today, and there are two races in Hidalgo County and two in Starr County on the ballots.

Lita Leo and David Salazar Jr. are vying to become Hidalgo County treasurer, while incumbent Homer Jasso Sr. and Armando M. Guerra are in a contentious race for Justice of the Peace Precinct 4 Place 2.


Motorists fill their tanks with gas at an Exxon on the corner of Pecan Avenue and Bicentennial Boulevard on Monday, May 21, 2018 in McAllen.

McAllen police investigating credit card skimming scheme


Two Cuban nationals were arrested late last month for allegedly stealing thousands of dollars from McAllen residents by planting credit card skimming devices inside gas pumps across the city.


Yuvann Luis Noa, 34, was arrested April 26 and faces 26 counts of credit card or debit card abuse, according to Hidalgo County jail records.


Gloria Gabriel walks with her attorney Brian Berryman following a news conference about her alleged misdiagnosis by Dr. Jorge Zamora-Quezada Monday, May 21, 2018, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. Zamora-Quezada was recently indicted on charges relating to health care fraud and money laundering.

San Antonio women accuse local doctor facing fraud charges of false diagnosis

Her health deteriorating, Gloria Gabriel said she required the help of her mother and even her children to hold her upright.


Gabriel said she was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis and lupus, among other diseases in 2012, but that it was the treatment for those ailments that had caused her physical damage.


Lawsuit: Outlet mall kiosk owners paid workers below minimum wage


A former outlet mall kiosk worker filed a lawsuit last week alleging four retail stand owners paid her and other workers below minimum wage, withheld overtime pay and deducted money from their paychecks for unmet sales goals or missing merchandise.


Daniela Moreno, who also sued on behalf of other workers, was employed at independently owned kiosks located at the Rio Grande Valley Premium Outlets in Mercedes.

