Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Paramedics and medical staff transported 44 festival-goers to area hospitals, including three who were taken by helicopter.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

A man carries a woman over a flooded area as they enter the Centeroo area after the second rainstorm at the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival in Manchester, Tenn., on June 10, 2018
(Photo: Brianna Paciorka / knoxnews.com)

MANCHESTER - The number of medical transport calls at at this year's Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival is up from 2017, the year that marked the lowest in the festival's 17-year history, officials said Tuesday.


Paramedics and medical staff transported 44 festival-goers to area hospitals, including three who were taken by helicopter during the four-day event, said Coffee County EMS deputy Chief Paul Tibbs.


More: 1 of 4 Bonnaroo paramedics who suffered carbon monoxide poisoning released from hospital


"They were for a smorgasbord board of this, that and the other," Tibbs said, adding many of the calls were for a variety of issues including heat exhaustion, significant cuts and chest pains.


Hannah Shipley, Charlotte, runs through the fountain to cool off at the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival in Manchester, Tenn., on June 10, 2018 (Photo: Tom Stanford / Tennessean.com)

Temperatures topped out in the mid 90s during this year's festival, and the heat index reached the high 90s nearly every day.


Last year transported 30 festival-goers to area hospitals, including four who were taken by helicopter.


Authorities said the yearly average is about 50 transports, but in some prior years medical workers have transported an excess of 100.


Among those transported this year, are four Bonnaroo paramedics hospitalized for possible carbon monoxide poisoning on Monday.


Coffee County Sheriff's Office spokesman Lucky Knott said the medical workers were using a generator to power the RV they were staying in. One of the paramedics woke up and was able to get help.


Two transports this year took place on June 3 and June 5, while workers were setting the festival up, Tibbs said. One was heat related, and the other was for a minor to moderate unspecified injury.


Officials reported one fatality this year. The death marked the 13th death on festival grounds since Bonnaroo began in 2002, authorities said, and was the only known fatality that took place during the festival.


On Friday, the second day of the festival - first-responders found 32-year-old Mount Juliet, Tenn. resident Michael Donivan Craddock, Jr. dead in his vehicle.


Coffee County Sheriff Steve Graves said foul play is not suspected in Craddock's death and that an autopsy will determine his exact cause of death.


More: Authorities ID Mount Juliet man who died at Bonnaroo


The last death at Bonnaroo took place in June 2015 after a 47-year-old man died after collapsing in the event's main area — known as Centeroo. His death stemmed from a pre-existing cardiac issue, authorities at the time said.


A year later, on June 11, 2016, festival attendee Casey J. Young, 22, of Louisville, was struck and killed by multiple vehicles outside the festival grounds on Interstate 24.


According to a Davidson County autopsy report, his manner of death was accidental and his cause of death was from multiple blunt force injuries. No drugs or alcohol were found in his system at the time of his death, a toxicology report found.


Reach Natalie Neysa Alund at nalund@tennessean.com and follow her on Twitter @nataliealund.



    Music fans fill up pools to stay cool in their  campgrounds at Bonnaroo
    Shelley Mays, smays@tennessean.com

 
