


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Two immigrants are demanding investigations into their complaints be reopened and that the Texas facility be audited for compliance with federal law.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The roughly 77,000 square-foot warehouse-like processing center in McAllen, Texas is the first stop for those detained by agents in the Rio Grande Valley Sector. On Sunday, June 17, 2018, more than 500 families and 197 unaccompanied minors were being housed there.
    Beatriz Alvarado/Caller-Times

A man checks a bag with his belongings after released by U.S. Immigration officials on Thursday, May 7, 2018, at the Catholic Charities Rio Grande Valley refugee center in McAllen, Texas.
(Photo: Casey Jackson/Caller-Times)Buy Photo

AUSTIN – Two women are demanding investigations into their  allegations of sexual abuse at an  immigration detention center be reopened  and that the facility be audited for compliance with federal law.


The women, whose cases are being handled by the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund, said they were sexually abused beginning more than a year ago by staff members at the women's only T. Don Hutto Residential Center in Talyor, a rural community northeast of Austin.


After the complaints were lodged, local law enforcement and the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement found the claim unsubstantiated. However, U.S. Reps. Lloyd Doggett, D-Austin, and Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio, and more  members of Congress have asked for an audit of the facility.


“It is unconscionable that those fleeing abuse abroad may be subject to abuse while in government custody," Doggett said Monday, adding "more audit work remains to ensure compliance with the law.”


Reps. Doggett and Castro


One of the woman who complained, asylum seeker Laura Monterrosa-Flores from El Salvador, has gone public with her allegations. The other woman has not so her identity is not being published.


More: Two military bases are preparing to house immigrants at temporary shelters, Pentagon says


According to a letter sent Monday by MALDEF to Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen and other federal authorities  the women said they were abused by female staff members and that federal authorities failed to protect the people in custody at the 500-bed facility.


"DHS failed to take action that could have prevented the sexual abuse of MALDEF’s clients and continues to leave other detainees vulnerable at the Hutto detention center by refusing to provide proper oversight and supervision of detention center staff," the letter said.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The demands from the detainees come amid heightened public awareness of conditions at immigration detention centers as the Trump administration pursues its "zero-tolerance" policy toward people who enter the United States without legal permission.


Monterrosa-Flores was released from the center in March but has not publicized her whereabouts. She reported being subjected to physical and emotional abuse.


Abuse allegations have surfaced in the past against staff members at the Hutto center.


In 2012, a federal judge in Austin sentenced Donald Dunn, a former residential supervisor when the facility was called the T. Don Hutto Correction Center, to a year in prison after he was accused of groping women while pretending to do searches.


John C. Moritz covers Texas government and politics for the USA Today Network in Austin. Contact him at John.Moritz@caller.com and follow him on Twitter @JohnnieMo.


More: John Cornyn, Ted Cruz say visit to immigrant children's detention center was emotional


More: Plan to reunite immigrant families questioned by attorneys, advocates in Texas


More: How to help children separated from parents through 'zero tolerance' immigration policy


Maldef Letter: Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) Complaints involving Texas Residential Center by callertimes on Scribd


 
