Advertisement

Supported by

The Walking Dead


By Charles Bramesco

Although some critics refer to it as the “Disney Death,” that old trick of seemingly killing off characters only to revive them hastily will soon be more closely associated with “The Walking Dead” if things keep on at the current rate. Last week’s installment did not include a title card emblazoned with the words “Now, Henry is dead,” but it did show young Henry getting trampled, characters looking for him and a somber aerial shot of a graveyard. All signs indicated that the boy had passed on to the next life, but this week’s episode had other plans.


Henry is not nearly as dead as we had been led to believe, found stuck in a zombie bog by Carol near this week’s close. She retrieves him, they embrace, Morgan’s disturbing hallucinations finally subside, and even Ezekiel finds his spirits lifted upon the boy’s return. It is supposed to be a celebratory moment, a rush of relief that it’s not too late to preserve this show’s last embodiment of innocence. (Never mind that Henry was in murderous spirits when he was last seen. His life-or-death encounter seems to have scared the nihilism out of him.)


In practice, however, Henry’s non-death feels like yet another yanked-away football that the viewers were naïve enough to run after.


At this late juncture of the season, this particular criticism has aged into an old refrain, but if the show insists on repeating this gaffe, so be it: Using death as a ploy to put other characters through a hardship and then reversing that death to tidily resolve it is at best easy writing, and at worst manipulative. If the ultimate objective in this episode was to return hope to Morgan, Carol and Ezekiel, the more satisfying route would have been to force these characters to accept the difficult realization that the only way to honor the dead is to continue living. By erasing the shadow of Henry’s death, the writers provide all three characters with an instant escape hatch from their own emotions.

For Morgan, the comfort extends beyond the limits of the now — he mentions his deceased son to Rick during their entrapment to cue up the deeper release when Henry returns, as if he’s made good for his own lost child. The narrative meat of his side journey with Rick is ultimately spoiled by Henry’s return as well; Morgan succumbs to a more brutal side of himself when he coldly murders the Savior captors that had Rick on the ropes.


Lennie James savors a moment of actorly gravitas when he growls at the close of his soliloquy among the carnage, “My son was there.” It’s a powerful moment, and the director has the good sense to let it land, but the Henry resurrection retroactively robs it of that impact.


Jadis fares the best in this hour, as she weighs what to do with a captive Negan’s life. The episode begins with another slight jump back in the chronology, checking in as Jadis scuttles away during Simon’s unauthorized massacre of her cohort. She plays possum with surprisingly convincing commitment — going without blinking is among her many talents, apparently — and she survives the slaughter, emerging in a pristine white nightgown of symbolic purification. She has been born anew in the blood of her clan.


So by the time she has Negan in a rare position of vulnerability, she is not entirely sure how to move forward. She wants to hurt him as deeply as he has hurt her, and she sees that tossing his darling bat, Lucille, into a miniature funeral pyre would be the most direct method.


She wants to do this, but two nagging thoughts give her pause. The first comes to her when Negan, in a last-ditch attempt to save his bat from the flame, confesses that Lucille was his dead wife’s name. The second comes shortly after, when Negan gets his hands on a flare and threatens to burn the few remaining photos of Jadis’s loved ones.

The first forces her to confront Negan’s fundamental humanity, and the second equates it to her own. She can’t deny the clear moral parallel between Negan’s attachment to the memory of his past and her still-fresh wounds from having lost her Scavengers. To destroy the last thing Negan holds dear would compromise some deep-seated shred of integrity that still means a lot to Jadis, and so she indulges in the gesture of mercy and spares Lucille. There’s respect buried somewhere in their begrudging recognition of each other’s humanity, and Negan’s offer to join the Saviors seems genuine. For a moment, the audience can even see from his perspective and understand how he might believe himself to be the hero of his own story.


But when he returns to the Savior compound, Negan’s behavior will not be heroic. While in the car back to the headquarters, he growls: “Daddy’s home, and it’s going to be a surprise. I got all sorts of surprises to roll out.” He’s not going to be pleased to find that Simon has angled his backside onto the seat of power, and resolving such a disagreement with his words is not in Negan’s nature.


Only two episodes remain before “The Walking Dead” wraps up the eighth season, and the remaining installments promise nothing short of hellfire from the primary antagonist. Whether Negan’s revenge will weaken the Saviors enough for the coalition to finally overtake them is yet to be seen, but the status quo can’t remain for long. The violent winds of change have already begun to blow.


A Few Thoughts While We Survey the Wreckage:


• It’s during the rare scenes of domestic tranquillity that “The Walking Dead” most closely resembles the Westerns from which it draws inspiration. Maybe it’s just the spartan décor, but the tender moment shared between Rick and Michonne evokes the subdued concern of a frontier woman who’s certain that her settler husband is going to get himself killed.


• This season continues to expand the array of zombified forms with Jadis’s crucified walker, hung on a rolling pallet as a makeshift wheelbarrow of death. Exploring the manifold possibilities of repurposed zombie bodies has been one of the show’s primary pleasures this year.


• Jeffrey Dean Morgan does some formidable acting from a supine position, denied a major dimension of physicality in his performance while bound by Jadis. His head tucked onto his chin, Morgan works the range of his voice and facial expressions to convey his inner turmoil, a sort of back-to-basics workshop for a seasoned actor.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS