Adam Furtick was out with two friends on the night of Oct. 8, enjoying the rock band UFO at the Concord Music Hall on Milwaukee Avenue in Chicago's Logan Square neighborhood.


A father of three and an avid rock and metal music fan, the 34-year-old Furtick was driving home when his wife called. He told her he was lost, but “when he figured it out, he’d call me back,” said Furtick’s wife, Gina, 33.


It was the last time she talked to her husband, a man she’d known much of her life and married last year.


Furtick was fatally shot early on Oct. 9 on Chicago’s Southwest Side, about 16 miles from where he watched the concert hours earlier and not far from his family’s home in southwest suburban Bridgeview.


Two weeks later, no arrests have been made as police investigate if Furtick died in a road rage incident.


Furtick was driving near 79th Street and Pulaski Road in the Scottsdale neighborhood around 1:15 a.m. when a vehicle pulled up alongside him, police said. Someone inside the other vehicle opened fire, striking Furtick in the abdomen.


Furtick crashed his vehicle a few blocks away at Rainey Park, near 79th and Kostner Avenue. Officers found him barely alive, and he was taken to Advocate Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn.


After not hearing from her husband, Gina Furtick called him repeatedly. Finally, an officer answered his phone and told her what happened.

“My heart fell into my stomach," she said. "I think I pretty much fell to my knees. I started crying. Just the thought of him being hurt, hurt me.


“I was just trying to get to the hospital as fast as I could,” she said. “I just sat there and prayed. That’s all I could do.”


Five hours later, her husband was pronounced dead.


“He was a wonderful husband,” Gina Furtick said. “He was allowing me to be a stay-at-home mom, so I mean there were times when he was working two or three jobs so I wouldn’t have to.”


She said her husband had no enemies and described him as a hard-working family man and die-hard Cubs fan.


He was a manager for a food company that served sheriff's deputies at Cook County Jail, she said. When her husband wasn’t working, the couple was caring for their 4-year-old son, Blake. Adam Furtick had two other children from a previous relationship, 13-year-old Daniel and 12-year-old Taylor.


“He was very much loved,” his wife said. “He would just make you laugh. His laugh alone would make you laugh.


“He was the type of guy that would have friends from one group and friends from a different group that didn’t like each other, but they would manage to get along because they were around Adam.”


Furtick also worked part time for a company that set up concert equipment for musical acts that came to the Chicago area. He helped set up concerts for Paul McCartney and John Mayer as well as the pop rock band Train, his wife said.


In his younger years, he loved to play the drums in a band with friends, she said. The band was “just a bunch of guys in a garage making noise,” she joked, but it reflected her husband’s longtime love for metal music. In the summer, her husband attended all three days of the annual Chicago Open Air music festival in Bridgeview, featuring Slayer, Megadeth and Kiss.


Gina Furtick said the grief of her husband’s loss is “not anything to accept or even process.” As for their young son, she said, “there’s so many things that Adam wanted to teach Blake.”


“He had plans for him,” she said. “I just hope whoever did this is caught and that my husband has justice because he definitely didn’t deserve this. He was a hard-working man, a great husband, a great father, a wonderful friend. I mean, he couldn’t even hurt a fly.”


Police could not provide a description of the suspect or the vehicle involved in the killing. Anyone with information was asked to call Area Central detectives at 312-747-8380.


jgorner@chicagotribune.com


Twitter @JeremyGorner