Eliza Dushku's disturbing account of her sexual assault on the set of "True Lies" was met with a chorus of support Sunday from co-star Jamie Lee Curtis, her former agent and a longtime friend, among others.

Dushku alleged Saturday that she was molested by stunt coordinator Joel Kramer in a hotel room when she was just 12 years old and filming "True Lies" in Miami.

Curtis, who played the actress's mother in the James Cameron action flick, penned a guest column for HuffPost divulging that Dushku had shared the story with her several years ago — and that child abuse within the industry deserved a larger spotlight.

"(Dushku) had shared that story with me privately a few years ago. I was shocked and saddened then and still am today," she wrote. "What compounds the difficulty here is that the stunt coordinator in question was literally in charge of our lives, our safety… What allegedly happened to Eliza, away from the safety net of all of us and our purview is a terrible, terrible thing to learn about and have to reconcile."

Meanwhile, several members of Dushku's inner circle told Deadline that they tried to hold Kramer accountable shortly after Dushku reported the incident, but had no luck.

JoAnne Colonna, Dushku's agent at the time, confirmed to Deadline that she was the "tough adult female friend in whom I had confided my terrible secret" that the actress referenced in her Facebook post.

Colonna told the outlet that prior to the alleged assault, she'd reached out several times to the film's executive producer Rae Sanchini to express concerns over inappropriate behavior she witnessed on set.

"I'd called Rae multiple times because there was such inappropriateness going on the set. There was sexual talk to (Eliza) and at her at various occasions," Colonna said.

Sanchini brushed aside Colonna's concerns the first time around — and again when Colonna reported the alleged assault.

"Nobody really did anything," she said.

When that proved a bust, she tried casting director Mali Finn, but was told to tread carefully in moving forward with the accusation.

"I've read all the stories about Mira Sorvino. There is a reason why nobody comes forward; everyone was so afraid that they would get blacklisted and fired," Colonna said.

Sue Booth-Forbes, Dushku's legal guardian at the time of filming, said in a statement to the Daily News that she reported the incident to no avail.

"I was on the 'True Lies' set for 3 weeks and reported Joel Kramer's inappropriate sexual behavior towards 12-year-old Eliza to a person in authority. I was met with blank stares and had the sense that I wasn't telling that person anything they didn't already know. I tried to keep Joel away from her as did others working on the set, but because of all the stunts she had to do, he was constantly involved with her and her body. Those who knew didn't know what to do and were far enough down the pecking order to be afraid of losing their jobs if they pressed the issue because all the power lay in the hands of those who called the shots and would stop at nothing to protect each other," she said.

"That was years ago when that power structure was the norm, and the bullies were in charge. Only now does it appear that women and men know what to do and are doing it. May Eliza be believed and supported and may her courage in telling her truth make a contribution to the sea change that is in progress."

Meanwhile, both Dushku's mother, Judith, and longtime friend Peter Conti confirmed that Dushku had informed them of Kramer's alleged behavior, but that she was afraid to go public out of fear of not being believed.

"She said she was afraid (to confront him) because he was in charge of her stunts," Conti told Deadline. "She said it's her word against his and no one would believe her. I regret not handling it differently. What clouded my judgment is that JoAnne repeatedly went to the producer and nothing happened. How the hell were they going to listen to me?"

Added Judith in a Facebook comment on her daughter's post, "It was not her career that I feared for, as that meant nothing to me. I was afraid of Joel Kramer, too. .. At the time, Eliza was too scared to tell the whole story and in a way I think she protected me from knowing because she knew how frightened I was of the powerful men on set."

Kramer, whose lengthy résumé includes "Blade Runner 2049" and "Westworld," told the Daily News Saturday he was "absolutely astoundingly flabbergasted" by Dushku's accusation.

"I don't know where this comes from. I am absolutely floored, she was a sweet kid I am absolutely in shock right now," he said, adding he was shaking because he was so upset. "I don't know why she would do this to me. It is not true."