Partly cloudy. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph..

Partly cloudy. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 3:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


HOUSTON (AP) — Officials in the Texas county hardest hit by Hurricane Harvey said Monday that $5 billion in federal funding that's been awarded to Texas in the wake of last year's deadly storm will finally help them finish major flood control projects, some of which have been under construct…

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

Natalia Alvarez

Cynthia Alvarez

Natalia Alvarez

Cynthia Alvarez

Two women were formally charged Wednesday with aggravated kidnapping stemming from an incident over the weekend when a 27-year-old man was taken from his rural Mission home at gunpoint by an unknown group of men.


The 27-year-old victim told sheriff’s deputies he was forced into a truck Saturday evening then beaten before being released, according to a Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office news release.


Deputies met with the victim around 9:45 p.m. Saturday, and he was taken to the hospital for treatment of non-life threatening injuries.

The victim told sheriff’s investigators he recognized 32-year-old Cynthia Alvarez, his ex-girlfriend, in the truck. She allegedly told the men in the truck, “That’s him,” before the men physically assaulted him. The victim also recognized Alvarez’s 35-year-old sister Natalie Alvarez in the vehicle.


Further review of surveillance footage, statements and evidence demonstrated sufficient probable cause to charge the sisters with aggravated kidnapping, the release stated.


Their bonds were each set at $30,000, and they remained at the Hidalgo County jail as of press time.

If convicted of the first-degree felony, the women could face five to 99 years in state prison and a fine of up to $10,000.


The investigation into Saturday’s kidnapping is ongoing, with more arrests to follow, according to the sheriff’s office. Anyone with information is asked to call the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office Criminal Investigations Division at (956) 383-8114 or the anonymous Crime Stoppers Hotline at (956) 668-8477.



Natalia Alvarez

Cynthia Alvarez