
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Editor’s note: Tenth and final of a series providing a position-by-position review of the Broncos in 2017 and looking ahead. Today: special teams. 






There was no fine-tooth comb or microscope necessary to study the problems that plagued the Broncos’ special teams units in 2017. 

The colossal gaffes — the fumbles, the kicks blocked, the chip shots shanked — happened on an open stage under a glaring spotlight like a Shakespearean tragedy, and they were detrimental for Denver during an 5-11 season marked by one head-scratching calamity after another. 

The issues steered the Broncos toward a total tear down of their special teams approach, and the house cleaning cost first-year assistant Brock Olivo his job. In his place in 2018 will be veteran special teams coordinator Tom McMahon, whose offseason, he said, won’t include much time examining the train wreck that occurred before he arrived. 

https://embed.sendtonews.com/oembed/?fk=5vyDixL5&amp;cid=5163&amp;sound=off&amp;format=json&amp;offsetx=0&amp;offsety=0&amp;floatwidth=400&amp;floatposition=bottom-right&amp;float=on 

“I’ll be upfront with you: I don’t get into the past,” McMahon told reporters at the Senior Bowl in Mobile, Ala., last week. “I’m a big fix guy. I’m not going to be a fault guy. Anything that happens, which you’ll find out with me in the media, anything that goes down there that goes bad on special teams, it’s on me. I’m going to fix it, though. I guarantee that.” 

McMahon’s job will be more geared more toward building a new plan of attack than fix a broken one. 

The first step in McMahon’s new plan should be finding consistency at the key return positions. The punts that were muffed by rookie Isaiah McKenzie in 2017 were the most obvious and crippling mistakes made by the special teams units this season. Two of those drops led directly to touchdowns by opponents and were deflating blows in the locker room. 


Broncos coach Vance Joseph routinely defended the repeated chances offered to McKenzie, citing his ability to produce big plays the Broncos desperately needed during long stretches of inefficient offensive play. But that game-breaking potential was never realized. By the time Joseph chose the safety valve in sure-handed receiver Jordan Taylor, the damage was done. 

Whether the Broncos decide they want a game-breaker to return punts — giving McKenzie another chance, turning to 2017 third-round choice Carlos Henderson or drafting a player who to fill the role could be among those options — or a highly reliable one who may sacrifice some breakaway speed, consistency in that choice could go a long way. As unpredictable as Denver’s quarterback situation was in 2017, the weekly question of who would return punts became a consistent weekly distraction. 

Injuries also forced the Broncos into a number of different combinations in the kickoff return game. Six different players returned a kick for Denver last season. An inability to gain consistent traction played at least some role in the team’s ranking of 26th in average starting field position, which was just inside the 27-yard line. 

It will also be up to Brandon McManus to examine where things got off track during the most inaccurate season of his career. The Broncos’ kicker made 24 of 32 field-goal attempts, a mark that included three misses inside 40 yards. McManus only had one prior miss from that range in his entire career before last season — during his rookie year in 2014. 

“We’re not going to try and hold him back here or there,” McMahon said. “Kickoffs and field goals, we’re going to go back and not try and get real cute with our technique. We’re going to let him be a power kicker.” 

If the Broncos are to actually achieve the identity Joseph claims to covet in 2018, an effort that will begin with controlling the turnover battle, the special teams units must set a distinctively different tone. 