Sunny. High near 95F. Winds SSW at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low near 70F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 3:52 am

Adam Kammann and Christine Zadina

Andrew Torrice

Adam Kammann and Christine Zadina

Andrew Torrice


About 75 people gathered on the southeast corner of 72nd and Cass Streets on Wednesday evening to remember three motorcyclists killed at the intersection last June.

The gathering occurred on the eve of the sentencing of a woman linked to the crash.

Motorcyclist Adam D. Kammann, 34, of La Vista; his passenger, Christine Zadina, 37, of Omaha; and the driver of a second motorcycle, Andrew Torrice, 24, of La Vista collided at 72nd and Cass Streets the night of June 10.

All three died at the scene, next to Crossroads Mall.

“Thank you for being his family,” Torrice’s mother, Kristine Torrice, 47, told the group, made up mostly of motorcyclists.

Rhonda Boisseau, 58, will be sentenced Thursday. She pleaded guilty in January to willful reckless driving, a misdemeanor that carries a maximum sentence of 90 days in jail. A charge of providing false information to police officers was dismissed.

Some of those at the memorial said Boisseau should have faced a more serious charge. A number of motorcyclists plan to attend the sentencing.

Emily Shoe, a sister of Andrew Torrice, asked that anyone attending the court hearing be civil.

Her mother, Kristine Torrice of San Pedro, California, said prosecutors have said they’ll be keeping an eye on things.

“They will empty the courtroom if they have to,” she said.

The Douglas County Attorney’s Office considered motor vehicle homicide charges in connection with the case but decided that there was not enough evidence.

The mourners formed a semicircle around a memorial to the three. Each person’s name was inscribed on a white cross .

Prosecutor Matt Kuhse has said Boisseau, driving a Volkswagen, revved her engine loudly and drove toward a group of motorcyclists at the Bucky’s gas station near 77th and Dodge Streets shortly before the crash. One of the motorcyclists was Torrice.

Lindsey Clark, a passenger on one of the motorcycles, has told The World-Herald that she and others saw Boisseau take off after Torrice as he left the station and follow him east on Cass Street.

Adam Kammann and Christine Zadina

Andrew Torrice


All actions and reactions have consequences, some more tragic than others. 

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


