




Even though it’s trotted out the same senior lineup five times in a row, the Texas Tech men’s basketball team has shown it’s more than just about its veteran players.


Its freshmen class, specifically Zhaire Smith and Jarrett Culver, have shown they can handle themselves against more experienced players, if not the most talented players in the country.


A game after Culver went off for a career-high 21 points, Smith attempted to do one better with style points by dunking six times and setting a new career high with 17 points as the Red Raiders defeated Savannah State 103-69 in a non-conference game Saturday inside United Supermarkets Arena.


The freshmen are showing promise, and that’s a sign of an improving program two years into coach Chris Beard’s tenure.


"I tell our players all the time that winning never gets old," Beard said. "Never take it for granted. We’re very pleased today to get this win. This is all we were thinking about. There was a time not too long ago, you know, at different schools across the country, where you’re just trying to get a win. Now we’ve got the program to a point where the expectations are up. I think people walked into the arena tonight expecting us to win, and I liked that. That was one of many objectives for year one and year two."


Texas Tech (6-0) remained perfect on the young season against a Tigers squad that was difficult to defend due to its penchant for shooting three-pointers. They were averaging 37 attempts per contest from the 3-point line per game and left Lubbock only after putting up 41 tries.


The Red Raiders held Savannah State to 10 three-point makes and won the battle on the boards, two goals Beard was imploring from his squad throughout the week. Texas Tech won the defensive rebounds by a 31-12 margin. The rebounding margin was more important than usual with the extra space created from shots fired beyond the three-point line.


Winning the boards translated into 20 fast-break points and 24 second-chance points, which led to Texas Tech racking up several SportsCenter Top 10 moments.


Senior Niem Stevenson, who finished with a team-high 18 points, also notched a dunk in the victory. Stevenson was one of four players to finish in double digits, along with Culver (18 points), Smith and Brandone Francis (10).


Savannah State’s John Grant ended his night with 18 points. He was the only player to crack double digits.


"(We were) playing aggressive," said Smith, who has notched three double-digit games in six contests. "Me running the floor, when my teammate gets the ball, I just run. We practice our running and that’s how we get easy buckets."


With a 53-36 advantage under 15 minutes, the Texas Tech offense started a track meet in the second half.


Thanks to back-to-back dunks by Stevenson and Culver, the Red Raiders engineered a 13-0 run to help seal the game and increase the scoring gap to a 30-point lead (66-36).


Savannah State (2-4) moves on to play Wichita State on the road Tuesday and has future non-conference games lined up with Baylor and Texas A&amp;M.


Texas Tech is set to take on No. 20 Seton Hall at 5:30 p.m. Thursday at Madison Square Garden as part of the Under Armour Reunion event. It is a rematch of a 2010 NIT game, in which the Red Raiders won but were unable to reach the semifinal round inside the Garden.


Beard was an assistant on the 2010 team and now is at the helm of his own headed to New York.


"I’m excited for it," Culver said of the trip to Madison Square Garden. "Michael Jordan had one of his best games there, and that’s my role model. I feel like playing there is an honor for the team. I’m excited for it."


Why Savannah State?


Not a lot of games pop off the Red Raiders’ non-conference schedule, but Beard said teams like the Tigers serve their purpose when the calendar turns to January, February and March.


Savannah State’s 3-ball capability and ability to create pressure, though it didn’t pan out perfectly, reflects Big 12 foe West Virginia.


"Ultimately the objective of a non-conference schedule is to get ready for Big 12 play," Beard said. "Today’s game served a lot of purposes. One of many examples, we know what’s coming with West Virginia down the line with their pressing. That’s just one example of many off the top of my head."


Celebrity sighting


Texas Tech head coach Kliff Kingsbury was in attendance less than 12 hours after the football team returned home following a 27-23 win against Texas. Kingsbury was also fresh off athletics director Kirby Hocutt confirming the head football coach would return to the sideline for the 2018 season after completing a 6-6 regular season.


Kingsbury sat alone three rows behind the Red Raiders’ bench. The fifth-year football coach got exposed when he was put on the jumbotron as Tech began a media timeout sales pitch regarding bowl game deposits. He got a rousing ovation from the 6,614 in attendance.


A line of fans formed near Kingsbury’s seat and stretched 15 rows back. He took pictures through halftime before departing through the Red Raiders’ entrance with a Guns Up to the crowd to another ovation.


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse Sports

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							Lubbock Avalanche-Journal  ~ 710 Avenue J, Lubbock, TX 79401 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service