A Brooklyn cuckold admitted to savagely beating his girlfriend's lover after he found the pair in the sack following a threesome that led to a twosome, authorities said.

"I knocked him out with that stick right there," Darryl Goodwine, 51, told police, according to the criminal complaint.

Prosecutors say Goodwine flew into a rage after finding his girlfriend Jenice Lightfoot and Leonard Thompson getting it on inside the suspect's East Flatbush apartment Sunday night.

The spurned man is accused of grabbing a metal stick spiked with nails, possibly from a coffee table, and clubbing Thompson, 31, multiple times.

Goodwine also attacked the 30-year-old Lightfoot, prosecutors say.

The beating left Thompson unconscious and bleeding from the head. Medics rushed him to Kings County Hospital in critical condition.

Lightfoot was struck in the legs and head during the attack — requiring stitches to her face, according to the criminal complaint.

Goodwine offered police a novel explanation for the attack — he intervened in brutal fashion to stop what he thought was a sexual assault, law enforcement sources said.

The three had engaged in a consensual ménage à trios the night before Goodwine returned home to find his lady with the other man, sources said.

Goodwine was arraigned in Brooklyn Criminal Court Monday night for assault, attempted assault and other charges. If convicted, he faces up to 25 years in prison.

The judge set his bail at $50,000, according to Goodwine's lawyer Michael Pate.

Prosecutors had requested $75,000 bail for Goodwine, who has more than 50 prior arrests — including three for assaults against women inside his home.

In October 2016, he pleaded guilty to assaulting a woman with a phone and served 60 days in jail.

He also spent 60 days on Rikers Island in November 2015 after pleading guilty to assaulting another woman.

Reached Tuesday, Lightfoot's estranged brother said the family was in the dark over the attack.

"If she got hurt, I'm surprised she didn't tell my mom about it," Kevin Lightfoot said.