Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Chris Perez


		
		
		
		
	


									January 25, 2018 | 8:27pm
											| Updated January 25, 2018 | 8:39pm
												

A North Carolina man is behind bars for roughing up a 94-year-old woman and sexually assaulting her 72-year-old daughter — who is mentally disabled, according to reports.

Tai’Quan Rodgers, 23, was arrested Monday in Charlotte and charged with sexual battery, first-degree burglary and assault on a female.

He allegedly broke into the victims’ home on Dec. 9 and attacked them around 3 a.m. — while they were both sleeping.

The 94-year-old described the horrifying encounter during an interview with Fox 46, using the name “Mother.”

“He went straight to my daughters room,” she said. “Then I thought that he had killed her. I said, ‘Lord have mercy, he’s killed my daughter!’ Then he ran to me and tried to unbutton my gown. I said, ‘You take your hands of off me.'”

Rodgers was able to get away that night, but he wasn’t on the run for long.

Investigators with the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department were eventually able to gather enough information and evidence to warrant charges this week, and he was taken into custody without incident.

“I forgive him for what he’s done,” explained Mother. “I don’t hate him. I hope he gets saved through this here, but he’s got to pay for his wrong-doings.”

Rodgers is reportedly locked up at the Mecklenburg County Sheriff’s Office, awaiting trial.

Authorities have begun reviewing other cases, involving the sexual assault of elderly women, to see if he matches the suspect’s description or whether they’re similar.

“We have about half dozen or incidents that involve a break-in or some sort of sexual assault or sexual assault attempt or peeping tom incident,” Lt. Melanie Peacock told WBTV back in December.

Residents in the victims’ neighborhood say the area has gotten very dangerous in recent years.

“Where is our protection in this community?” asked Kimberly McKinney, one of Mother’s neighbors. “It is just getting worse and worse and worse.”

Mother told Fox 46 that she’s just glad things didn’t turn deadly that night.

“I know the lord is with me because he took care of me,” she said. “[Rodgers] came in here to kill me — but he couldn’t do it.”


			Read Next
		


			
				BASE jumpers arrested during plunge from cell tower			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				BASE jumpers arrested during plunge from cell tower			
		

Share Selection

143,318

90,955

52,942

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters