A Florida woman who allegedly played clips of the Talking Heads song "Psycho Killer" in threatening phone calls to Tony Stewart has been arrested and charged with felony stalking.

Kathi Russell, 68, who was upset that the NASCAR champ wouldn't sign an autograph for her, was taken into custody on Tuesday. She faces multiple felony charges, including stalking, terroristic mischief and intimidation, according to multiple reports.

The criminal charges were filed last week, Indianpolis TV station WRTV reported.

The Cape Coral woman allegedly made hundreds of anonymous phone calls to Stewart, as well as to his mother and sister.

According to the affidavit obtained by the TV station, Russell would also play an audio clip from a statement made by then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton about Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi's death - "We came, we saw, he died" - in some of the calls.

The alleged harrassment started in March 2016 and continued through October of this year.

She is also accused of making an anonymous phone call to authorities that a plane with Stewart onboard was transporting drugs. The call resulted in Stewart's plane being searched upon landing in Fort Worth, Texas.

A letter filled with baking soda was also sent to an Indianapolis law firm representing Stewart's mother causing an Anthrax scare that led to the evacuation of a downtown Indianapolis building. Stewart's mom had filed a protective order against Russell. Investigators traced the powder back to Russell, WXIN (Fox59) reported.

"Ms. Russell stated she repeatedly tried to get Mr. Stewart's attention and get him to sign an item of racing memorabilia, but Mr. Stewart ignored Ms. Russell's attempts and Ms. Russell states she felt like she was ignored," according to the affidavit.

Russell, who is being held in Lee County Jail in Florida, will be extradicted back to Indiana where the charges were filed.

Stewart, an Indiana native, retired following the 2016 NASCAR season and is currently a co-owner of the Stewart-Haas Racing (SHR) team.