
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Across the state, families are being unfairly, inhumanely, and illegally targeted by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in schools, hospitals, and courtrooms.

In Texas, ICE agents stood outside the hospital room of 10 year-old Rosa Maria Hernandez as she underwent emergency gallbladder surgery. She was brought to the US when she was just 3 months old, and has cerebral palsy. Federal immigration authorities in Detroit harassed Jorge Hernandez while he was dropping his four year old daughter off at preschool. With his wife and family in the car, his son pleaded with immigration agents, “Please, don’t take my dad. He’s just taking us to school.” And in Glenwood Springs, Colorado, Virginia Mancinas was arrested because she bravely reported her assault. She is a survivor of domestic violence and ICE arrested her after she called 911 for help while being attacked by her husband.

There are new stories just like these happening every day. A parent having to make impossible decisions between bringing their urgently ill child to a hospital and risking their family unity and livelihood. An elementary school student bringing a suitcase to school everyday because she thinks she needs to be ready in case her mom is not home when she returns from school. Everyday activities, like check-ups and church services, now feel dangerous, and entire communities hold their breath, knowing ICE could be lurking around the next corner.

In health care settings, immigrant families are cancelling pediatric appointments out of fear of deportation, and health care providers report more children having symptoms of extreme stress and instability. School teachers and principals say that children are having panic attacks in classrooms, unable to concentrate and learn because they are afraid their parents will not be home when school is done for the day. This kind of chaos sets children up for a life of otherwise avoidable health conditions and mental health issues.

ICE’s actions also send a message to the immigrant community that they cannot expect to be safe when they seek justice in our state. As a result, crimes are being reported less frequently, and witnesses to crimes often won’t expose themselves to give statements or file restraining orders, undermining the very safety of our communities.

By targeting immigrants at our public institutions, like health care facilities, schools, and courthouses, ICE is breaking its own rules. These spaces, where our communities come together and where we all want to feel safe and welcome, are already off-limits to immigration enforcement according to ICE’s own policies. However, they are putting Coloradans’ health and lives at risk by disregarding it regularly.

When Coloradans can’t lead healthy lives, peacefully pursue an education, or trust hard-working law enforcement agencies, our state’s public health, the future of its economy, and our basic safety are all compromised. And this is because of the fear ICE has created and encouraged among our immigrant friends and neighbors.

It has to stop. That’s why we have introduced House Bill 1417, legislation known as Virginia’s Law, at the Colorado legislature. The measure would help make our state one that protects its immigrant families from being unfairly torn apart and one where our institutions work for all of us.

The bill would require ICE to respect the sanctity of health care facilities, schools, and courtrooms as protected spaces for all Coloradans, regardless of immigration status. Under Virginia’s Law, courts will remain a place for justice, hospitals will remain a place for healing and schools will remain a place for learning.


This is an important opportunity to enshrine those values and protect people like Rosa, Jorge, Virginia, and so many others. We call upon our colleagues in the legislature and Gov. John Hickenlooper to support their neighbors and constituents by providing them the protection and dignity we all deserve.

Susan Lontine, D-Denver, represents Colorado House District 1. Dan Pabon, D-Denver, represents Colorado House District 4.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by email or mail.