


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Officers in Yuma warned Corrections about talk of a March 1 riot, but officials ignored the tip and understaffed the unit, attorney says.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Arizona State Prison Complex - Yuma
(Photo: Arizona Department of Corrections)

Corrections officials were warned of an impending riot at the Yuma prison weeks before the Thursday melee that left one prisoner deadand dozens injured, an attorney for correctional officers told The Arizona Republic.


Martin Bihn,a Phoenix attorney who has sued Corrections alleging chronic understaffing, said Monday that corrections officers told upper management at Arizona State Prison Complex-Yuma at least two weeks before the riot that inmates planned to rebel.


The reason: They were angry over plans to desegregate the facilities' units, Bihn said.


A Corrections spokesman said Bihn's allegations are untrue and unsupported.


The threats were not taken seriously, Bihn said, and the officers were disciplined and placed under investigation for "agitating the inmates."


MORE: 1 inmate killed, 37 injured in Yuma prison riot


"Absolutely, they were warned," Bihn said of managers at the prison. "They knew it would happen March 1."


Despite the warning, the prison did not adequately staff the Cheyenne unit, where the riot occurred, Bihn added.


The unit is supposed to have 35 correctional officers on duty, he said, but only 28 wereworking during Thursday's swing-shift, when the riot began.


Bihn provided The Republic with an email from a Yuma correctional officer to support his statements.


Corrections late Monday issued a two-page statement that disputed Bihn's statements. 


The statement said 33 of the unit's 35 designated posts were staffed by correctional officers at the time, along with two shift supervisors. And, it says, the Yuma complex has the lowest staff vacancy rate of all state-run prisons, including no correctional officer vacancies.


The agency said it continues criminal and administrative investigations into Thursday's "major disturbance" in Yuma. Damage was estimated at roughly $475,000.


MORE: Prison-guard shortage prompts workers to sue over 'dangerous conditions'


Yuma's tactical support unit was activated to regain order with shotguns deployed after inmates attacked prison personnel by using tables as shields, the agency said.


The Yuma riot was the second within a week in the Arizona prison system. The other occurred at the privately run Red Rock Correctional Center in Eloy, where a dozen inmates and two officers were injured.


Bihn said inmates favor being segregated because violence can occur if, for example, White supremacist inmates are housed with African-American inmates.


"If you were implementing a new race integration, you would want to put more officers on duty, not fewer," Bihn said. 


Corrections previously confirmed the incident that began at 6:18 p.m. Thursday and that inmates attacked prison personnel, set fires and threw rocks. About 600 inmates — more than half of the prison’s 1,147 inmates — took part, the Corrections Department said.


Adam Coppa (Photo: Arizona Department of Corrections)

The Yuma correctional officer's email states the riot erupted after an inmate refused to be housed with sex offenders, and force was usedon an African-American inmate.


Corrections said the disturbance began as an inmate, who appeared to be impaired, was being escorted across the recreation yard. It's illegal to have alcohol or drugs in Arizona prisons.


That inmate attempted to assault the officers and then ran from them. As the officers pursued him, other inmates spontaneously attacked the officers, Corrections said.


According to the correctional officer's email, inmates charged correctional officers with mattresses. "The young inmates were in front, the oldest number inmates" were in the back, the email stated.


The inmates broke toilets, sinks and windows and also burned trash and left graffiti messages, according to the email. Inmates also confiscated narcotics and cut themselves while breaking windows, the email says.


MORE: Arizona prisons will now give female inmates free tampons


Corrections confirmed that inmates pulled mattresses and other property outside of the dormitories and started fires on the yards.


The riot caused one inmate death and injuries to 28 inmates and 11 employees at the medium-security prison.


Adam Coppa, 32, who was serving a three-year sentence out of Maricopa County for a drug violation, was killed. Coppa had served prior prison sentences for attempted armed robbery, aggravated assault and possession of prison contraband.


Corrections said the inmate died from a gunshot wound.


All inmates involved in the riot have remained in the prison's recreation yard since Thursday, Corrections said. 


Tactical units from Yuma as well as the Lewis and Tucson state prison complexes were brought in to quell the riot, and according to the department, they had contained the disturbance by 9 p.m.


The corrections officer's email stated that outside police agencies, including from the Border Patrol, San Luis and Somerton and the Yuma County Sheriff were called in to assist.Corrections added that Yuma Police and the FBI provided resources to maintain the prison's perimeter.


MORE: Did Arizona's inmate-care provider deny care to avoid fines?


Corrections has historically understaffed its prisons because of low pay and the dangers of the job, but the agency said that was not a problem in Yuma.


The starting annual salary for correctional officers is $31,886, while the maximum salary is about $40,000, according to the agency's website.


The agency, which gets $1 billion annually from the state general fund, receives enough funding from the Legislature for 6,655 correctional officers. However, the state had 5,809 correctional officers on the payroll as of June 30, 2017.


The agency has a turnover rate of nearly 15 percent, and a vacancy rate of nearly 13 percent.


Corrections last fiscal year spent nearly $21 million on compensation time, holiday pay, retention and merit pay in order to entice officers to stay with the agency.


Reach the reporter at craig.harris@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8478 or on Twitter @charrizazrep


READ MORE:


Homicide suspected in death of Arizona prison inmate


State house bill proposes minimum 5-year sentence for first-time opioid sellers


Gang activity suspected in fatal stabbing of inmate at state prison in Florence


Drone carrying drugs, phones crashes in Buckeye prison yard


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.