


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In Arizona, no central repository exists of police officers’ career records, according to a Republic investigation.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Arizona experts weigh in on whether or not an expansion of police-misconduct oversight is necessary. Carly Henry/azcentral.com
    

In Arizona, no central repository exists of police officers’ career records, which makes it impossible for hiring departments, and the public, to get a full picture of the complaints against them and how they have been handled, according to an Arizona Republic investigation.
(Photo: Robert Hanashiro/USA TODAY)

A Pima County Sheriff’s deputy resigned amid reports that he was harassing women on his beat.One apartment manager said he fondled her breasts while in uniform.  


A Tucson officer was fired after smashing his son’s coach over the head with a lawn chair.


A Pinal County Sheriff’s Office deputy was fired after failing to adequately perform a welfare check on an elderly man. The man’s spouse answered the door naked, the deputy later would recall, and said the man was fine. The deputy went on his way. The elderly man was discovered in the home days later in what records describe as a “mummified state.”


In each case, the incident cost the men their jobs — but not their careers — as Arizona law-enforcement officers. 


In less than three years, they all held a badge again at a different agency in the state.  


The phenomenon is well known within the profession: Officers who are fired for misconduct or resign before the hammer drops are able to move from agency to agency.


In Arizona, no central repository exists of police officers’ career records, which makes it impossible for hiring departments, and the public, to get a full picture of the complaints against them and how they have been handled, according to an Arizona Republic investigation.


A state agency, the Arizona Peace Officer Standards and Training Board, or AZPOST, provides basic monitoring and certification designed to make sure officers meet minimum standards. It tracks officer terminations and resignations and highlights internal investigations and criminal charges.


But there are loopholes in the oversight. Among them:


Officers can be fired but still meet AZPOST's minimum standards for certification, meaning they are eligible for hire by other departments. 


Arizona officers either were fired or resigned under the shadow of a misconduct investigation 2,311 times between 2000 and 2016, according to an Arizona Republic examination of AZPOST records. In about 1 out of 6, or 17 percent, of the instances, the individuals became officers again in Arizona by mid-2017, either by moving on to a different agency or being rehired by their city’s appeals process.


In this time span, Arizona agencies made 418 hires of cops who either were fired or resigned amid an internal probe by another department.


Only about 3 percent of Arizona law-enforcement officers were decertified between 2000 and 2016, or 938 of the 29,546 who served during the time span.


The gaps in oversight raise questions about those officers who are working with a job history that is unknown to their current employer. 


Police agencies say red flags include officers who change departments frequently – a particular issue in small rural communities.


With an overall shortage of law-enforcement officers and recruits, the smallest, most remote departments often strain to fill their openings. Those departments hire among those who have been fired but retain their law-enforcement certification. 


The towns of Hayden, Kearny and Superior have absorbed more cops with checkered histories than any other agencies in the state, according to The Republic's analysis of AZPOST data.   


While there are always two sides to every firing, issues can arise with officers given a second chance.


Some Arizona lawmakers have proposed a more robust, statewide system to track officer discipline at all levels. But the Democratic-sponsored measures to date have received little interest by AZPOST or a state Legislature dominated by Republicans. 


"As a state legislator, my job is to respond to the will of the people," said Rep. Reginald Bolding. "People across ... the state of Arizona and frankly across the country, have been asking for police accountability measures."


AZPOST Executive Director Jack Lane said he believes AZPOST's current checks and balances system is sufficient, and that AZPOST's hiring audits catch many of the bad apples who may have slipped through the cracks of an agency's application process. 


Maria Haberfeld, a professor at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said no states have the types of central repositories the Arizona legislators have proposed. 


She said the current system allows for different standards of hiring, and allows bad apples to maintain a badge. 


"I just cannot emphasize enough how difficult it is for me to see ... an account of events that, in my mind at least, should have not happened if the standards were higher and more transparent," she said. 


Haberfeld said despite a recent wave of calls for more officer accountability, she doesn't expect states to adopt the type of repository Bolding has proposed. 


"Any type of central oversight on police behavior, or organizational behavior, would diminish the control of the organization," she said. "So, I don’t see this happening." 


By Arizona statute, the AZPOST board is made up of 13 members who make final disciplinary actions. The board includes top law-enforcement officials such as sheriffs, chiefs and the Department of Public Safety director; two public members, such as university professors; and two law-enforcement "peer" members, who hold positions of sergeant or below. 


The AZPOST board can strip an officer’s certification under extreme circumstances, such as committing a felony or lying in an internal investigation. Lesser or unconfirmed allegations may result in a certification suspension by AZPOST or simply be handled by the agency.


“As a state legislator, my job is to respond to the will of the people. People across ... the state of Arizona and frankly across the country, have been asking for police accountability measures.”


AZPOST tracks when an officer leaves an agency for any reason. Statutes also require that agencies report to AZPOST when an officer is terminated “for cause” — including when one resigns amid an internal investigation. This information is maintained in a database that is easily accessible to the public or hiring agencies.


But a termination doesn’t always rise to the level of a revoked certification, and AZPOST isn’t a catch-all for bad behavior.


Internal investigations and citizen complaints are maintained by the officer’s agency of employment and aren't reported to AZPOST unlessthey violate certain AZPOST rules orresult in a termination.


As a result, officers cast out from one department often can and will be hired at another and then perhaps another, at the agency head’s discretion.


Lane said AZPOST's decisions are bound by tight legal guidelines that afford little subjectivity. The board's job, he said, is only to ensure officers meet the minimum standards for certification. Employers set a higher bar.


Regardless of any questionable history, AZPOST only acts upon allegations of an AZPOST violation. Violations can include dishonesty, malfeasance or committing a serious crime. A string of department policy violations, no matter how long, may not trigger an AZPOST board investigation.


Lane said the board is aware of the "nomad cop" concept, and said the outcomes in their new jobs vary.


“In a lot of cases, they’ve learned from (the firing), I would hope, and they turn their careers around,” he said. “In some cases, they’re either fired (again) or one step ahead of getting into trouble, and decide to move on.”


Lane said some officers try their luck in different states as well. Arizona, like 42 other states, reports its decertifications to a national database. But like the state system, this national database also doesn't record internal discipline or complaints. 


Of the 938 AZPOST revocations between 2000 and 2016, the board opted to revoke 511 officer certifications. The rest were voluntary relinquishments and automatic revocations triggered by serious crimes.


Common grounds for revocation include sexual misconduct such as sex on duty, untruthfulness, and crimes such as theft, assault, domestic violence and driving under the influence.


But other officers accused of similar misconduct receive lighter punishment, including suspended certification or no action from the board.


READ:  ACLU of AZ sues Phoenix police for use-of-force records from Trump rally


For officers accused of crimes, their certifications may rely on the outcome of the criminal case. 


The Tucson officer who hit his son’s coach with a lawn chair was arrested and charged with assault but later acquitted. AZPOST took no action against him. Two years later, he was hired as a peace officer at the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses.


A Clifton officer was fired and charged with three counts of aggravated assault amid complaints of excessive force and liberal use of his stun gun. The charges were dropped, though, because three of the witnesses had credibility issues and five others declined to testify. AZPOST took no action in this case either, explaining that while his conduct was “questionable,” it was an issue of “training and performance that should have been detected and remedied by proper supervision.”


A Tombstone officer was fired and convicted of misdemeanor assault after he fired his stun gun and struck a bartender in the stomach, requiring a trip to the emergency room. The officer’s certification was suspended, and he later was hired at the Patagonia Police Department.


Lane said the differences lie in the details. The board considers each case individually and weighs both mitigating and aggravating factors.


“An example of aggravating in a DUI could include extreme DUI, (causing) an accident, leaving the scene of an accident, etc.,” he said. “An example of mitigating would be a lower BAC, complete cooperation with investigators, etc.”


Derek Arnson spent the past decade at the top of agencies around the state — five to be exact — leaving controversies and fired subordinates in his wake.  


He was a sergeant at the Department of Public Safety until 2007, when he transferred to the Buckeye Police Department and became a commander. Less than two years later he was a commander in Hayden before becoming chief of the Gila River Police Department and then chief in Nogales.


“I just cannot emphasize enough how difficult it is for me to see ... an account of events that, in my mind at least, should have not happened if the standards were higher and more transparent.”


As a commander in Buckeye, Arnson received at least six complaints that he threatened his co-workers’ job security, intimidated employees and harassed a co-worker based on her sexual orientation. The allegations were validated by an independent report, and Arnson collected $8,300 during a two-month suspension, the Arizona Republic reported at the time.


Arnson was fired for cause in Gila River, amid allegations that he changed a uniform supply vendor based on personal ties, and that he gave unfair advantages to applicants from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, members of Arnson's religion.


By the time AZPOST's Gila River report was completed, Arnson had been named chief in Nogales. 


In Nogales, Arnson was placed on administrative leave during an undisclosed investigation by the city, then allowed to retire earlier this year. Arnson told news reporters at the time he was placed on leave just days after he submitted a grievance to the city.


If an agency were looking to hire Arnson today, they would have no access to his disciplinary records from Buckeye, or to any complaints or investigations while at DPS. Cities are only required to maintain employee personnel files for five years, including those for its sworn employees. If the discipline did not reach the AZPOST threshold, it no longer exists after this time. 


Arnson is currently employed by the Arizona Department of Transportation in a civilian position. He did not respond to The Republic's requests for an interview. 


Some of Arnson's previous employees believed the board didn't do enough to prevent the hiring of a problematic leader. 


Chelsea Peterson, a former Gila River officer, was under investigation for a use-of-force incident when Arnson was appointed chief. Arnson used the incident as cause for firing, with Peterson among the first sacked of what would become 20 percent of his staff, she said.


Peterson was exonerated by Gila River’s grievance process and was reinstated.


“In a lot of cases, they’ve learned from (the firing), I would hope, and they turn their careers around. In some cases, they’re either fired (again) or one step ahead of getting into trouble, and decide to move on.”


After Arnson was fired, Peterson said he was out for retaliation. While out of a job, Arnson uploaded the video of Peterson’s use of force online, advertising it as a white officer abusing a Native American man. One of the commenters said Peterson should be beheaded, Peterson recalled.


Other former employees believed Arnson was retaliating against them by needlessly reporting them to the Maricopa County Attorney's Office's "Brady List," a collection of sworn officers whose honesty has come into question and may be unfit to testify. 


Peterson and others complained to the AZPOST board, which resulted in a special subcommittee reviewing his actions. According to the subcommittee's minutes, board members found that while "retaliation is a reasonable conclusion" regarding Arnson's actions against Peterson and others, "the dates and statements on record do not prove it."


The board said while posting the video on YouTube was "unprofessional," it "was done when Mr. Arnson was not a peace officer and therefore was not misfeasant, malfeasant or nonfeasant 'in office' under the POST Rule."


"The matter will not be investigated further or referred to the entire Board," the committee concluded. 


Within a year, Arnson was hired as chief of Nogales police.


Peterson, who left law enforcement after the ordeal and became an attorney, said AZPOST let her down.


“The board is made up of chiefs and commanders,” Peterson said.  “They watch each other’s backs.”


According to AZPOST records, at least 10 Arizona officers previously terminated “for cause” but not decertified went on to become chiefs or assistant chiefs at other agencies between 2000 and 2016.


Ken Crane, president of Phoenix police's rank-and-file union, defended the state's decision to purge personnel records after five years. 


He likened it to the "ban-the-box" movement, in which civil-rights advocates are pushing for employers to remove the check box that asks about an applicant's criminal record. 


"So, on the one hand we’re going, 'If someone’s been convicted of a felony, trying to get a job, we should strike that off the application.' But all these police officers over here, we want to know if you’ve missed court five years ago, and got a written (write-up) we want that in the database," Crane said. "That makes absolutely no sense to me."


Applicants sometimes manage to lie or omit details about their background and clear the application process at the next agency. Though it’s unclear how often this occurs, a subsequent background check or audit by AZPOST may reveal their dishonesty months or years later.


AZPOST performs audits on every new hire in the state, double-checking to ensure applicants are truthful about their background. But records show some dishonest applicants still manage to slip through the cracks.


Such was the case with Richard Corso, who served as Kearny Police Department’s interim chief until 2015, when he was up for the role as permanent chief.


By that point, Corso’s career was stained by internal investigations.


MORE:  Police are using face-recognition tech, and every Arizona driver is in system


As a young deputy at the Gila County Sheriff’s Office, Corso was accused of making death threats against a female deputy, saying he may “accidentally” kill her if they were at the same shooting range that night. He was fired as a deputy.


In a second probe, investigators alleged Corso, by then a Hayden police officer, had failed to report his girlfriend — a jail nurse — was stealing medications from inmates while he was working for the Sheriff's Office.


He then was terminated by Hayden.


Corso served at Kearny police for three years before applying for chief — a move that triggered a second, independent background investigation. That probe revealed Corso had failed to disclose details about yet another internal investigation stemming from his time as a Gila County deputy.


Corso reportedly had asked a female deputy into a meeting, and when she arrived Corso asked her to “pick up my unit.” His service weapon was on his lap.


Corso denied the allegation but failed a polygraph test, and then failed to mention the polygraph results in his Kearny application.


This omission cost Corso his job — and his certification. According to AZPOST, the board revoked his certification on April 19. He filed a request for reconsideration on June 2, but to date the revocation stands. 


TheRepublic  was unable to reach Corso for comment. 


In the case of the Pima County deputy accused of harassing an apartment manager, records note that there were other women he had met on the job. The deputy was known as somewhat of a ladies' man, by his own account, but he insisted that he had never crossed a line. 


Still, the deputy packed up before the internal probe was completed. Within two years, he would be hired at a police department in Pinal County. 


In his file, AZPOST staff notes allegations that “further research or investigation is warranted, but is not feasible at this time.”


The same note can be seen in an AZPOST case involving a Bullhead City officer, fired for reportedly tripping a suspect in handcuffs and slamming his head into the pavement.


In both cases, the officers resigned amid an investigation.


READ:  After split with Sheriff's Office, Sun City Posse looks to readjust, recruit


Mark Perkovich, a compliance manager for AZPOST, said the board marks this situation as "RF," or "resolve in the future." Often, this occurs when an officer resigns, making the probe difficult or impossible for department internal affairs investigators to complete. 


Between 2000 and 2016, AZPOST marked 224 cases "RF." 


Lane said there are some cases that can't be proved one way or another, but said it's up to the new hiring agency to complete the investigation. Lane said the AZPOST hiring audit ensures the previous investigation has been "cleared up" before the officer moves on to another Arizona agency. 


Officers who have only one “for cause” termination on their records may show up at three, four or as many as eight different agencies within their career, according to The Republic's review of AZPOST data. 


Other officers jump around without any flag from AZPOST. 


Still, lateral moves — even without a for-cause termination — trigger red flags for hiring departments, according to Phoenix police Lt. Tony Lopez, who heads recruitment efforts. Lopez said while some have legitimate reasons to transfer, such as a spouse accepting a job in another city, all lateral moves are heavily scrutinized. 


In the third season of recruitment since a six-year hiring freeze, Lopez said the department has become sensitive to lateral hires.


“I think early on we were probably more open-minded,” Lopez said. “But we’ve learned that (lateral moves) are very strong indicators we should be looking very closely at.”


MORE:  Mall patrols continue amid uncertain future for sheriff's posse programs


Lopez said Phoenix police comb through hundreds of applications from officers employed elsewhere. They’re theoretically appealing options — the city doesn’t have to pay for their academy training and it takes less time to get them on the street.


“We barely manage to hire two a month,” Lopez said. “… we just cannot survive them coming here and making mistakes.”  


Each agency’s hiring department must check both AZPOST as well as the applicant’s former employers to research background.


The AZPOST audit for newly hired officers also is conducted within weeks.


Cities facing tight budgets often will take a chance on officers with records of untruthfulness, excessive force, domestic violence, DUIs or policy violations. And some cities may be unaware of previous behavior if an applicant lies about his history and the misconduct didn’t result in termination. 


For Arizona’s fired officers, a 30-mile stretch of rural land along State Route 177 has become a place of refuge.


“Sometimes it’s either these small rural communities hire troubled police officers or have no officers at all.”


Despite their modest workforces, the towns of Hayden, Kearny and Superior have absorbed more cops with checkered histories than any other agencies in the state.


More than 160 Arizona agencies employ sworn officers, but these three towns take on about one out of every seven hires after for-cause terminations: 58 out of 418. One of these hires includes the officer who was fired for failing to discover a mummified body; he was taken on in Kearny two years later. 


Hayden, an old mining town that currently employs eight officers, tallied the most at 22.


Phoenix police, the state’s largest agency with about 3,000 officers, hired four fired officers in the same period. Glendale and Tucson each hired one.


Pinal County Supervisor Pete Rios said it’s difficult for rural communities to recruit the best and the brightest. They’re fishing from the same pond as large agencies including  Phoenix police, the Department of Public Safety and the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office, which also face hiring difficulties.


Young officers, Rios said, want good schools and neighborhoods for their families and lifestyle amenities like theaters and restaurants. And the pay in small towns is often significantly less than in urban departments.


“Sometimes it’s either these small rural communities hire troubled police officers or have no officers at all,” Rios said.


Hayden police occupy an outsize presence in an otherwise forgotten town. The department is seated behind Roman columns in the heart of downtown, polished with a fresh coat of white paint. A handful of shiny patrol trucks waited out front.


But the department’s downtown neighbors are relics of the past. A boarded-up coin laundry here, a crumbling church there.


READ:  Civilian Phoenix police assistants to start handling some patrol calls


Tamatha Villar, the new police chief for both the towns of Hayden and Mammoth, said it’s “geographically challenging” to hire here.  


“This area geographically is so separated from the rest of Arizona,” she said. “You’re not in metro Tucson — it’s a challenge to fund and recruit and retain young officers.”


As a new employee herself, Villar said she couldn’t speak to the agency’s hiring decisions of the past. But she said she philosophically supports second chances.


“Absolutely I believe that police officers are human beings; they’re not without lapses in judgment,” she said. “Obviously we’re held to a higher standard of conduct; however, I strongly believe that we also have to realize that there’s a human element involved.”


For the past two years, Arizona state Reps. Reginald Bolding and Ken Clark, both Democrats, have sponsored a bill that would expand the disciplinary database maintained by AZPOST.


“Absolutely I believe that police officers are human beings; they’re not without lapses in judgment. Obviously we’re held to a higher standard of conduct; however, I strongly believe that we also have to realize that there’s a human element involved.”


In addition to terminations, the bill would have required agencies to report to the board all disciplinary actions, sustained complaints, formal reprimands and information about an investigation if an officer resigns before an investigation is complete.


The bill also would have required a hiring agency to check for an applicant’s name in the database. This portion of the AZPOST database, Bolding said, only would have been available to hiring agencies.


Bolding said a more robust, centralized database would mirror the records of other public-facing professions such as doctors, attorneys and real-estate agents.


The bill also would have added a provision to allow citizens to take action if they could prove an agency was cutting corners in reporting or hiring. This, he said, would add a level of accountability to both the employer and hiring agency.


The bill was never heard by the House Judiciary Committee.


Lane of AZPOST said that requiring the agency to maintain internal discipline records would be a duplication of efforts and that its hiring audits are effective. 


He said AZPOST isn't equipped for the type of expansion Bolding wants. 


"I don’t know where we’d store all that stuff; most probably isn’t digitized," he said. "It’d be a nightmare for us. We don’t have the personnel or the resources."


Bolding said he’s debating whether he would submit the bill in the Legislature again this year.


“I totally recognize that you have different departments that have hard-to-fill positions,” he said. “But I don’t believe that we should lower our expectations to fill gaps in policing.” 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
