Sunny. High near 95F. Winds SSW at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low near 70F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 3:52 am

Thanks for subscribing to the Omaha World-Herald and supporting local journalism. As a subscriber, you have exclusive access to articles that carry the Subscriber Plus logo (left). 

More people would be let out of jail while awaiting trial under a pilot project about to be launched in Omaha.


The Douglas County Corrections Department, faced with a crowded and chronically understaffed jail, is leading the effort.


The program would alter Douglas County’s pretrial release system to increase the use of a mathematical formula that calculates the risks that people accused of crimes will fail to appear in court or will commit a crime while awaiting trial. It would also increase the use of such supervisory tools as sobriety checks and ankle bracelets with GPS monitors.

County corrections officials have been working with representatives of judges, public defenders and prosecutors for months. They’re aiming to reduce the number of people in jail without jeopardizing public safety, said Michael Myers, community corrections manager for the county.


The various stakeholders recently reached consensus on a plan for a pilot program, Corrections Director Mark Foxall told the Douglas County Board last week. Meetings are being held this month with judges of the Douglas County District and County Courts, as well as the staffs of the Douglas County Attorney’s Office and Public Defender’s Office, and with the Omaha City Prosecutor’s Office.


They’ll launch the new method as a pilot in early June, Foxall said. It could be fully implemented later this year.


If it goes well, it could be expanded further.


Dozens of counties across the nation are turning to similar programs to address a number of related issues. One is crowded jails. Another is a concern about the civil rights of people spending months behind bars, away from their jobs and families, while awaiting trial simply because they can’t afford bail. A third is a goal of reducing racial bias.


The civil rights concerns about cash bails are mostly in the background in Omaha so far. The jail crowding is a more immediately pressing issue.


The Douglas County Jail’s average daily population has hovered above 1,300 people a day for months, almost at capacity. The vast majority of those people have not been convicted of a crime but are accused and awaiting trial. In 2015, the jail’s average daily population of people awaiting trial was 654, Myers said.


“In 2017, that number was 909,” Myers said.


The county also has struggled to hire and keep enough corrections officers to staff the jail. That has led to thousands of hours of mandatory overtime, which has led to more officers quitting. The County Board recently approved a contract offer that would raise starting pay by 22 percent to try to stem the tide. It’s pending a union vote.


Foxall recently told the County Board that if numbers in the jail don’t decline, the county will have to consider expanding the jail. That would be expensive, and the County Board’s not in a hurry to do it. Board Chairman Chris Rodgers told Foxall that he is opposed to expanding the jail by even “one inch.”


Myers said county corrections officials are confident that they can reduce the jail population without compromising public safety.


When someone is arrested and booked into jail in Omaha, a judge usually sets bail and other conditions of release. The person has to post 10 percent of that to get out of jail while his case is pending. Bail amounts can range from as little as $1,000 to more than $1 million, depending on such factors as the severity of the charges and the person’s record.


Corrections and courts officials in Omaha already use a standardized risk assessment tool to help determine how likely people are to fail to appear in court or commit a crime. It’s called the Virginia Model. The Corrections Department’s pretrial services staffers use it to calculate a risk score for each jailed person before the person’s first hearing, typically within 48 hours of arrest. They consider such factors as criminal history, the alleged offense, whether the person has failed to appear in court before and whether he or she has a job, a stable place to live, a supportive family or a connection to such resources as a counselor or Alcoholics Anonymous sponsor.


The scores are given to judges, who can use them while deciding whether to let people out of jail before trial and how high to set bail, if any.


That will still happen under the pilot program. And judges will still have discretion. But judges will have more information and more options for pretrial supervision.


“What we’re going to do is more comprehensive,” Myers said. “We’ll have a matrix that matches the level of risk with a level of supervision.”


Corrections’ pretrial services doesn’t have enough staffers to do that by a person’s initial court hearing, Myers said. But in the pilot program, pretrial services will ask for a second hearing within a few days for people who did not get released the first time around.


That will give the staff time to develop more detailed risk assessments and supervision recommendations — such as having those being released call in a couple of times a day, submit to drug and alcohol testing multiple times a day or be confined to their homes with a GPS monitor.


“This is putting in the tools to allow judges to lower bonds, or eliminate bonds, for some people, and given the things we’re doing for supervision, the public can be safe,” Myers said. “Even if we just get a fraction, if we can get 5 or 10 percent of people out, that will make a meaningful operational difference.”


He said all the stakeholders involved have been supportive.


County Board members praised the initiative. Clare Duda told Foxall he was “thrilled” that the county is going to do more to assess the risks and needs of each person in the jail.


Douglas County Attorney Don Kleine said he’ll meet with his staff about the program next week but said he didn’t have much to say about it before then.


Douglas County Public Defender Tom Riley called it a collaborative effort to address jail overcrowding and a step in the right direction.


“But the judges need to buy into it or it’s not going anywhere,” he said.




The offer is an effort to address a critical staffing shortage at the Douglas County Jail and resulting mandatory overtime that union leaders and officers say is approaching crisis levels. Leaders of the union, Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 8, support the contract offer. They will submit it to their membership for a vote within the next two weeks, said Lt. Dave Aldrich, union president.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Chris Burbach covers the Douglas County Board, Planning Board and other local government bodies, as well as local neighborhood issues. Follow him on Twitter @chrisburbach. Phone: 402-444-1057.


                                    
                                        Whenever Chris Burbach posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


