Hollywood and history just go together. This week's offerings include the haunts of a film director giant and a famously married, then divorced, actress. There are also homes owned by a popular comic actor and a decorated soap opera producer.

For a look inside a celebrity home, check out our video of the living room at the Valley home of Jeannie Mai, co-host of "The Real." Light enters the carefully curated room through French doors, while a rustic, brick fireplace creates a centerpiece.

Once you're done reading about these deals, visit and like our Facebook page, where you can find Hot Property stories and updates throughout the week. That's also a great place to leave us a tip about a celebrity home deal.

– Neal J. Leitereg and Lauren Beale

Ready for a new role

Veteran actor Vince Vaughn is poised to give up his role as landlord in Hollywood Hills West. He's put an income property in the area up for sale at $2.495 million.

Built in 1955, the Traditional-style house was previously leased out for $12,500 a month. Vaughn bought the property from actress Kate Bosworth four years ago for $2.375 million.

The split-level house has three bedrooms, three bathrooms and nearly 2,900 square feet of living space. French doors open to a terrace for indoor-outdoor living.

Bamboo hedges provide shade for a lap swimming pool in the side yard.

Vaughn, 47, has starred in such films as "Delivery Man" (2013), "Old School" (2003) and "Swingers" (1996).

Retaining its 1920s vibe

A Hollywood Hills home built for Oscar-winning film director Frank Capra is for sale at $1.549 million.

Built in 1925, the Spanish Revival-style house has such vintage details as arched doors and windows, beamed ceilings and wrought iron work.

The 3,500 square feet of interiors retain an Old World ambiance. Living areas include a cathedral-ceiling-topped great room, a formal dining area, a den, a wet bar, four bedrooms and five bathrooms.

Capra, who died in 1991 at 94, won Academy Awards for best director for "It Happened One Night" (1934), "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town" (1936) and "You Can't Take It With You" (1938). His credits include "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" (1939) and "It's a Wonderful Life" (1946).

Desert retreat of divorcee

This Spanish-style home in Palm Springs, listed at $2.199 million, is often associated with actress Jane Wyman, who leased the home shortly after her divorce from Ronald Reagan, who went on to be elected president.

The 1935 residence is set on about an acre with a putting green, an oval swimming pool, a detached casita and an outdoor kitchen.

The 4,743 square feet of living space includes a media room and five bedrooms. The master suite has two fireplaces, a walk-in closet and a large soaking tub. Colorful Spanish tile adorns the seven bathrooms.

Wyman, who died in 2007 at 90, won a best actress Oscar for "Johnny Belinda" (1948). She and Reagan met and worked together on the film "Brother Rat" (1938).

She must be getting restless

Television producer Jill Farren Phelps, whose work on the daytime soaps "General Hospital" and "The Young and the Restless" has won her scores of Emmys, has put her home in the Hollywood Hills on the market for $2.5 million.

Set on more than half an acre, the 2,606-square-foot house features vibrant hues and wallpaper, crown molding and hardwood floors. A brick-surround fireplace anchors the living and dining rooms.

A family room, a skylight-topped breakfast nook off the updated kitchen, four bedrooms and three bathrooms complete the floor plan.

Outside, a blue-tiled swimming pool and spa take in the city lights and mountains.

A piece of architectural history

Paul Williams became known as an architect to the stars during a six-decade career, catering to such Hollywood elite as Frank Sinatra, Tyrone Power and Lucille Ball.

Now his personal residence in Mid-City is on the market at $2.395 million. Built in 1951, the midcentury modern home reflects the Hollywood Regency style in the entry foyer and the wrought-iron stair railing depicting gazelles ascending the steps.

A lanai and living room open to the patio and gardens. Other rooms in the 4,440 square feet of living space include a formal dining room with built-in storage, the original kitchen and breakfast area, four bedrooms and four bathrooms.

Williams died in 1980 at 85. In addition to his large body of residential work, his projects included the LAX Theme Building and St. Jude Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.

My favorite room

Although "The Real" co-host Jeannie Mai shares her Sherman Oaks home with her mom, known to fans of the daytime talk show as Mama Mai, she didn't enlist her help in decorating the living room. The space is filled with collectibles Jeannie curated with thought and precision. Accents of gold and bronze are dispersed throughout the cabin-like space, with whimsical bird cages hanging from the ceiling.

From the archives

Ten years ago, Mary Lynn Rajskub, of the series "24," listed a remodeled two-bedroom, 800-square-foot Venice bungalow for $1.4 million. She had bought the place three years previously for $899,000.

Twenty years ago, comic actor Steve Martin sold one of his two Beverly Hills homes for about $2 million. He lived in the house while remodeling his other one.

Thirty years ago, actress Brigitte Nielsen, the former Mrs. Sylvester Stallone, purchased a 10th-floor condo on Wilshire's Miracle Mile that was listed at more than $1 million.

What we're reading

The "My Big Redneck Vacation" home in East Hampton, N.Y., has listed at $4.25 million. Newsday reports that the five-bedroom house, which was used in the Country Music Network reality television series, sits on 3.62 acres.

We love a home with history. This Chicago house – believed to be built by a Civil War veteran in 1873 — was spotted by Estately.com. The four-bedroom Victorian is listed at $700,000.

Think home prices are high in L.A.? Curbed San Francisco checks out a collapsing, unlivable house in Oakland priced at $399,000. Features include a partial roof, ample ventilation and detached exterior trim. The circa 1897 cottage is being sold for its lot value.