
    
        
            By Caitlin Mota


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

KEARNY - A woman who attempted suicide at the Hudson County jail over the weekend has died, officials said.

Cynthia Acosta was found hanging early Sunday morning. She was brought to Jersey City Medical Center where she remained in extremely critical condition for two days before dying on Tuesday, county spokesman Jim Kennelly said.

She is the fifth inmate to die since 2016 and fourth since June.

Acosta, 34, was arrested by the North Bergen Police Department on Jan. 11 on a failure-to-appear warrant related to a motor vehicle infraction, officials said. Sources said the warrant stemmed from a suspended license.

Officials could not immediately release information about the date or municipality where the warrant was issued.

In a video posted on social media, dozens of Acosta's family and friends gathered outside the Jersey City Medical Center Wednesday afternoon for a balloon release in her memory. A white flag was raised outside the hospital because the 34-year-old donated her organs.

"Here's my beautiful sister and may she rest in peace may the Lord open the gates of Heaven for her may he guide her and protect her I miss you Cindy forever I love you God bless you little sister," her brother Alex Acosta wrote on Facebook. "Thank you Lord 4 giving me my sister for as long as you did I know she's in a better place no more suffering for her thank you Lord."

The health services provided at the facility have come under heightened scrutiny in recent month. In June, an immigrant detainee died two days after being hospitalized for "gastrointestinal bleeding." His family wasn't notified of his death and learned he had died when they called the jail to check on him. An autopsy was never ordered. 

A few weeks later, Jennifer Towle was found dead inside her cell within the medical ward. An autopsy report released on Tuesday ruled her death a suicide after more than three liters of "foreign material" was found in her stomach. Officials said she was on suicide watch for most of her stay.

On the same day Acosta hanged herself, 41-year-old Dominick J. Ramunni collapsed dead inside the jail. He was awaiting sentencing for burglarizing a Bayonne deli in November. Sources said officials were looking into Ramunni's medical history to determine if he was receiving the proper treatment while in custody.

In 2016, a 24-year-old woman facing up to seven years in prison for her role in a 2012 kidnapping was found hanging from a ripped bedsheet inside her cell.

Marlboro-based CFG Health Systems, which was awarded a five-year contract in 2016 to provide health services at the county jail, has not returned requests for comment. 

Caitlin Mota may be reached at cmota@jjournal.com. Follow her on Twitter @caitlin_mota. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        