
    
        
            By Jessica Mazzola

jmazzola@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

NEWARK -- Twice in the span of two hours early Friday morning, off-duty corrections officers fired their guns while grappling with alleged criminals in the city of Newark.

In the first incident, at about 3:30 a.m., an off-duty corrections officer fired during an altercation near Elmwood Avenue and Broadway, Acting Essex County Prosecutor Robert Laurino announced in a release Friday afternoon. No one was injured in the shooting, authorities said.

At about 5:30 a.m., Laurino said a second corrections officer, who was off-duty but dressed in uniform and on his way to work, allegedly saw a man inside his parked car. The officer fired his gun, but did not hit anyone, authorities said.

The man in the car, Taquan Holland, 20, of Newark, was arrested on burglary, criminal mischief, and other related charges, officials said.

No other information about the incidents was immediately available. Though both corrections officers work in the Essex County Correctional Facility in Newark, the incidents were not related, officials said.

The Essex County Prosecutor's Office is investigating both incidents, as is required by the Attorney General whenever officers discharge their weapons, officials said. Anyone with information is asked to call 862-520-3700.

Jessica Mazzola may be reached at jmazzola@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @JessMazzola. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        