Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Clear skies. Low 64F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 64F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 6:54 pm

RADFORD — The remaining members of a rogue Radford University fraternity had all hazing charges against them dropped Thursday with most pleading guilty to lesser charges.

Also Thursday, city prosecutor Chris Rehak gave a new detail about a publicized goat disappearance more than a year ago. He said after a monthslong investigation by Radford police, it became apparent that the goat “suffered a demise at the hands of this fraternity.”

He said charges were unlikely in the goat case because of the statute of limitations. Rehak disclosed no other details about the goat.

Nobody will be charged with hazing in last September’s incident involving , according to search warrants, strippers whipping pledges and heavy drinking at the fraternity that continued to call itself Pi Kappa Phi, even though it had lost its standing with Radford University and the national organization. In 2016 it lost those affiliations because of hazing and other violations of the university’s code of conduct.

After the September incident at a residence on Downey Street, a pledge said he suffered burns, which police at the time said appeared to be from a branding . However, a team of defense attorneys reached the conclusion that the burns were probably from an e-cigarette in the pledge’s back pocket that malfunctioned and he threw away shortly after suffering the burn, said Bev Davis, an attorney representing one of the accused.

In total, 15 of 17 men pleaded guilty and were convicted of lesser charges related to last year’s incident . The other two had all charges dismissed. Some of the men entered pleas last week.

During Thursday’s hearing, the hazing charges were dropped against nine men: Jason Nicholas Wheeler, 21, of Fairfax Station; Carlos Alfredo Escobar, 23, of Alexandria; Joseph Andrew Sible, 22, of Arlington; Trever Vaughn Stanford, 22, of Hamilton; Marcel Terrence Gough, 20, of Herndon; Samuel Kent Harris, 22, of Gainesville; Justin Patrick Hooper, 20, of Ashburn; Hunter David Hanes, 19, of Roanoke; and Jacob A. Tucker, 22, of Herndon.

Wheeler, Escobar, Sible, Stanford, Harris, Hanes and Tucker pleaded guilty to purchasing alcohol for an underage person. They were sentenced to 12 months in jail, with the term suspended, and a $500 fine.

Sible, Stanford and Harris also pleaded guilty to maintaining a common nuisance and were sentenced to pay a $100 fine.

Last week, plea agreements were presented that dropped hazing charges against: Luke Everett Andress, 19, of Vienna; Kyle Dennis Best, 20, of Haymarket; Christopher Blair Gepford, 23, of Centreville; Matthew Dylan Thomas, 21, of Haymarket; Caleb Lorenzo Howard, 19, of Manassas; Joshua Ko, 19, of Fairfax; Matthew Stuart Wedel, 20, of Manassas; and Clayton Marshall O’Neill, 22, of Herndon.

Best, Howard, Ko, Wedel, Gepford and Thomas pleaded guilty to supplying alcohol to minors. They were sentenced to 12 months in jail, with the term suspended, and a $500 fine. Gepford and Thomas were also found guilty of maintaining a common nuisance and were sentenced to pay a $100 fine.

All the men were ordered not to have contact with the victim in the case.

All charges were dropped for Hooper and Andress after it was revealed they weren’t at the house the night the pledge suffered the burn, Rehak said.

Of the men charged, Best, Sible, Hamilton, Hanes, Ko and Tucker are no longer Radford University students, according to school spokeswoman Sherry Wallace.

The plea agreements were reached after what attorney Bev Davis described as a team effort of several local lawyers. The group determined the burn was roughly the same dimensions as the e-cigarette in the pledge’s pocket. He said police discovered that the device had to be thrown away shortly after the incident because it no longer worked.

Davis said burns like the ones suffered by the pledge caused by e-cigarettes are “not uncommon,” pointing to news articles about the devices causing burns across the country.

As for the goat, Pi Kappa Phi was not one of the fraternities that was investigated in the publicized search for the animal in late 2016 and early 2017. Earlier in 2016, Pi Kappa Phi had lost its national organization and Radford University affiliations.

The university investigation was sparked by an internet uproar that stemmed in part from a post via the “Goats of Anarchy” Instagram account regarding possible mistreatment of a goat. The account offered no evidence for that claim. At one point it offered a $500 reward for information leading to the animal’s location. That prompted a flurry of tips sent to the university. Inquiries regarding the goat continued for weeks, but it was never located.

Rehak said he hopes that the conclusion of this case means the end of Pi Kappa Phi in Radford.

“I pray it’s the end of [this fraternity],” he said.

Radford University announced Friday that it has concluded its investigation of four fraterni…

Radford University lifted the suspension of Alpha Sigma Phi, the final fraternity penalized …

Three of four fraternities suspended at Radford University during an investigation of possib…

Radford University placed four fraternities on interim suspension Monday after investigating…

RADFORD — A malfunctioning vape unit, not a branding iron, probably caused the mysterious bu…

RADFORD — Police have launched an investigation into an incident involving what’s being call…

RADFORD — Seventeen men have been arrested in connection with hazing at a rogue fraternity a…

Robby Korth covers higher education at Virginia Tech and Radford University.


                                    
                                        Whenever Robby Korth posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
