Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

✓ Unlimited access to trib.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (866) 981-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:27 pm

The scene of a Saturday morning shooting, where investigators say someone fired multiple rounds into a home, pictured Monday south of Bar Nunn. The Natrona County Sheriff's Office is investigating the shooting as an attempted homicide.

Crime and Courts Reporter

The scene of a Saturday morning shooting, where investigators say someone fired multiple rounds into a home, pictured Monday south of Bar Nunn. The Natrona County Sheriff's Office is investigating the shooting as an attempted homicide.

A woman was in bed Saturday morning in her home near Bar Nunn when a man fired into her bedroom and hit a cat she was petting, her husband said Monday morning.

Both the woman and her husband were unharmed. The cat, Morris, who had lived with the family for 14 years, died.

Natrona County sheriff’s deputies took Lyle James Clark, 43, of Natrona County, into custody in relation to the shooting. Sgt. Aaron Shatto said he expects Clark to be booked into jail Monday on suspicion of aggravated assault.

Shatto said Monday morning the shooter fired “several rounds” into the home on the 3400 block of North Plateau Street around 1:15 a.m. The Star-Tribune is not publishing the exact address of the home or the names of the residents at the request of Shatto and the alleged victim of the shooting.

Deputies were still looking for Clark on Monday morning, when he was considered a “person of interest.” By the time Shatto announced the detention Monday afternoon, Clark was considered a suspect. Clark was apprehended in Casper.

On Monday, blue painter’s tape covered multiple bullet holes in the home’s bedroom window.

The man who lives in the home said he had just gotten up from the bed to ash his cigarette when the shooting began.

“I said to my wife, ‘Somebody’s shooting at us,’” the man told a Star-Tribune reporter. “Then the hellfire came through.”

Shatto declined to say at a Monday afternoon news conference what type of gun was used in the attack, citing the ongoing nature of the investigation. He said sheriff’s investigators recovered eight shell casings from the scene. He said he was uncertain how many shots had been fired in total.

Shatto would not comment earlier Monday on whether a nearby security camera had recorded the shooting.

A neighbor said she was surprised to learn of the shooting on Monday. Melissa Apel, who lives on the same street, said the neighborhood is typically safe and peaceful. She was out of town with her two daughters when the shooting took place, she said.

The shooting was an isolated incident, Shatto said. Someone had targeted the family who lives in the home, he said. He declined to say what the shooter’s motive may have been.

Follow editor Joshua Wolfson on Twitter @joshwolfson



A Natrona County man appeared in court Tuesday to face allegations that he fired a .22-caliber rifle into a bedroom and nearly struck the occupants. 

Crime and Courts Reporter

Shane Sanderson is a Star-Tribune reporter who primarily covers criminal justice. Sanderson is a proud University of Missouri graduate. Lately, he’s been reading Cormac McCarthy and cooking Italian food. He writes about his own life in his free time. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Shane Sanderson  posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Give him 10 years for being a scumbag and 5 more for killing the cat.

If they find him driving a car,  I have a double sawbuck that says they look in the trunk.

too bad they won't say who they are seeking, they could find him faster if more people knew to be on the lookout


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 