Partly cloudy. High 94F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


VIDEO: McAllen baby semifinalist for 'Live with Kelly and Ryan' cute photo contest 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Republicans who secretly wished for an opening at the top of the Environmental Protection Agency got it Thursday, when ethically challenged EPA Administrator Scott “Security Detail” Pruitt tendered his resignation. But this one may fall into the category of “be careful what you wish for.” 

Many attend the re-opening of the Point Isabel Lighthouse Tuesday at Port Isabel.

Many attend the re-opening of the Point Isabel Lighthouse Tuesday at Port Isabel.

PORT ISABEL — As a lifelong Rio Grande Valley resident, Valerie Barrientos of La Feria has long wanted to climb the historic steps of the Port Isabel Lighthouse. It was still closed when she visited in September, at the tail-end of its restoration.


Barrientos, 25, got her chance to take in the 16-mile view from atop the lighthouse Tuesday, when visitors joined local and state officials to celebrate its grand reopening.

“I’ve always wanted to come,” Barrientos said. “I just think it’s great that they’re trying to preserve it.”


The lighthouse is Texas’ smallest state park, though its day-to-day operations are run by Port Isabel. It opened to the public Jan. 2, ending a 15-month closure.

“The lighthouse is a symbol of our city, it’s a symbol of our area, and it’s something people from the area hold very dear,” City Manager Jared Hockema said during the ceremony.


nadia@brownsvilleherald.com

