
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Heading into a new market year when construction costs around Denver are likely headed up, one thing that’s certain is that new ranch plans will continue in strong demand, as a generation of homeowners ages out of their older, two-story homes, wanting to move into single-level living. CalAtlantic Homes — a leading builder of luxury-sized ranch designs — has a small inventory of those homes ready to deliver by year-end, and is holding a special open house this weekend at Inspiration in Douglas County to show off their wide-open feel and attainable pricing.

With a location off E-470 at Gartrell Road that’s become popular for its amenities and good commuter access, master-planned Inspiration features an all-ranch enclave of homes by CalAtlantic where you can tour four models from two ranch collections. If you like their looks, you’ll find two homes from each series on track to deliver soon.

Those include a “4A06-C” plan at 2403 E. Caleb Place, with a ranch-style plan showing 2,285 square feet of finished space on the main level, plus an unfinished basement and a three-car garage. It provides three bedrooms and two-and-a-half baths, along with a chef’s kitchen under vaulted ceilings that shows a gas cooktop and double ovens, opening to a wide-open great room with tray ceilings. It has an exceptionally sized and appointed main-level laundry room, and a covered patio for outdoor entertaining.  The home can be ready for move-in by the holidays, and is priced at $580,200.

“If you’ve been waiting for the right moment to move over to a larger ranch design, this is a chance to take advantage of special pricing that may not be around next spring,” says Dan Nickless, Denver Division president for CalAtlantic Homes.

Nickless adds that CalAtlantic’s ranch designs show a use of space that have made them popular not just with downsizing buyers, but also younger families that are looking to Inspiration for its highly amenitized lifestyle and Douglas County schools in Parker. In an area of the county where some neighborhoods are restricted by covenant to older buyers, CalAtlantic’s neighborhood in Inspiration has no age restriction. That means lower HOA dues for CalAtlantic’s residents here, in exchange for Inspiration’s trails, community pool, event lawn, community events and other amenities.

Nickless adds that CalAtlantic’s neighborhood at Inspiration has a smaller, quieter feel than some other all-ranch areas. Sized for a buildout of around 120 homes, CalAtlantic is already well into the final third of sites available. When you tour Inspiration, you’ll notice the quick drive from here into the Denver Tech Center and other South I-25 business areas, as well as to DIA. Residents here take advantage of their proximity to Southlands Town Center and its array of restaurant options and dine-in theater, as well as to dining/entertainment attractions nearby in old-town Parker and at Park Meadows in Lone Tree.

CalAtlantic’s special open house at Inspiration is a mile south of E-470 at the Gartrell Road exit. To reach the models from I-25, take E-470 east past Parker Road to Gartrell; exit and head south a mile to Rockinghorse Parkway, and turn left a block to Del Norte.