
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

LOS ANGELES — Teammates playfully yelled at Richard Jefferson when he passed up an open 3-pointer Friday against Memphis.

The reason Jefferson didn’t fire away? He was rusty. After all, he had only played 61 total minutes during the season’s first 41 games.

Now the Nuggets need their 17-year veteran on the court more than ever. Coach Michael Malone has inserted Jefferson into the rotation at times over the past week to spell Denver’s starters during the midseason grind and bring his wealth of experience to game action.

“People forget — and I have to remind myself, for that matter — RJ last year in Cleveland, on a team that went to the Finals, was playing 20 minutes a night,” Malone said. “He still has something left, and I have to give him a chance to play.”



When Jefferson signed a one-year contract days after the season opener, Malone was up-front that Jefferson would not immediately hold a rotation spot. But the coach said he “would have no hesitancy” to put Jefferson in a game and that “at some point, he’s gonna be called upon.”

That prediction came true last week when, after a stunning home loss to Atlanta, Malone again vowed to give more playing time to his bench. Jefferson was not surprised when Malone delivered the news that he’d soon get his chance, given minutes were piling up for the Nuggets’ young core as they dropped three consecutive games for the first time all season.

“I know no player is ever out of the rotation for 82 games, especially if you’re being a professional,” Jefferson said. “There’s going to be an opportunity — whether it’s due to injuries, needing to change some things, the toughness of the schedule, the matchups coming up. So it’s just a matter of being ready.”

Defense and rebounding were the initial focuses for Jefferson, who also hit a key jumper in the win over Memphis. Then in a blowout loss to the Spurs, he totaled six points on 3-of-6 shooting and three rebounds in 24 minutes. Though he did not play in Tuesday’s win over Dallas, he’s a contender to receive minutes in Wednesday’s game at the Los Angeles Clippers on the second night of a back-to-back set.


Jefferson’s recent on-court production is now complementing his “invaluable” off-the-court leadership displayed throughout the season’ first half.

He peppers teammates with advice on the bench, with standout Nikola Jokic noting Jefferson can say “one or two sentences just to kind of wake me up.” Jefferson challenges youngsters like Malik Beasley with post moves during pick-up games following practices or shootarounds. He speaks up in the locker room, with Malone particularly recalling Jefferson’s pointed message about a lack of physicality following a December loss at New Orleans that helped carry the Nuggets through their longest road trip to date.

“I have no problem being the bad guy, and I’ll say what I have to say,” Malone said. “But when a peer says it, I think it carries that much more weight.”

Added Jokic: “He’s seen everything. He’s played with the best. He’s guarded the best players. So he knows the small things that matter.”

Jokic joked that Jefferson is “not talking that much, because he’s tired” due to the uptick in playing time. Jefferson expects to fully be in rhythm in about a week, because no practice or workout can completely simulate game action.

Then perhaps he’ll stop passing up open 3-pointers. But even while he’s on the floor, Jefferson knows his role extends beyond his stat line.

“My game is judged by how much I can contribute eating minutes for some starters, making sure the lead stays within range and just trying to be a calming presence,” Jefferson said.