Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 6:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


 

DENVER (AP) — Nikola Jokic and Will Barton grew up worlds apart. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

An undated photo of the former 3,000-bed Willacy County Correctional Center, which will now be used as an ICE detainees.

Bishop Daniel E. Flores, Archbishop José H. Gomez, Cardinal Daniel N. DiNardo, Bishop Joseph C. Bambera and Bishop Robert J. Brennan sit for a press conference on Monday, July 2, 2018, at the National Shrine at the Eugene De Mazenod Renewal Center in San Juan.

Roel "Roy" Rodriguez

An undated photo of the former 3,000-bed Willacy County Correctional Center, which will now be used as an ICE detainees.

ICE to hold inmates in new Willacy detention center


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement is coming back to town.


Bishop Daniel E. Flores, Archbishop José H. Gomez, Cardinal Daniel N. DiNardo, Bishop Joseph C. Bambera and Bishop Robert J. Brennan sit for a press conference on Monday, July 2, 2018, at the National Shrine at the Eugene De Mazenod Renewal Center in San Juan.

Bishops get closer look at immigration


Bishops from across the country — including the president and vice president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops — gathered in the Rio Grande Valley on Sunday and Monday to see firsthand the experience of children and parents who have recently migrated to the United States.


Roel "Roy" Rodriguez

McAllen city manager receives raise


Roel "Roy" Rodriguez, who has served as city manager since 2014, received a $25,000 raise last week from city commissioners on the grounds that he remove his name from the finalist list for the Brownsville city manager job.

Sentence handed down in meth case


A Mission man was sentenced for his role in the sale of meth last April.

