Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Natalie Musumeci


		
		
		
		
	


									June 28, 2018 | 3:29pm
											| Updated June 28, 2018 | 4:05pm
												

The hip-hop music producer whose body was found at the New Jersey home of Giants cornerback Janoris Jenkins died after a brawl with the football star’s older ex-con brother, according to a new report.

William Jenkins Jr., 34, and Roosevelt Rene, 25, got into a “physical altercation” early Monday inside the NFL player’s luxury Fair Lawn home — where Rene had been staying and where officials listed William as living, according to court documents obtained by NJ.com.

The complaint against William, filed in Bergen County Superior Court, alleges that William fled the state of New Jersey following the fight that would lead to Rene’s death, the news outlet reported.

Rene’s cause of death was not yet known and the complaint did not detail the fatal injuries that he suffered.

The body of Rene, a Jenkins family friend who produced music under the name Trypps Beatz, was discovered in the basement of the six-bedroom Van Saun Place residence around 10:40 a.m. Tuesday.

Roughly nine hours earlier, William was busted in upstate New York and held in the Ontario County Jail for violating the conditions of his parole, officials said.

According to NJ.com, investigators learned of William’s deadly fight with Rene after interviewing him in the Canandaigua jail.

William — who has a lengthy rap sheet and was released on parole from New York state prison in July 2016 after being busted in April 2011 on drug charges — was charged Wednesday with aggravated manslaughter in the death of Rene.

Janoris Jenkins has been in Florida since the end of the Giants minicamp more than two weeks ago and was reportedly advised by lawyers to remain there.

He has not made any public statements on the matter.

William remains in upstate New York pending extradition to Bergen County.

A neighbor in Fair Lawn told The Post this week that William was living in his Pro Bowl brother’s basement — where Rene’s body was found.

Additional reporting by Jennifer Bain


			Read Next
		


			
				Pro golfer losing his vision as cancer battle takes bad tu...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Pro golfer losing his vision as cancer battle takes bad tu...			
		

Share Selection

52,124

32,139

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						