Children play under a dome of water at Cliff Fen Park in Burnsville.

Photo: Glen Stubbe / Star Tribune

BUY

SHARE

ABOUT

BURNSVILLE

OCT. 1

Theft. A 23-year-old St. Paul woman was arrested for theft after she was caught shoplifting at Macy’s, 14251 Burnhaven Drive.

OCT. 2

Property damage. A 25-year-old Burnsville man was arrested for property damage on the 13700 block of Nicollet Avenue S.

Theft. A Savage man, 23, was arrested for theft after he was caught shoplifting at Holiday, 14150 Irving Av. S.

JORDAN

OCT. 10

Drugs. An officer observed a suspicious vehicle on the 500 block of Sunset Drive. A 29-year-old man was arrested for possession of a controlled substance.

OCT. 15

Drunken driving. A 24-year-old man was arrested for drunken driving and possession of a handgun under the influence of alcohol after he was stopped for speeding at Hwy. 169 and Delaware Avenue.

PRIOR LAKE

OCT. 3

Theft. Officers responded to Holiday, 16800 Duluth Av., on a report that four boys attempted to steal four packs of cigarettes. The cigarettes were recovered. No charges were filed.

OCT. 5

Theft. A cellphone was stolen from an unlocked vehicle on the 17400 block of Ponds Parkway.

Drugs. A 42-year-old Hamburg man was arrested for possession of a controlled substance and receiving stolen property at Dakota Convenience, 15035 Mystic Lake Drive.

OCT. 7

Drugs. A 20-year-old Minneapolis man was arrested for possession of a controlled substance, introduction of contraband to jail and three outstanding warrants at Franklin Circle SE. and Crossandra Street.

Assault. A 59-year-old Carver man was arrested for assault and disorderly conduct at Mystic Lake Hotel, 2400 Mystic Lake Blvd.

Drunken driving. A 19-year-old Waconia man was arrested for drunken driving at Mystic Lake Casino, 2400 Mystic Lake Blvd.

OCT. 9

Drugs. A 26-year-old Richfield woman was arrested for two counts of possession of a controlled substance and a 21-year-old Coon Rapids man was arrested on a warrant at Mystic Lake Casino, 2400 Mystic Lake Blvd.

SHAKOPEE

SEPT. 29

Driving violation. A 16-year-old girl was cited for a bus stop-arm violation following a traffic stop at Shakopee Avenue and Spencer Street.

SEPT. 30

Driving violation. A 32-year-old Minneapolis woman was cited for driving after revocation, no proof of insurance, allowing an open bottle in a motor vehicle and possession of drug paraphernalia at Mystic Lake Drive NW. and Valley View Road.

OCT. 2

Drugs. A 27-year-old Shakopee man was arrested for possession of marijuana, providing false information to police and driving after license revocation at Canterbury Road S. and Eagle Creek Boulevard.

OCT. 3

Drugs. A 29-year-old Anoka man was arrested for possession of a controlled substance and hypodermic needles, and for driving after license revocation following a traffic stop at Hwy. 101 and Shenandoah Drive.

OCT. 4

Theft. A 38-year-old St. Paul woman was arrested for receiving stolen property, driving after license revocation and providing fraudulent identification following a traffic stop at Holiday, 3901 Eagle Creek Blvd. The passenger, a 33-year-old Lakeville man, was arrested on a warrant and possession of methamphetamine.

Drugs. A 41-year-old Vadnais Heights man was arrested for possession of a controlled substance at Mystic Lake Drive NW. and County Road 42.

Susan Hilliard • 612-673-7131

An arrest or citation means police suspect a crime has occurred; they are allegations and still must go before a judge. Items are selected from reports made to police departments and are not intended to provide a comprehensive picture of crime.

StarTribune.com welcomes and encourages readers to comment and engage in substantive, mutually
                        respectful exchanges over news topics. Commenters must follow our Terms of Use.

Comments will be reviewed before being published.

© 2018 StarTribune. All rights reserved.