Missouri Gov. Eric Greitens came out swinging against reports Thursday that he slapped and blackmailed a woman he had an extramarital affair with.

The 43-year-old Republican, a self-billed family values man, admitted that he met his mistress when she cut his hair in 2015.

Greitens said he engaged in a months-long sexual relationship with the unidentified hairdresser, and a recording published by a St. Louis TV station on Thursday suggests that the governor threatened to disclose nude photos of the woman if she ever spoke about their affair.

Later Thursday, Talking Points Memo reported that Greitens once slapped the woman after she told him that she had sex with her husband.

The shocking claims prompted Democrats and activists to call on Grietens to step down.

"The allegations of sexual exploitation and blackmail against Governor Greitens are deeply disturbing and disgusting," Nita Chaudhary, co-founder of women's advocacy group UltraViolet, said in a statement. "Sexual exploitation and blackmail are crimes — plain and simple ... Greitens should resign immediately."

But the governor, who was elected in 2016, vowed Thursday afternoon that he's going nowhere because the allegations of blackmail and violence against him are "completely false."

The bizarre secret recording that set off an avalanche of outrage against Greitens featured the governor inviting his mistress to his home. Once she got there, Greitens supposedly blindfolded her and taped her hands to an exercise apparatus after offering to teach her "how to do a perfect pull-up."

Then, Greitens apparently took a photo of the woman.

"He stepped back, I saw a flash through the blindfold and he said: 'you're never going to mention my name, otherwise there will be pictures of me everywhere,'" the woman told KMOV, which first reported the recording.

Greitens allegedly later said he deleted the picture, though the woman's ex-husband claimed the future governor remained in her life as their marriage disintegrated.

The governor, who has been married since 2011, said in a statement that being unfaithful in his marriage was a "deeply personal mistake."

He thanked "God's mercy" for helping his wife, Sheena, forgive him after he ended the affair.

"We have a loving marriage and an awesome family; anything beyond that is between us and God. I want the media and those who wish to peddle gossip to stay away from me and my children," Sheena Greitens said in a separate message.

A lawyer for the governor told the station that broke the report that it "contained multiple false allegations" and threatened legal action.

"There was no blackmail and that claim is false," the lawyer said. "This personal matter has been addressed by the Governor and Mrs. Greitens privately years ago when it happened. The outrageous claims of improper conduct regarding these almost three-year-ago events are false."