Sunny. High 89F. Winds light and variable..

A clear sky. Low 69F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 6:53 am

The number of Americans living with Alzheimer’s disease is expected to more than triple in the next few decades – from five million today to more than 16 million by 2050, unless a cure is found.


As the number of individuals with Alzheimer’s and other forms of dementia grows, so, too, will the need for communities to adapt and become more accessible to those living with dementia-related diseases. Every 66 seconds someone in the U.S. develops Alzheimer’s disease.


This September, as part of World Alzheimer’s Month, the Home Instead Senior Care network is on a mission to educate Americans about Alzheimer’s. Home Instead is encouraging people to learn more about the disease and how to respectfully and compassionately interact with those who live with it.


On Alzheimer’s Learning Day, Sept. 21, Home Instead Senior Care invites people in northern Georgia to participate in free live training webinars. The online sessions will feature leading experts in Alzheimer’s and dementia care and help people better respond to the needs of those living with the condition. Details about the webinars can be found on the program website, www.alzlearn.com.


“As the number of seniors in our community grows, it is likely that every one of us will be touched by Alzheimer’s at some point, whether it’s a family member, neighbor, friend or customer at work,” Jeff Shiovitz, owner of the Home Instead Senior Care office serving central and north Atlanta, one of eight offices serving northern Georgia, said in a news release. “That’s why it’s important for each of us to learn how to better interact with people living with Alzheimer’s or dementia. That way we can create a supportive environment that engages them.”


Home Instead’s Alzheimer’s Learning Day hopes to help improve the quality of life for those living with the disease and for their caregivers. Currently, more than 15 million Americans provide unpaid care for those living with the Alzheimer’s and nearly 60 percent of individuals with dementia-related diseases live at home with support from family, friends and other members of the community.


“Many people caring for someone with dementia feel alone and isolated from their communities,” Benita Summers, co-owner of the Home Instead Senior Care office serving east Atlanta, said in a news release. “Caregivers need allies who understand the disease and who have knowledge and resources to help those living with Alzheimer’s or other forms of dementia. By educating the community, we are fostering a global movement to build dementia friendly neighborhoods that will reduce the stigma and isolation of caregiving and bring caregivers back into the fold.”


Summers said the commitment to learn more about Alzheimer’s and other dementias is one we all should make. To do so, here are five steps you can take:


1. Learn the symptoms. Visit http://www.helpforalzheimersfamilies.com/alzheimers-dementia-dealing/symptoms-and-stages/ to learn more about the symptoms and signs of Alzheimer’s and other dementias.


2. Read an article about Alzheimer’s. Articles about Alzheimer’s can be found at http://www.helpforalzheimersfamilies.com/alzheimers-dementia-dealing/guide/.


3. Watch and share the “I Will Remember You” video at http://www.helpforalzheimersfamilies.com/alzheimers-dementia-dealing/capturing-memories/video/.


4. Take an E-Learning Class. Visit http://www.helpforalzheimersfamilies.com/alzheimers-dementia-education/ to find an online Alzheimer’s and dementia class that interests you.


5. Spread the word. Take the Home Instead Alzheimer’s Learning Day pledge and share on your social media channels why you are participating.


For more information about Home Instead Senior Care’s Alzheimer’s Learning Day, webinar details and tips for respectfully interacting with someone living with Alzheimer’s or dementia, visit www.alzlearn.com.



A Family Affair, the eighth annual dinner to benefit the Emory University Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, will take place Nov. 16 at the …

The of the Alzheimer’s Association’s Georgia chapter June 19 announced Linda Davidson, former senior director of Relay for Life for the Americ…


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Choose your city:


                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Search Neighbor Newspapers Archives

Sorry, there are no recent results for popular images.

Sorry, there are no recent results for popular videos.

Sorry, there are no recent results for popular collections.

Sorry, there are no recent results for popular commented articles.

Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription