Gallery: Fatal hit-and-run crash in North Bergen, Sept. 26, 2017


    
        
            By Caitlin Mota


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- The 36-year-old man accused of running a woman over while she sat at a North Bergen bus stop is due in court after turning himself into police Monday morning. 

The court has pushed back Olvy Torres's 1:30 p.m. appearance by two hours and the lingering question is: will he be detained?

Sources say Torres, a New York resident, scored low enough on his public safety assessment for a recommendation to be made that he be released from custody following the Sept. 26 crash that killed Luisa Valdez, a nursing assistant at a long-term care facility. 

But sources indicate the state is expected to request that Torres remain in jail under the state's Criminal Justice Reform Act. If that does happen, Torres would likely appear in court again Friday for a detention hearing. 

It's unclear if that motion will be accepted.

Dozens of Torres's family members and friends packed into the lower level courtroom at the Hudson County Administration building this afternoon. They were asked to leave the courtroom and come back at 3:30 p.m. Most gathered across the street waiting to return for the hearing. 



Both of Torres's attorneys told The Jersey Journal they would think about commenting on the case after the hearing. 

Authorities say Torres was driving a small SUV at about 6:30 a.m. when he jumped the curb on River Road and hit Valdez, who was sitting at a bus stop in front of her job at the Harborage. 

Torres allegedly fled on foot, prompting police to ask for the public's help locating him one day later. Authorities said an "enormous amount of pressure" from the public led him to turn himself in. 

Caitlin Mota may be reached at cmota@jjournal.com. Follow her on Twitter @caitlin_mota. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        