
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Nuggets coach Michael Malone approached Trey Lyles during Tuesday’s shootaround to express thanks for his professionalism.

Lyles put together his best performance as a Nugget during Saturday’s blowout loss to the Golden State Warriors, totaling 11 points, three rebounds and two blocks in the game’s final 15 minutes. He’s currently the victim of the logjam at power forward, with an all-star in Paul Millsap backed up by Kenneth Faried in Malone’s nine-man rotation. Wilson Chandler and Mason Plumlee are also options when Denver plays a smaller or bigger lineup.

“I can’t play everybody. That’s what it boils down to,” Malone said. “There’s nothing I’m waiting to see more of from Trey Lyles. He’s shown me everything, and I know that if there’s a situation where I can play him, I’m going to have complete confidence in doing so.”

Lyles, whom the Nuggets acquired in a trade with the Utah Jazz on draft night, described conversations with Malone about his limited playing time as “really positive.” He has remained engaged by gaining continuity with teammates during practice and studying opponent scouting reports. And he still feels his strengths as a skilled outside shooter and passer are a better fit in Denver’s free-flowing style.

“I’m not very patient,” Lyles said. “But in a situation like this, I just have to continue to wait for my time to have my number called.”

Spencer Dinwiddie returns. After a rocky start to his professional basketball career, former University of Colorado standout Spencer Dinwiddie has carved out a rotation role with the Brooklyn Nets.

Dinwiddie, who entered Tuesday averaging 10.3 points and 5.4 assists per game while shooting 45.7 percent from 3-point distance, got his second start of the season. Most of the time, he spearheads the Nets’ offense as the second-team point guard.

“My Brooklyn Nets experience in general has been my second chance,” Dinwiddie said. “The biggest difference that separates guys is being comfortable and being confident in whatever it is that you’re doing in your role.”

Dinwiddie was drafted in the second round by the Detroit Pistons in 2014 and then toggled between the NBA club and the D-League’s Grand Rapids Drive. He was traded to the Chicago Bulls in 2016 and was waived, re-signed and waived again over the next four months, before signing with the D-League’s Windy City Bulls. He then signed with the Nets last December and appeared in 59 games, an experience he called a “crash course” to prepare for this season.


Nets coach Kenny Atkinson said Dinwiddie’s development over the past year is “what we’re all about.” Dinwiddie’s next step? Consistency.

“He put his finger through the ceiling. Can he punch a hole in it?” Atkinson said. “Can he make that next step? I think that’s the hardest step, but he’s on his way there if he keeps playing the way he’s playing now.”