Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Former Hidalgo County district clerk, Omar Guerrero, appears at the Hidalgo County Jail courtroom to face charges of possession of a controlled substance and tampering with identificaiton numbers on a firearm at an  arraignment hearing May 4, 2013 in Edinburg. photo by joel martinez/jmartinez@themonitor.com

Arnaldo Corpus

Arnaldo Corpus

Former Hidalgo County district clerk, Omar Guerrero, appears at the Hidalgo County Jail courtroom to face charges of possession of a controlled substance and tampering with identificaiton numbers on a firearm at an  arraignment hearing May 4, 2013 in Edinburg. photo by joel martinez/jmartinez@themonitor.com

EDINBURG — A Hidalgo County jury may hear the county’s first bond forfeiture case in recent memory should attorneys for the state and a bail bondsman not come to an agreement by Monday.


A six-person jury was selected Tuesday for Monday’s trial involving the forfeiture of Omar Guerrero’s $50,000 bond, which stems from a misdemeanor charge.


The forfeiture process began in October 2013, when Guerrero failed to appear for his arraignment for tampering with the identification number on an assault rifle.

After his arrest for the misdemeanor and two felony drug possession and distribution charges, Guerrero is believed to have fled to Mexico in May of that year after he posted bond and was released from jail. While the forfeiture process has been initiated for the $1 million bond attached to the felony charges, that case has yet to be settled.


During Tuesday’s jury selection proceeding, Assistant District Attorney Eric Schreiber described the trial to potential jurors as a “civil proceeding about a criminal matter.”


The civil proceeding does not involve Guerrero but rather Arnoldo Corpus, a Mission-based bail bondsman who covered the $50,000 bond nearly five years ago.


While Schreiber described a bail bond as an insurance policy that an individual will appear in court following his or her release from jail on bond, Corpus’ attorney, Oscar Alvarez, said that he and his client had a different view. Rather it is the duty of court officials to get the accused to appear in court, Alvarez said.


In addition to proving that Guerrero did not appear in court, the state must also prove during the trial that there was a valid bond and judgment nisi — the latter of which is not effective until a certain condition is met.

Alvarez told prospective jurors that during trial, he will challenge the bond amount.


“We have a $50,000 bond on a misdemeanor charge, which the state concedes is high and this is on a Class A misdemeanor … (where) the maximum penalty as far as money on that charge is $4,000,” Alvarez said.


One reason why the bond may have been set so high is that Guerrero had previously fled to Mexico in December 2006 after police issued an arrest warrant for him on sexual assault charges for which he was later acquitted. Police arrested him two months later in Reynosa, Mexico.


County Court-at-Law Judge Rodolfo “Rudy” Gonzalez told Schreiber and Alvarez that he “will proceed with the case” if no settlement agreement is reached.


msmith@themonitor.com



Arnaldo Corpus


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.