
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

A Denver Police Department officer was justified in firing his shotgun twice at a suspect who had holed up in a bathroom with a butcher knife and then sprang from the room with a war cry to attack the officers, the Denver District Attorney concluded.

Cpl. John Albergotti, a 10-year veteran of the department, was one of six officers who had been called to a home on the 1800 block of South Alcott Street on the evening of Feb. 6 because a strange man had kicked in the door while a family was home. He was the only officer who fired a weapon at 29-year-old Alex Duran, who was suspected in a carjacking and the home invasion.

“Under these dangerous circumstances, Corporal Albergotti was forced to make a split-second judgment, and his decision to shoot Mr. Duran in self-defense and defense of others was justified under Colorado law,” McCann wrote in a letter clearing the officer of any criminal wrong-doing.

McCann will hold a meeting to discuss her decision at 6 p.m. June 28 at Hadley Branch Library, 1890 S. Grove St.

Police first were called that night by Duran’s mother, who reported that her son was on drugs and threatening her with a knife. He fled before police reached her, but minutes later a couple reported that their Pontiac had been taken at knifepoint on Federal Boulevard, just blocks from where Duran’s mother lived.

A few minutes later, a woman called to report that someone had crashed a Pontiac into her garbage can and ran away with the engine running. She lived less than 3 miles from the carjacking scene, the letter said.

Almost at the same time, a man called 911 to report that a strange man had broken into his South Alcott Street house and that he and his family had fled. He lived one street away from where the Pontiac had crashed.

Inside the house, Duran locked himself in a bedroom, where police officers spent about 30 minutes negotiating with him to coax him out of the room. At one point, Duran darted from the bedroom to a bathroom.

From there, he screamed something about killing the officers as he lunged at them with the knife, the letter said.


Duran, who died from the shots, had methamphetamine, amphetamines and cannabinoids in his blood, the letter said.