Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Scott did not directly address banning assault weapons after being asked multiple times by reporters.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Students from Broward County boarded buses on Tuesday, Feb. 20, 2018, to talk guns and mental health issues with legislators.
    Wochit

Florida Gov. Rick Scott listens to Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel speak at a news conference near Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland on Wednesday, Feb. 14, 2018, following a mass shooting at the school.
(Photo: XAVIER MASCAREÑAS/TCPALM)Buy Photo

TALLAHASSEE - Everything is "on the table" when it comes to policy and budget decisions proposed in response to the deadly mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, Gov. Rick Scott said Tuesday.


That may include banning assault weapons, the governor told reporters Tuesday night after a roundtable discussion with mental health advocates, law enforcement personnel and leaders in the state's education system. Scott did not say outright that he supports a ban on assault weapons. 


More: Florida House defeats move to debate a ban on assault weapons


Scott said he will unveil a legislative plan by Friday that addresses what he believes needs to be done after the shooting that killed 17 students and staff members. 


The roundtable discussion followed three separate meetings held by mental health professionals, education officials and law enforcement officers about what policies could be enacted after the shooting. 


Frank Brogan, assistant secretary at the U.S. Department of Education and former lieutenant governor, applauded state officials for how they are responding to the shooting. 


“If something better doesn’t come of this, all we’re going to have is an enormous tragedy," Brogan said.


More: While students demand action, House says assault weapons ban is not up for discussion


A major topic during the public safety discussion was how the state can respond after a person is temporarily committed under the Baker Act. 


Sheriffs said during the meeting that under current state law, they cannot seize someone's weapons while they are committed. Attorney General Pam Bondi said her office is researching whether police could temporarily take someone’s gun while they're committed. The person would have to go before a judge to get their weapons back under the proposal. 


More: Baker Acted in school? It happens all the time | Gil Smart


Florida law would need to be changed to make that a reality. 


Pinellas County Sheriff Bob Gualtieri expressed frustrations with the current background check system for gun owners, saying it wasn't a true check. Currently, the state requires gun shops to check only two things before determining if a buyer can purchase a gun: whether they have a felony charge that prohibits them from owning one, and whether a court has determined the buyer is mentally ill. 


More: Was Broward shooter out for 'revenge?' | Gil Smart


Scott said he would be interested in boosting school safety money in the wake of the tragedy. 


The Florida Legislature has not increased the amount of money that Safe Schools, the state's school safety program, in seven years.


Education Secretary Pam Stewart said one other change that could be made is to require active shooter drills in all school districts. Currently, districts are not required to train students on how to respond to a shooter. 


Bondi also suggested having undercover security officers at each school.


Department of Children and Families Secretary Mike Carroll pushed a "team-based" approach to mental health during the meeting.  He said he'd like to see families and mental health providers to work together while treating children. 


He also advocated for early intervention and identification programs to treat students with mental health issues. 


During the workshop Tuesday morning, Heather Flynn, a clinical psychologist and professor at Florida State University's College of Medicine, suggested even talking with pregnant women.


“You can predict pretty well which families will have this forward trajectory even before the child is born,” Flynn said during the meeting.


More: Viral ascent of 'Never Again' movement could change Florida gun laws | Eve Samples


Student survivors of the shooting and Democrats in the legislature have called for the state to ban automatic weapons. The Florida House nixed a proposal by state Rep. Kionne McGhee, D-Miami, that would have allowed the Republican-controlled House to consider a ban on large-capacity magazines and assault rifles. 


 
