Gallery: Miguel Angel Cabrera Romero arraignment


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A Jersey City man pleaded guilty to aggravated manslaughter today and admitted covering his girlfriend's nose and mouth with his hands and suffocating her during an argument in the Heights in April.

Miguel Angel Cabrera Romero, 56, was charged with murder after the body of Albenelis Vidal De Larosa, 51, of Bergen Avenue, was found wrapped in blankets in front of 79-89 Reservoir Ave. on April 29. The location is across the street from Cabrera Romero's home.

Under the plea deal laid out by Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Leo Hernandez in court today, the state will recommend Cabrera Romero be sentenced to 30 years in prison with no chance of parole until after serving more than 25 years.

When Hudson County Superior Court Judge Patrick Arre asked Cabrera Romero why he was pleading guilty today, Romero said "I committed the crime," through a Spanish translator.

Cabrera Romero is not a United States citizen and Arre told him he will be deported after serving his sentence. He displayed no emotion while admitting killing De Larosa and how he did it.

While placing a factual basis for the plea on the record, Cabrera Romero's attorney asked him if his actions displayed "an extreme indifference to the value of human life?"

Cabrera Romero answered "Yes."



The killer was arrested a day after the homicide and has remained in custody at the Hudson County jail in Kearny since then. He will be sentenced by Arre on Jan. 12 in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.

Family members of the victim in court today chose not to comment on the guilty plea.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        