
    
        
            By Allison Pries

apries@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Two Paterson men were arrested with $10,000 worth of heroin after a month-long undercover investigation.

Authorities received information last month that Merciful Parks, 24, was distributing heroin throughout Bergen County and launched an investigation, the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office said in a press release Saturday. 

An undercover detective from the prosecutor's office allegedly purchased several bricks of heroin from Parks on two separate occasions in Oct. and Nov. Then, on Friday, the detective made arrangements to buy 30 bricks -- 1,500 bags -- of heroin from Parks.

The two allegedly agreed to meet at the Westfield Garden State Plaza mall in Paramus. Prior to the transaction, officers arrested Parks and Jeffrey H. Rincon, 28, in the mall's parking lot. 

Parks was also allegedly in possession of a small quantity of marijuana, authorities said.

Parks was charged with possession with the intent to distribute heroin, two counts of distribution of heroin and possession of marijuana under 50 grams. He was sent to the Bergen County Jail to await a court appearance.

Rincon was charged with possession with the intent to distribute heroin. He also had an outstanding warrant for an unrelated offense and was sent to the Bergen County Jail.

The investigation was conducted jointly by members of the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency Paterson Post, Dumont Police, Tenafly Police, Paramus Police and the Bergen County Regional SWAT Team.  

Allison Pries may be reached at apries@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @AllisonPries. Find NJ.com on Facebook. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        