
    
        
            By Ron  Zeitlinger


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A Paterson woman went on a spending spree with a credit card she stole from a co-worker at a Secaucus business, police said.

Joanny Paulino, 37, was arrested on March 23 and charged with two counts of credit card fraud and burglary, Secaucus police Capt. Dennis Miller said.

Police say stole at least one credit card from the victim's vehicle and then purchased plane tickets and made purchases from various retailers totaling at least $940. The victim became aware of the fraudulent activity after she received numerous alerts from the credit card company.

Paulino was processed, issued a summons and released, Miller said.

On March 21, police responded to the Home Depot in Secaucus and arrested a 67-year-old Hoboken man on shoplifting charges, Miller said. The man was taken to Hudson County jail.

On March 19, a 25-year-old North Bergen man was charged with possession of marijuana after a traffic stop in Secaucus, Miller said. The man was also issued three motor vehicle summonses and taken to Hudson County jail.

The following day, a Union City man was charged with two drug counts after a motor vehicle stop by Secaucus police. The 22-year-old was charged with possession of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia, Miller said. He was also issued two motor vehicle summonses.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        