
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- Jersey City police patrolling an area known for drug offenses, disorderly groups and drinking in public arrested a 38-year-old man on charges related to 94 bags of suspected heroin with the logo "Warrior" and one with the logo "Thriller."

Monarch S. Hopson, of the 500 block of Bergen Avenue, is charged with drug counts including possession with intent to distribute within 500 feet of public property and within 1,000 feet of School 14, located at 153 Union St., the criminal complaint says.



On Dec. 2 at 12:50 p.m., Street Crimes Unit officers were following a slow moving vehicle when it pulled over beside Hopson and another man. The officers said Hopson was drinking a Colt 45 beer and was manipulating objects in his hands, the complaint says.

When the officers pulled up at Bergen Avenue near Clarke Street and searched Hopson they found the suspected drugs and $295, the complaint says, adding that he was taken into custody.

Hopson made his first appearance on the charges on Dec. 4 in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny. At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        