Gallery: Hoboken Terminal crash damage


    
        
            By South Jersey Times Letters





I enjoyed reading Larry Higgs' recent commentary about NJ Transit, in which the reporter -- who has covered the transit agency for 20 years --offered his view on the myriad of issues involved in its tough climb from being a "national disgrace," as Gov. Phil Murphy has described it.

Higgs mentioned a proposed Passaic-Hudson-Bergen light rail line, an idea that was revived in 2015. Many see the money that was spent on a study completed in 2008 as being wasted, since the data is now outdated.



Another $9 million has been spent by NJ Transit and the Delaware River Port Authority to study a proposed light-rail line between Camden and Glassboro. The most recent phase of that study started in 2009, so I would argue that it also is irrelevant due to changing demographics.

This Camden-Glassboro line was supposed to "save" downtown Woodbury, one of its key stops. However, since 2009, the Gloucester County Jail there was closed, and most of Inspira Health Network's Woodbury hospital will be relocated to Harrison Township. The hospital transfer alone will eliminate 1,100 jobs in Woodbury, and result in fewer trips there by patients, visitors and delivery people,

And, if the paltry number of new jobs being created by the tax-credit funded resurgence of Camden are supposed to be filled by residents of that city, they would not need to use a Camden-Glassboro rail line. 

The estimated cost of the this line has also ballooned from $1.6 billion to $2.3 billion since it was first proposed. Will there be another tax increase in our future, in addition to the 23-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax increase enacted in 2016, and championed by state Senate President Stephen Sweeney?

Carol Rhodes, Barnsboro

Send a letter to the editor of South Jersey Times at sjletters@njadvancemedia.com

Bookmark NJ.com/Opinion. Follow on Twitter @NJ_Opinion and find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        