
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A 20-year-old North Bergen man has been charged with having sex with an underage girl he met at a Christmas party, authorities said.

Nixon Amaya, of the 1200 block of 12th Street, was arrested Wednesday and charged with sexual assault, criminal sexual contact and endangering the welfare of a child, the criminal complaint says.

The Hudson County Prosecutor's Office Special Victims Unit was contacted regarding the alleged Jan. 12 incident and a sexual assault evidence collection kit was performed on the 14-year-old girl, the complaint says.

The girl told detectives she met Amaya at a party on Dec. 24, where they danced, kissed and exchanged contact information. She said she missed school on Jan. 12 and met Amaya at his friend's home, where they had sex, the complaint says.

The girl's mother told investigators Amaya called an Uber to take the girl to the home of Amaya's friend. The mother said the girl was "with" him, but would not provide further details, the complaint says.

Amaya was questioned Wednesday and then arrested. He made his first appearance on the charges Thursday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the judge noted that Immigration and Customs Enforcement had filed a detainer on Amaya, who is apparently in the country illegally.



The state moved to detain Amaya through the course of his prosecution and a detention hearing is scheduled for today before Hudson County Superior Court Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        