Gallery: Olvy Torres detention hearing, Oct. 16, 2017


    
        
            By Caitlin Mota


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A New York man has admitted to fatally striking a woman with a vehicle while she sat at a bus stop outside her job in North Bergen last year.

Olvy Torres pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of a crash resulting in death for the Sept. 26 wreck that killed Luisa Valdez, 59.

Authorities say Torres, who was 36 at the time, jumped the curb on River Road near Hackensack Meridian Health Palisades Medical Center, plowed through a bus stop, and hit Valdez. He left his car at the scene and took off on foot. He was arrested a few days later after an "enormous amount of pressure" from the public resulted in his surrender to authorities.

Valdez worked for 27 years at the Harborage, a nursing home next to and affiliated with Palisade Medical Center.

During the investigation, police recovered $500,000 in cash, bags of diamonds, and a motorcycle inside a Bergen County apartment in Torres' name. He was subsequently charged with money laundering.

Torres additionally pleaded guilty to second-degree money laundering before Judge John Young on Monday. The charge was originally a first-degree crime, which could have landed him in jail for up to 20 years.

The state is expected to ask for Torres to be sentenced for seven years for the crash and five years for money laundering. Those sentences would run concurrently.

Authorities also charged Melissa Coda and Yesenia Suriel with second-degree conspiracy to commit money laundering during the probe. They pleaded guilty to a third-degree offense and are both likely to be sentenced to probation.

Torres' sentencing is scheduled for May 18.

Caitlin Mota may be reached at cmota@jjournal.com. Follow her on Twitter @caitlin_mota. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        