Gallery: Fatal hit-and-run crash in North Bergen, Sept. 26, 2017


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A New York man charged with leaving the scene of a fatal North Bergen accident last week has now been charged with laundering more than $500,000.

Olvy R. Torres, 36, of Brooklyn, was accused of money laundering after a search warrant executed at a Palisades Park residence on Monday turned up a suitcase containing more than half a million dollars, a large amount of high valued merchandise and a motorcycle, the criminal complaint says.

The items and cash said to be in Torres' possession are believed to have been derived from criminal activity, the complaint says.

Authorities say Torres was driving a Hyundai Santa Fe at about 6:30 a.m. on Sept. 26 when the SUV jumped the curb on River Road and hit 59-year-old Luisa Valdez, who was sitting at a bus stop in front of her workplace. The nursing assistant was pronounced dead at the scene, officials said.

The driver fled on foot, prompting police to ask for the public's help locating Torres one day later. Authorities said an "enormous amount of pressure" from the public led him to turn himself in on Monday.

Torres appeared on the money laundering charge last week in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain Torres through the course of his prosecution. A detention hearing is scheduled for Wednesday.

Torres was represented at the brief hearing by attorneys Laura Sutnick and Barry Zone. Afterward, the lawyers said they had no comment. A plea of not guilty was entered on Torres' behalf.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        