
    
        
            By Anthony G. Attrino

tattrino@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Lodi High School teacher and track coach who was allegedly drunk when he slammed into a patrol car and critically injured a police officer in 2014 was sentenced to four years in prison on Friday but may be eligible for parole in under a year.

Michael Ettz, 40, had pleaded guilty to assault by auto in the crash that left Bergen County Police Officer Daniel Breslin disabled.

On Friday, Bergen County Superior Court Judge Christopher Kazlau sentenced Ettz to four years in prison with parole eligibility after 10 months, court officials said.

Ettz was taken into custody after the hearing.

The crash occurred about 2 a.m. on April 19, 2014 as Ettz drove his Ford Fusion at a high rate of speed west on Route 46 in Lodi, authorities said at the time.

Breslin, now 42, was pulled over in the right lane next to another patrol car parked on the shoulder when he was rear-ended and suffered a fractured skull and broken ribs. The accident left Breslin unable to work, his family has said.

Prosecutors alleged Ettz's blood-alcohol level was .215. The legal limit in the state is .08.

Ettz has sued Breslin, claiming the former police officer was to blame for the accident.

State motor vehicle commission records show Ettz had his driver's license suspended for 240 days after a Nov. 19, 2012 drunk driving conviction out of Clifton.



Lodi schools Superintendent Frank Quatrone was not immediately available Monday to comment on Ettz's employment status.

An attorney for Ettz was not available Monday to comment on the sentencing.

Bergen County police Det. Chris Weston, president of PBA Local 49, expressed disappointment in the sentence.

"We are hopeful that today's sentence can give Danny and his family some closure to this terrible event," Weston said in a statement. "However, we are extremely disappointed in the sentence that was handed down. Mr. Ettz may be released in 10 short months, yet Danny and his family's life has been altered forever. All because of a choice that Mr. Ettz made. A choice, by a repeat offender, that almost killed another person. This sentence should not only be offensive to law-enforcement but to the community as a whole."

A man who answered the phone in the Breslin home on Monday said the family wasn't dwelling on the amount of time Ettz would serve.

"The sentence doesn't matter to us," said the man, who identified himself only as Breslin's father-in-law. "He'll get out of jail and his life is going to go on. Danny's life is over."

Anthony G. Attrino may be reached at tattrino@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TonyAttrino. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        