
    
        
            By Caitlin Mota


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

KEARNY -- Less than 48 hours after telling police he wanted to jump off a bridge during a West New York arrest, a 26-year-old man was found hanging in his jail cell on Sunday morning. 

The man, whose name is being withheld pending the notification of his family, previously indicated to medical personnel at the Hudson County jail that he had suicidal thoughts, officials said. 

The jail death -- the sixth since June, four of which have been classified as suicides -- is not sitting well with county officials who have signaled its contract with an outside medical provider could soon be terminated. 

At about 9 a.m., authorities at the jail found the man hanging from his bed with a laundry bag tied around his neck, county spokesman Jim Kennelly said. He had already eaten breakfast and made telephone calls before he returned back to his bunk, he said. 

The man was pronounced dead at Jersey City Medical Center at about 10:30 a.m. 

Kennelly said the man was picked up by the West New York Police Department on Friday on open warrants out of that city and North Bergen. Charges against him included domestic violence aggravated assault, animal cruelty, resisting arrest, and eluding. 

During that arrest he yelled "I want to jump off a bridge." Police brought him to Palisades Medical Center for evaluation where he was cleared to be released into custody, officials said.

He indicated during his intake at the jail he had mental health issues, though he did not report being suicidal. The man did, however, tell medical professionals at the jail in May he has suicidal thoughts, according to Kennelly. 

Those records do not appear to have been properly reviewed on Friday, Kennelly said, and the man was housed in general population instead of a mental health ward.

CFG Health Services, which has a $29.4 million contract at the jail, has come under fire in the past year. Inmates have reported receiving shoddy medical care and two of the suicides happened while those inmates were on mental health watch.

The latest death is disturbing to local officials. Hudson County Executive Tom DeGise is scheduled to meet with staff at the jail on Monday afternoon. 

"I am outraged at what has been presented to me in this case,"DeGise said in a statement. "If it is true, I can assure you CFG's contract at the jail will be terminated ASAP."

This is DeGise's strongest statement about recent jail deaths since the first one on June 10. This latest death comes as DeGise faces a threat to his political future, with Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop and Union City Mayor Brian Stack announcing earlier this month that they would not support DeGise's bid for a fifth term next year.

CFG did not immediately return a request for comment. 



Caitlin Mota may be reached at cmota@jjournal.com. Follow her on Twitter @caitlin_mota. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        