
    
        
            By Community Bulletin

Members of the M25 Initiative's Housing First Collaborative and Cumberland County Code Blue Coalition held their annual press conference on Dec. 8, 2017. The annual press conference marks the fourth anniversary of the death of Joseph Hanshaw, a homeless man in the City of Bridgeton. 

During the evening of December 9th, 2013, Hanshaw, a homeless man in the city of Bridgeton, died after becoming entangled in the pull-down door of the Salvation Army Clothing bin. Police said the 50-year old Hanshaw was apparently looking for a coat, or a warm place to sleep, when the incident occurred. 

On Dec. 10, 2013, the Code Blue Program began in the city of Bridgeton. Since beginning in the fellowship hall of St. Andrews Episcopal Church in Bridgeton, Code Blue programs have developed in Vineland and Millville. Beginning in the 2015-2016 Code Blue Season, all three municipal-based programs joined together to form the Cumberland County Code Blue Coalition. The Coalition has been chaired by Dr. Weinstein since its inception. Code Blue is a grassroots movement of churches and community members responding to the needs of our homeless neighbors. 

"The Cumberland County Code Blue Coalition is a grassroots movement of compassion in action," said Dr. Robin Weinstein, President of the M25 Initiative. "Code Blue demonstrates the 'better angels of our nature,' as our community joins together to ensure that no one has to sleep in the bitter cold." 

In 2016 and 2017, the volunteers in Cumberland County staffed 33 nights of Code Blue life-saving relief. The support provided warm shelter and food for over 70 homeless individuals in our three major cities. Last year, Code Blue provided over 3,000 dinners to area homeless and needy people and a total of 1,500 overnight warming center stays for homeless individuals. 

Code Blue is 100% volunteer-led and 100% donor-funded through contributions to the M25 Initiative.

The Cumberland County Housing First Collaborative (CCHFC) is a consortium of social service and health care organizations, faith-based institutions, and government officials committed to tackling the problem of chronic homelessness in Cumberland County. The guiding agency of this collaborative is the M25 Initiative, a nonprofit organization based in Bridgeton, which also facilitates the grassroots Cumberland County Code Blue Coalition. The other current partners of the collaborative include Gateway Community Action Partnership, PRAC of Southern New Jersey, Resources for Independent Living, Inspira Health Network, and CompleteCare Health Network. The collaborative is operating in partnership with the Cumberland County Jail and Monarch Housing. 

The Housing First model that is being employed throughout the state, and the nation, has demonstrated real results. The underlying philosophy of Housing First is that, instead of requiring people to meet certain conditions before providing them housing, the homeless are first given housing and then helped to make the changes they need to reintegrate into society successfully. Bergen County has seen over 700 individuals find permanent housing; 20 percent of these people were once considered chronically homeless. Bergen County is now the first county in the nation to end chronic homelessness. 

"The process has been slower and more difficult than we first believed it would be, but the momentum is moving forward, and the data is encouraging," said Weinstein, the Convener of the Collaborative. "Not only do the preliminary findings suggest improved quality of living for our clients, but it also demonstrates a cost-savings for our community." 

The CCHFC has received approvals for 44 individuals to use the 42 vouchers from the Department of Community of Affairs. This week the group celebrated their 20th individual placed in permanent supportive housing. The cumulative amount of hospital and jail system usage since 2014 for the approved individuals is approximately 1,203 hospital encounters with Inspira Health Network, and approximately 1,030 days in the Cumberland County Jail. 

Monitoring of the first 14 clients, since the middle of the year, has shown a reduction in hospital encounters. When CCHFC utilizes all 42 vouchers, a significant reduction in avoidable emergency services, emergency room visits, and hospitalization is anticipated. 

To date, none of the housed individuals have returned to the County Jail. If the decrease in jail recidivism holds for the entire population, the County could save a substantial amount of money. 

"Utilizing the Housing First vouchers saves lives and saves money," said Mayor Albert Kelly, President and CEO of Gateway Community Action Partnership &amp; M25 Board Member. "Our preliminary data shows that we could save a great deal of money in direct and in-direct costs related to chronic homelessness. It turns out that compassion is good public policy, and makes fiscal sense when we use data-driven best practices and work together. I am proud of our work together as a Collaborative, and believe that this model of collaboration is key to addressing many of the issues facing our region." 

"An address and a place called home is essential in reducing crime and helping people rebuild their lives," said Ralph Padilla, CEO of PRAC of SNJ. "The Housing First clients are the hardest population to serve because they have been homeless for over 12 months and have a disability. Our model provides wrap-around case management utilizing the strengths of the members of the Collaborative. Our approach is effective and efficient because it lowers the costs of wrap-around case management services to just over $2,500 a year." 

"This program is not just about placing people in homes, it's about helping them help themselves in rebuilding their lives," said Lisa Killion-Smith, Executive Director of Resources for Independent Living. "From the moment a client is approved, we are working with them each step of the way to improve financial independence, family relationships, healthcare, and drug/alcohol rehabilitation services. We are seeking to improve the holistic quality of health." 

"This is a noble mission that improves lives and communities, which is in line with the mission of Inspira," said David Moore, Executive Director of Behavioral Health Services for Inspira Health Network &amp; M25 Board Member. "Inspira is a proud partner and investor in this initiative because it is the right thing to do, and because it is the smart thing to do. Having a place called 'home' is an important foundation to rebuilding lives and transforming this community." 

Inspira, pending final approval, will provide an additional $50,000 to support the on-going efforts of the Collaborative, and $5,000 to support the Code Blue Coalition. Additionally, the M25 Initiative Board of Directors has secured an additional $45,000 to support Phase 2 of the plan to end chronic homelessness in Cumberland County. 

Phase Two of the Cumberland County Housing First Collaborative's work to end homelessness in Cumberland County by 2020 will utilize a Rapid Rehousing (RRH) approach. The goal of RRH is to help individuals and families exit homelessness and return to permanent housing as quickly as possible. RRH projects utilize the Housing First philosophy by providing temporary financial assistance, combined with housing location and housing stability case management services to help homeless individuals and families obtain permanent housing and achieve stability. 

The Housing First Phase Two Program will seek to serve an additional 20 chronically homeless and/or unsheltered individuals in Cumberland County. The program will prioritize those unsheltered chronically homeless individuals with monthly income who are frequent users of the jail and hospital. 

Each year, counties across New Jersey are required to take a Point-In-Time (PIT) count to estimate the number of homeless individuals in the community. In the Cumberland County 2015 count, 53 chronically homeless persons were identified. But these figures presumably reflect just a portion of homeless individuals, since the Point-In-Time (PIT) count has various methodological limitations resulting in undercounting the overall homeless population. There are also multiple estimates of homelessness, making it difficult to quantify with certainty the number of chronically homeless persons at any one time. The Point-In-Time figures also depend on what time, and under what circumstance, the count was made. 

On the night of January 24th, 2017, a total of 151 persons were experiencing homelessness in Cumberland County, which represents a 7.9% increase from 2016. Additionally, a total of 15 persons were identified as chronically homeless. 

"In stark contrast to the figures provided in the PIT count and other sources, the Housing First Collaborative has received over 117 applications from individuals who are chronically homeless," said Weinstein. "We think these numbers represent a crisis point, and we are going to do our part to help this issue, but we need additional State and Federal vouchers." 

The CCHFC also announced that the Volunteers of America Delaware Valley is signing on as official members of our Collaborative. 

Volunteers of America Delaware Valley will be working with the homeless population that are ex-offenders, helping them lead independent, responsible lives, while enhancing public safety. 

"Volunteers of America Delaware Valley is looking forward to working with the Coalition to address the needs of Cumberland County's most vulnerable populations," said Daniel Lombardo, President &amp; CEO of Volunteers of America Delaware Valley. "This movement, spearheaded by volunteer partners, is desperately needed. Our organization has a rich history of success and service to the community, and will be there to support those exiting the criminal justice system." 

The Housing First program has received a significant financial investment from the Ocean First Foundation. Additionally, numerous donors and volunteers have sponsored the move-ins for the Housing First clients, including: Bethany Grace Community Church, REAL-Women of Cumberland County, Bethany Seventh Day Adventist Church-Bridgeton, Greater Bridgeton Women's Club, Vineland Rotary, Parish of the Holy Cross, Church of the Resurrection, St. Paul's Evangelical Lutheran Church, Christ Evangelical Lutheran Church, Bay Atlantic Credit Union, Junks for Bunks, Anne Hartman and family, Seventh Day Baptist Church of Shiloh, Catherine O'Brien and family, Trinity United Methodist Church (Bridgeton), and the Restoration House. 

For more information on the Housing First Collaborative, please visit www.endhomelessness2020.org or call 1-844-M25-HOPE. For more information on the Cumberland County Code Blue Coalition, please visit www.codeblueccnj.org. 

Have community news you'd like to share? Send an email to sjtowns@njadvancemedia.com. Have an event happening you want to share? Go to nj.com/events to submit your information to be included in a community calendar. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        