
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A 46-year-old Jersey City plowed into a telephone pole while eluding police in a stolen vehicle last week, authorities said.

Jack Conde, of Bergen and Armstrong avenues, was arrested Wednesday and charged with eluding police and receiving stolen property, according to a criminal complaint. 

Jersey City police attempted to pull Conde over at Martin Luther King Drive and Van Nostrand avenues but he hit the gas and ran numerous red lights and a stop sign before nearly having a head-on collision while driving against the flow of traffic, the complaint states.

As the officers were slowing down and about to turn off their flashing lights in order to end the pursuit, Conde's vehicle slammed into a utility pole at Stegman Parkway and West Side Avenue, according to the court document.

Conde was arrested and taken to the Jersey City Medical Center complaining of pain, the complaint states.

He made his first appearance on the charges on Friday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution and a detention hearing is scheduled for Wednesday before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        