
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

There was a good reason two alleged crooks tried to steal or destroy security cameras at a Hudson County dump site. The footage from the North Bergen facility's cameras caught them in the act, a criminal complaint said.

Wilfredo Gonzalez, 43, and Luis Gonzalez, 49, both of the 100 block of Summit Avenue, were tracked down and arrested by North Bergen police on Thursday with the help of security video, the complaint said. Each was charged with theft and two counts of criminal mischief, the complaints say.

The complaint said the men struck and damaged two surveillance cameras at a Hudson County Improvement Authority dump site at 5800 West Side Ave. in North Bergen, and stealing one camera from the location.

The two Gonzalezes made their first appearance on the charges on Friday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain Wilfredo Gonzalez.

A detention hearing is scheduled for today before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.

The complaints do not characterize the relationship between the two men, if any.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        