
    
        
            By Patrick Villanova


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

The state Department of Education released school by school data on SAT scores in it NJ School Performance Report for the 2016-17 school year. In Hudson County only four schools surpassed the state average for the SATs, the standardized test that is considered one of the key factors in college admission.

Helen's Pizza in Jersey City celebrated its 50th anniversary Monday by turning back the clocks.

The woman jailed last week on charges she stalked Mayor Steve Fulop was freed from jail yesterday after prosecutors failed to convince a judge to detain her through her prosecution.

The Jersey City City Council is expected to delay a final vote on Mayor Steve Fulop's plan to ban recreational marijuana sales citywide. In Bayonne, the city welcomed a minor league soccer team.

Federal agents who raided the office of President Donald Trump's personal attorney, Michael Cohen, were looking for information about payments to a former Playboy playmate and a porn actress who claim to have had affairs with Trump, two people familiar with the investigation said yesterday. 

In sports, a North Bergen softball player is thrilled to back after a knee injury kept her out for all of last season. Saint Peter's University has reportedly found its next basketball coach.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        