
    
        
            By Allison Pries

apries@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Twin brothers have been arrested in the fatal hit-and-run crash on Route 46 in Moonachie last month that left a pedestrian dead.

Brandon Bialek, a laboratory aide from Lodi, was the alleged driver and Brian Bialek, a maintenance worker from Hasbrouck Heights, hindered the investigation into the death of Brian P. Rossi, 28, of Teaneck, authorities alleged.

The suspect brothers are 32.

Police responded to a report of a pedestrian in the roadway on Route 46 East near Industrial Avenue at about 5:50 a.m. on Jan. 5. There they found Rossi deceased in the roadway with injuries consistent with being struck by a motor vehicle. 

Evidence indicated that he was hit by a black Ford Focus sedan or hatchback, ranging from 2012 to 2015 model years. The vehicle fled the scene with heavy front end damage heading east on Route 46 and parked behind a business.

A Mitsubishi Lancer arrived soon after and the two vehicles left together traveling east on Route 46 and then turned north on Liberty Avenue towards Hackensack, police said.

An investigation conducted by the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office Fatal Accident Investigation Unit and the Moonachie Police Department led to the arrest of Brandon Bialek who was charged with leaving the scene of a fatal motor vehicle collision and hindering apprehension. He is in the Bergen County Jail pending a detention hearing Friday, Feb. 23 at 9 a.m.

Brian Bialek is charged with hindering apprehension and is scheduled for a first appearance in Bergen County Central Judicial Processing Court on Monday, March 4 at 8:30 a.m.

Allison Pries may be reached at apries@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @AllisonPries. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

 

 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        