
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A man accused of stealing a bottle of water from a gas station is also facing drug charges after police found 27 bags of suspected heroin on him while making the arrest, authorities said.

Alvaro Ortega, 37, of Duncan Avenue, was arrested around 4 a.m. Saturday and charged with theft, burglary, resisting arrest, and drug offenses including possession with intent to distribute within 500 feet of Lincoln Park and within 1,000 feet of the Badr School, at 359 Bergen Ave., according to a criminal complaint.

Officers responding to the Kennedy Boulevard gas station found an employee pointing at Ortega. They ordered him to stop and he hesitated, but then complied. A search revealed Ortega had the suspected heroin in his jacket pocket, the complaint states.

The employee said he saw Ortega pry open a storage room door, take the bottle and hide it. Police said Ortega refused to be handcuffed and there was a struggle before he was taken into custody, according to the complaint.

Ortega made his first appearance on the charges Monday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution. A detention hearing is scheduled for today before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        