Gallery: Mulijah Smart, 19, who was charged with murder on July 2 made his first appearance in Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePasquale's courtroom.


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A Jersey City man charged with murdering a man outside a party pleaded guilty to aggravated manslaughter late yesterday afternoon with a jury already selected and opening statement in his trial expected this morning.

Mulijah Smart, 23, faces seven years in prison for killing Anthony Smith Jr., 21, on Dwight Street early on July 2, 2013, Hudson County Prosecutor's Office spokesman Raymond Worrall said this morning. 

Smart must serve six years before becoming eligible for parole. If he was tried and convicted, Smart would have faced up to 30 years in prison on the charge.

Smart, who served three years in jail and one in prison for a 2012 weapons offense while awaiting trial for the murder, has accumulated roughly nine and a half months of time served since his prison release last April.

Smart will be sentenced by Hudson County Superior Court Judge Vincent Militello Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City. Officials said a sentencing date has not yet been logged into the system. 

Smith was attending a party on Dwight Street around 12:15 a.m. when he was approached by a man who opened fire on him, officials said at the time.

The man chased Smith down the street, and continued to fire at him until Smith collapsed in front of a Dwight Street residence near Ocean Avenue, authorities have said.



Smart, who was 19 at the time, was arrested at Audubon and Bergen avenues about two weeks after the homicide. 

According to the criminal complaint, Smart was identified by a witness who told police he saw him shoot Smith.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        