
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A samurai sword and a variety of suspected drugs were found in a vehicle after Secaucus police pulled over a 20-year-old North Bergen man last week on Paterson Plank Road, officials said.

After pulling Jonathan C. Hernandez, of 82nd Street, over on June 11, the officers smelled the strong odor of marijuana, called for backup and asked him to get out of the car so a search could be performed, the criminal complaint says.

As a result of the search police charged Hernandez with having suspected drugs without a prescription including four bags of marijuana, two Adderall pills, one Oxycodone pill, one Carisoprodol and four bags containing suspected cocaine residue, the complaint says.   

Officers said they also found drug paraphernalia including 62 plastic bags, a fake soda can "commonly used for concealing" drugs, one green container used for drugs, eight pipes, rolling papers and vape pens, the complaint says.

Weapons found in the vehicle included a large metal nail with tape around it, an ice pick and a razor. Police said in the trunk they found the samurai sword a folding knife and four identification cards believed to be fake, the complaint says.

Hernandez made his first appearance on five drug charges and a weapons offense on Wednesday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        