
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A Guttenberg man being arrested for allegedly dragging a child by the wrist on the sidewalk in North Bergen was also charged with pot and cocaine offenses after cursing at police officers, authorities said. 

The 35-year-old Madison Avenue resident was arrested after Sunday's incident and charged with endangering the welfare of a child, resisting arrest, possession of cocaine and marijuana and causing a risk of public annoyance or alarm, according to a criminal complaint.

Officers said they were placing him under arrested for dragging the boy when he began to yell "F--- you guys," causing pedestrians and vehicles to stop to see what was going on," according to the complaint.

Police said he resisted being handcuffed and it took five officers to take him into custody. Finally, when he was frisked, police found a bag of suspected marijuana and a bag of suspected cocaine, the complaint states.

The Guttenberg man made his first appearance on the charges Monday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution and a detention hearing is scheduled for Monday before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale.

The court documents states that the man and the boy are family members. It does not include their specific relationship of the boy's age. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        