New York Giants

William Jenkins, who has been charged with aggravated manslaughter in the death of a man found at the Bergen County home he shared with his NFL star brother, has been arrested at least seven previous times in New York and Florida, according to court records.

Jenkins, 34, is the older brother of Giants cornerback Janoris Jenkins.

The elder Jenkins has served nearly seven cumulative years in jail since he was 18 years old for a series of crimes including burglary, battery and sale and possession of drugs, records show.

William Jenkins was taken into custody Tuesday in Ontario, N.Y for a parole violation on two felony drug offenses, according to police. 

On the same day, the body of Roosevelt Rene was found in a home in Fair Lawn owned by Janoris Jenkins, who is said to have been in Florida at the time. Janoris Jenkins and Rene collaborated on rap music and can be together in recent photos posted to social media accounts. 

Rene, who went by the name "Trypps Beatz" as a music producer, was living in Jenkins' Fair Lawn residence. Janoris Jenkins purchased the home after he signed a five-year, $62.5 million free-agent contract in March 2016, a few months before he made his first career Pro Bowl. 

William Jenkins charged with aggravated manslaughter in death of man whose body was found in @Giants star Janoris Jenkins' home. This Jenkins is football player's brother @CBSNewYork pic.twitter.com/ohDO32gujS

Here is the statement from Bergen County Acting Prosecutor Dennis Calo:

William Jenkins has been arrested and charged with aggravated manslaughter, for the death of Roosevelt Rene. Jenkins is currently in custody in the Ontario County Jail in New York State. 

The investigation, which is being conducted by the Bergen County Prosecutor’s Office and Fair Lawn Police Department, is ongoing. Due to the ongoing nature of the investigation, we are not able to release any additional information at this time. Any charges are merely accusations, and the defendant is presumed innocent unless and until found guilty.

Here is a look at William Jenkins' previous criminal history, according to court records:

Burglary: Sentenced to 5 years probation.

Burglary and grand theft: Sentenced to 30 months in jail.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        