Gallery: Fatal hit-and-run crash in North Bergen, Sept. 26, 2017


    
        
            By Caitlin Mota


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

Luisa Valdez wasn't there Monday to learn her daughter had been accepted to Rutgers University, and she won't be able to attend her grandson's high school graduation this June.

These important milestones and others are when her daughter, Sandra Valdez, says she'll miss her mother the most.

But that's the reality Luisa Valdez's family faces after she was killed Sept. 26 in North Bergen when an SUV jumped the curb and struck her as she sat at a bus stop in front of her job. Authorities said Olvy Torres, 36, was behind the wheel of the Hyundai Santa Fe that plowed into the mother of three and grandmother of four.

Torres left the vehicle at the scene of the crash on River Road and fled on foot, according to authorities. Valdez died at the scene. Torres, of New York, turned himself in to police Monday morning after feeling an "enormous amount of pressure" from the public, authorities added.

"She was a wonderful woman," Sandra Valdez said of her mother from outside the Hudson County courthouse, where Torres made his first appearance on the charges yesterday. Torres is due back in court Friday for a detention hearing before Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale.

"She was going to work, she didn't deserve this. She loved helping people."During a hearing before Superior Court Judge Sheila Venable, Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Lynne Seborowski motioned to keep Torres in jail until his trial concludes.

More than three dozen of his family members and friends, many wearing black and dressed in suits, attended the hearing. Torres was not present in the courtroom -- which had tight security -- but appeared via video from the Hudson County jail in Kearny. His attorneys Laura Sutnick and Barry Zone did not comment on the case.

The 59-year-old victim had the same routine each morning, her daughter said.

She took the bus to work, sat on the bench before her shift began, and then went inside to her job at The Harborage where she worked as a nursing assistant. No one had a bad thing to say about her and she would give anything to anyone in need, the grieving daughter added.

"She (would) give you that last dollar, she'd give you food if you were hungry," Sandra Valdez said. "She (would) talk to you, she'd laugh ... she's just a rare person (whose) life was taken away tragically."

Sandra Valdez, who plans to attend every court hearing, said Torres should not have left the scene and said he needs to pay for what he did.

"He's a very bad guy, that's it," she said.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        