
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A Jersey City teen was charged with dealing heroin Saturday when police conducting surveillance interrupted a sale in an area known for drug trafficking, authorities said.

Shawn Adams, 19, of Vreeland Place, is charged with possession of 20 bags of heroin, possession with intent to distribute and possession with intent to distribute within 1,000 feet of Snyder High School, located at 239 Bergen Ave., a criminal complaint says.

Officers doing surveillance on Grant Avenue between Bergen Avenue and Martin Luther King Drive said they watched as Adams accepted money from a man, then walked away and entered a vehicle, the complaint says.

Thinking Adams was about to drive away, officers converged on the vehicle. They said Adams threw the bags into the back seat and tried to get out of the car and close the door before being taken into custody, the complaint says.

Adams made his first appearance on the charges Tuesday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain Adams through the course of his prosecution. A detention hearing is scheduled for today before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        