
    
        
            By Anthony G. Attrino

tattrino@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A cyberstalker has been charged for the third time in three years with posting naked pictures of a woman he knows without her consent, authorities said.

Daniel G. Pfeiffer, 28, of Old Tappan, was arrested Monday in Hackensack after an investigation that began when the photos were posted in October, according to Bergen County Prosecutor Gurbir S. Grewal.

The criminal complaint states Pfeiffer posted the photos "with the intent to emotionally harm the victim."

"Some of the postings included personal identifying information of the victim on the internet," Grewal said in a statement. 

By posting the materials, Pfeiffer violated a "final stalking restraining order" issued in September, according to the complaint.

Pfeiffer is charged with stalking, invasion of privacy, cyber-harassment and contempt of a stalking restraining order, Grewal said.

In 2015, Pfeiffer was arrested after investigators said he created social media accounts in a woman's name without her knowledge.

Pfeiffer, who knew the woman, uploaded sexually explicit images of her online, authorities said.

Pfeiffer was accused of engaging in sexually explicit chats and solicitations while pretending to the be the victim, authorities said at the time.

In 2016, Pfeiffer was again arrested and charged with stalking and invasion of privacy after investigators said he posted nude and sexually explicit images of the woman online without her knowledge or consent.

Public records show Pfeiffer pleaded guilty in 2016 to stalking as a repeat offender for the same victim. He was sentenced to five years of probation.

On Sept. 15, Bergen County Superior Court Judge James Guida issued the restraining order prohibiting Pfeiffer from stalking the victim.

Pfeiffer, who is unemployed, was being held in the Bergen County Jail pending a first appearance.

Anthony G. Attrino may be reached at tattrino@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TonyAttrino. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        