
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

Sharp-eyed Jersey City Police Detective Jose Santana recognized items taken during an August burglary while conducting an unrelated investigation in a pawn shop and it led to an arrest this week.

Gerald Moore, 64, of the 400 block of Bergen Avenue, is charged with receiving stolen property in connection to an Aug. 29 burglary on Bergen Avenue during which a large amount of jewelry was taken by someone who entered through a window, the complaint says.

On Sept. 12, Santana recognized jewelry items taken during the burglary in the pawn shop and was provided with paperwork showing it had been sold to the establishment on Aug. 30 by Moore, the criminal complaint says.

A warrant for Moore's arrest was issued on Sept. 13 and he was arrested Tuesday. He made his first appearance on the charge on Wednesday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, Moore was ordered released with conditions of supervision pending trial. His next court date in the matter is set for Feb. 28 before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        