
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A 24-year-old Jersey City felon was sentenced to seven years in prison March 2 for gunning a man down outside a party in 2013.

"I put strong, strong weight on the need to deter you," Hudson County Superior Court Judge Vincent Militello told Mulijah Smart before sentencing him for the July 2, 2013, aggravated manslaughter of Anthony Smith Jr., 21, on Dwight Street.

Before being sentenced, Smart turned toward the Smith's family in the courtroom, saying "I just want to say I apologize for the actions I did. May God be with you and hopefully one day you can forgive me for the actions I did."

But when given a chance to speak, Smith's aunt said, "Mulijah, you are an evil person who deserves nothing but life behind bars... The only reason I don't want to see you executed is because I thought of your family... I do not forgive you."As the aunt took her seat, Smart said "Ma'am, I really didn't do it."

"You did do it," she replied.

Smart served three years in jail and one in prison for a 2012 weapons offense while awaiting trial for Smith's death. He pleaded guilty to the aggravated manslaughter charge on Jan. 23 after a jury had already been selected for his trial.

He must serve six years before becoming eligible for parole. If he was tried and convicted on the original murder charge, he would have faced 30 years to life in prison.

On the day of the killing, Smith was attending a party on Dwight Street around 12:15 a.m. when he was approached by a man who opened fire on him, officials said at the time.

The man chased Smith down the street, and continued to fire at him until Smith collapsed in front of a Dwight Street residence near Ocean Avenue, authorities said.

Smart, who was 19 at the time, was arrested at Audubon and Bergen avenues about two weeks after the homicide.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        