
    
        
            By Anthony G. Attrino

tattrino@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Pennsylvania man was arrested in Bergen County and accused of illegally selling firearms - including assault rifles - to New Jersey residents, authorities said Tuesday.

Andrew Okie, 24, of Tobyhanna, Pennsylvania, was arrested after allegedly selling several assault weapons and ammunition to an under detective posing as a buyer, according to Acting Bergen County Prosecutor Dennis Calo.

In March, the prosecutor's office received information that Okie was buying firearms in his home state and selling them for profit in New Jersey, Calo said.

Between March and May, a prosecutor's office detective working undercover met with Okie several times in Bergen County, buying an AK-47 rifle, three AR-15 rifles, seven high-capacity magazines and more than 100 rounds of ammunition, Calo said.

Okie, who is employed as an electronics technician, was arrested Saturday and charged with four counts of second-degree possession of an assault rifle, four counts of third-degree unlawful possession of a rifle, four counts of third-degree illegal sale of a firearm, seven counts of fourth-degree sale of a high-capacity firearm magazine and seven counts of fourth-degree possession of a large-capacity firearm magazine.

Okie was held without bail Wednesday in the Bergen County Jail, county records show.

In addition to the prosecutor's office, the Bergen County Regional SWAT Team, Hackensack police, Dumont police and Hasbrouck Heights police assisted in the investigation.

Anthony G. Attrino may be reached at tattrino@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TonyAttrino. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        