Gallery: Olvy Torres detention hearing, Oct. 16, 2017


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- Authorities have seized hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash and arrested a pair of women they say are connected to the man accused of leaving the scene of a fatal crash in September. 

Olvy Torres, 36, is being held in Hudson County jail on charges he fatally struck Luisa Valdez, 59, in North Bergen and fled the scene. He later turned himself into authorities, who seized $1 million in cash and bags of diamonds from a Palisades Park apartment Torres rented. 

On Nov. 4, members of the Hudson County Prosecutor's Narcotics Task Force arrested Melissa Coda, 37, of Teaneck, charging her with money laundering and conspiracy to commit money laundering with Torres and Yesenia Suriel, Prosecutor's Office spokesman Raymond Worrall said today.

Coda was arrested after a search of a safety deposit box she maintained led to the recovery of more than $250,000 and two kilos of gold worth more than $40,000. A 2013 Mercedes Benz ML350 was also seized, Worrall said.   

Suriel, 30, of Brooklyn, faces the same charges as Coda and she surrendered to authorities on Nov. 8, after a search of a safety deposit box she maintained resulted in the seizure of $75,000 and two diamond rings, Worrall said. 

The two women have been charged by the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office but an official said are expected to be prosecuted in Hudson County. 



Authorities say Torres, was driving a Hyundai Santa Fe at about 6:30 a.m. on Sept. 26 when the SUV jumped the curb on River Road and hit Valdez, who was sitting at a bus stop. The nursing assistant was pronounced dead at the scene, officials said.

The driver fled on foot, prompting police to ask for the public's help locating Torres, who turned himself in Oct. 9. But before he surrendered, a search warrant was executed at a Palisades Park residence associated with him, officials said.

That's where investigators found the cash, bags of diamonds, jewelry, marijuana, designer bags, and watches worth up to $30,000 each. Also found were dozens of pairs of expensive sneakers, bullets, electronics and expensive clothing and liquor. An earning statement says Torres makes $42,000 per year, officials said.

The prosecutor said multiple IDs were found including a Florida driver's license with Torres' picture and another man's name. A medical marijuana ID card was found with Torres' information and the address of a gas station/car wash in California.

A TD Bank card, Social Security card, and a title for a motorcycle, all in other people's names, were also found in the home. Investigators additionally found plane tickets for travel all over the world including Cuba, Colombia, the Dominican Republic and Seychelles, officials said.

At Torres' detention hearing, Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Lynne Seborowski noted that the island nation of Seychelles is known as a location for money laundering. She told the judge that Torres has unlimited resources, no residence in his name and is a "ghost."

The judge ordered Torres to be detained through the course of his prosecution.

Torres is charged with leaving the scene of a fatal accident, a second-degree charge carrying a possible prison sentence of five to 10 years upon conviction. He is also charged with money laundering, a first-degree crime carrying a possible sentence of 10 to 20 years.

The Palisades Park apartment appeared to have been ransacked before investigators arrived. Security video captured after the North Bergen crash shows what appears to be Torres loading duffel bags into a car and leaving the apartment for good, officials said.   


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        