
    
        
            By Caitlin Mota


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

KEARNY -- A 34-year-old woman was found hanging early Sunday morning inside the Hudson County jail, officials said. 

The victim, whose name is being withheld because it's unclear if her family has been notified, is recovering at a local hospital after attempting suicide, a county spokesman said. 

First aid was rendered to the woman, who did have a pulse, and she was transferred to Jersey City Medical Center. She is currently in the intensive care unit, officials said. 

The woman was arrested on Jan. 11 -- just three days before she attempted suicide -- by North Bergen police officers on a failure to appear warrant. The county has been working to contact her family, officials said. 



Sunday's incident adds to the growing number of incidents reported at the county's jail. 

In June, an immigrant detainee died two days after being hospitalized for "gastrointestinal bleeding." His family wasn't notified of his death and learned when they called the jail to check in on him. An autopsy was never ordered. 

Then just a few weeks later, a woman serving a six month sentence for DWI was found dead inside her cell in the the health ward. Sources say she hit her head and pieces of plastic were found inside her stomach. 

Caitlin Mota may be reached at cmota@jjournal.com. Follow her on Twitter @caitlin_mota. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        