
    
        
            By Allison Pries

apries@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Bergenfield man jailed for driving without a license thought he was getting out of jail on Monday, but police officers from his hometown were there waiting for him at the jail with a new arrest warrant charging him with more than a dozen burglaries.

Aaron Sukhdeo, 27, broke into and stole from 19 businesses between July 14, 2017 and Sept. 27, 2017, police said. 

The crimes took place during the overnight to early morning hours when the businesses were closed. Sukhdeo targeted places that had money in their cash registers to make change for customers when they opened, police said. 

It's unclear how much Sukhdeo stole, Bergenfield Police Capt. Mustafa Rabboh said, because exact dollar figures for how much business owners left in their registers overnight couldn't be determined.

Sukhdeo allegedly burglarized gas stations, a carpeting business, Reilly's Rib Cage and finally a Burger King on the day of his last known heist. Police chased Sukhdeo after the Burger King burglary but were unable to catch him, Rabboh said. 

The burglary at Reilly's Rib Cage, on Aug. 9 at about 4 a.m. was caught on video and shared to Instagram.

In the video, a person wearing a knit cap and carrying a backpack is seen trying to pry open a drawer, while using a cellphone as a flashlight.

The break-in, which resulted in a broken window and cash register, cost the store owner about $500, including roughly $300 in start-up cash. 

"Finally," said Danny Reilly, owner Reilly's Rib Cage. "It was a headache having to worry about the guy being on the loose."

Police said the backpack helped them link Sukhdeo to several of the burglaries.

Based on the police chase and video surveillance footage gathered from the scenes of the break-ins, Rabboh said, they identified Sukhdeo as the person to charge with 19 burglaries, 24 attempted burglaries, numerous counts of possession of burglary tools and theft, obstruction of justice and resisting arrest. 

He was processed at Bergenfield Police headquarters and sent back to the Bergen County Jail to await a detention hearing.

Allison Pries may be reached at apries@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @AllisonPries. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

  


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        