
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A motor vehicle stop by North Bergen police led to the arrest of a 25-year-old Arizona man and the seizure of nearly nine pounds of heroin earlier this month, authorities said. 

Detectives pulled over the vehicle driven by Hector E. Llamas, of Tucson, during an investigation into suspicious activity at a hotel on Nov. 8. Llamas gave them permission to conduct a search, according to a criminal complaint. 

The detectives said they found a hidden compartment under the driver's seat and another under the passenger seat, according to the court document, which also states they saw a box on the backseat.



After getting written permission to search the box, the officers found four kilos of suspected heroin inside, the complaint says.

Llamas faces drug charges including the first-degree offense of possession with intent to distribute heroin in a quantity of more than five ounces. A first-degree offense carries a possible sentence of 10 to 20 years in prison upon conviction. 

Llamas made his first appearance on the charges Thursday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him throughout the course of his prosecution and a detention hearing is scheduled for today before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        