Gallery: Man pleads guilty in 2014 fatal hit-and-run, Jan. 3, 2018


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A 41-year-old Guatemala native will face 15 years in prison after pleading guilty Wednesday to the aggravated manslaughter of a 20-year-old man in a 2014 North Bergen hit-and-run.

Rogelio Chavix-Tacen admitted in court Wednesday that on Nov. 14, 2014 he went to a local bar and drank to the point of intoxication. Under questioning by his attorney, Keith Hirschorn, he said he then got into a vehicle and drove at a high rate of speed on Kennedy Boulevard.

As he sped along Kennedy Boulevard, his vehicle jumped the curb between 31st and 32nd streets, striking Michael Viruet, 20, and his then-11-year-old brother, Adrian. The brothers and their sister, Mileen, 15, had just seen a movie and were walking toward the pedestrian bridge, officials said.

"You are aware that your vehicle struck two boys on the sidewalk?" the attorney asked.

"Yes, I found out through the news," Chavix-Tacen said through a Spanish interpreter.

"You are aware that the accident you caused resulted in the death of a boy named Micheal Viruet?" Hirschorn asked his client.

"Yes" was the reply.

"You also struck his brother ... in the accident and caused him to suffer serious bodily injury," the counselor queried.

"Yes," Chavix-Tacen said in the courtroom of Hudson County Superior Court Judge John Young in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.

Chavix-Tacen, who was handcuffed and dressed in the green garb of the Hudson County jail in Kearny, showed no emotion as he recounted his fatal actions.

Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Karen Kazanchy said that under the plea deal, the state wants Chavix-Tacen to serve 10 years for the aggravated manslaughter and fire years for the aggravated assault of the 11-year-old boy.

The prosecutor said the prison terms are to be served consecutively and he will not be eligible for parole until after serving more than 12 years.

Hirschorn said that at the March 15 sentencing, he will argue for concurrent terms. Young noted that if convicted at trial, Chavix-Tacen could have faced up to 30 years on the aggravated manslaughter charges and up to 10 on the aggravated assault charge. He will be deported after serving his time.

More than seven agencies -- including the Hudson County Sheriff's Office, North Bergen police and federal authorities --

began tracking Chavix-Tacen after finding the vehicle parked on 72nd Street. He had tried to take the car to a body shop for repairs.

Chavix-Tacen was arrested Dec. 4 in Annapolis, Maryland, where he was found hiding under a bed. His arrest came a half hour before Michael Viruet's death. Authorities said that Chavix-Tacen bought plane tickets and planned to leave the country.

The plea hearing had a shaky start when Young first asked Chavix-Tacen if he was guilty, and the reply was "Yes, I am pleading guilty so I can finally put this to rest. To get this nightmare over with."

Young responded saying, "I didn't ask you if are pleading guilty, I asked you if you are guilty."

Chavix-Tacen said "Yes" but then asked for more time to speak to his lawyer.

About two hours later, the hearing reconvened and he pleaded guilty to the two counts.

Deportation was not an issue for Chavix-Tacen.

"I didn't care whether or not I am deported back to my country because I have an open door there," he said. "I have no record there. I am free there. I am a humble man and a hardworking man."


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        