Gallery: Law enforcement investigate a body found in the Fair Lawn home of Giants cornerback Janoris Jenkins


    
        
            By Taylor Tiamoyo Harris

tharris@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

The brother of NFL Giants player Janoris Jenkins is "a person of interest" in relation to the body of a family friend found at the NFL player's home, according to Ontario County, New York District Attorney James Ritts.

Ritts said authorities in Bergen County reached out to New York State Police on Tuesday to let them know that William Jenkins, 34, was someone they wanted to talk to about the discovery of Roosevelt Rene's body in Jenkins' Fair Lawn home.

William Jenkins was already in police custody when Bergen County called, Ritts said.

On Tuesday, police officers in Ontario County responded to a call around 1:30 a.m. about a "suspicious condition" near a convenience store, Ritts said.

Police responded and found Williams Jenkins, who they discovered had an outstanding warrant and arrested him, he said. 

According to public records, Williams is on parole in New York for prior convictions on charges of the criminal sale and possession of controlled substances -- both class B felonies under New York state law.

Records show he was released to parole supervision on July 18, 2016.

Authorities in New Jersey discovered Rene's body around 10 a.m. Tuesday. Rene, a music producer, had been living at the NFL player's home while Janoris Jenkins was in Florida. 

As of Wednesday afternoon, Ritts said William remained in the Ontario County jail. 

Bergen County prosecutors have not said said if they consider Rene's death a homicide, and did not answer calls seeking comment about William Jenkins' arrest.

Rene's cause of death is pending an autopsy by the Bergen County Medical Examiner's Office, authorities said. 

Janoris Jenkins, a Florida native, has reportedly been in that state since Giants mini-camp broke earlier this month.

Staff writer Thomas Moriarty contributed to this report.

Taylor Tiamoyo Harris may be reached at tharris@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @ladytiamoyo.

Find NJ.com on Facebook.  


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        