
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

A 25-year-old Virginia man has been arrested two years after he allegedly sexually assaulted a 13-year-old girl in North Bergen after the pair met through social media.

Roly O. Garcia-Reyes made his first court appearance Friday on charges that include endangering the welfare of a child, the criminal complaint says.

Authorities say the girl did not come home after school on April 20, 2016 and when she was found, she told them she had consensual sex with a man she knew as Ricky Garcia at an unknown hotel, according to a criminal complaint charging Garcia-Reyes.

The two had met on Tango, a social media video, voice, and chat app, according to the court document.

Investigators canvassed several hotels and motels in the Hudson County area and found a registration card for a Roly Garcia, of Virginia, who had the same birth date as the one listed for Ricky Garcy on Tango, the complaint alleges.Investigators reached out to Prince William County police for assistance and

Garcia-Reyes was taken into custody recently, although the complaint does not list the date of his arrest.

He made his first appearance on the charges in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City on Friday via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, Garcia-Reyes was ordered released with conditions of supervision pending trial. The judge told him he would have to remain in New Jersey and Garcia-Reyes said he had a place to stay locally.

Garcia-Reyes said he worked at a Mexican restaurant in Virginia. He said he is not a United States citizen and the judge informed him of the impact a conviction or guilty plea on certain charges could have on his ability to remain in the United States, his ability to reenter the U.S. should he leave voluntarily or his ability to become a citizen.

There is no statute of limitations for sexual assault in New Jersey. For endangering, a prosecution must begin within five years after the victim turns 18.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        