
    
        
            By Steve Strunsky

sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

An aging, ailing former North Bergen public works director was spared jail time when sentenced on Friday, despite having admitted he aided a political campaign of Mayor Nicholas Sacco at the expense of taxpayers, state Attorney General Christopher S. Porrino announced.

Timothy Grossi, 77, of Jersey City, was given a suspended 3-year sentence by a state Superior Court judge who had previously stated she would not submit Grossi to jail time due to his failing health.

Grossi had pleaded guilty on Oct. 21 to a charge of third-degree misapplication of entrusted property and property of government, before Superior Court Judge Margaret M. Foti in Hackensack, who sentenced gave him a 3-year suspended sentence on Friday.

Grossi was indicted in 2012 in a state investigation launched after a slate of North Bergen township commission candidates running against an incumbent slate headed by Sacco posted YouTube video appearing to capture township employees removing campaign literature from North Bergen homes.

In pleading guilty, Grossi admitted that he directed on-duty DPW workers using township vehicles to go to the county clerk's office to perform errands related to his personal political activity in the township, including picking up and dropping off challenger badges.



Grossi's lawyer, Jeffrey Garrigan, said in October that his client had undergone quadruple bypass surgery and suffered from related heart problems. Garrigan said that it was the same failing health that had prompted his client to send his secretary on a campaign errand that he would have run himself had he been feeling better.

On Friday, Garrigan said Grossi welcomed the sentence and the end of the nearly-six-year ordeal.

"We're glad this is finally over and he can finally move on with his life," Garrigan said.

Prosecutors said Grossi was one of four North Bergen DPW supervisors caught directing employees to do perform political or personal work while on duty for the township. 

"By arrogantly abusing the power entrusted to him and exploiting public workers for political purposes, Grossi promoted a culture of corruption within his department, a culture we exposed through our investigation," Porrino said in a statement.

In September of 2012, a former DPW superintendent, James Wiley, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit official misconduct, admitting he directed employees to do hundreds of hours of chores at his home and to work on campaigns while being paid by the township. Wiley is awaiting sentencing. 

In 2015, two former supervisors, Troy Bunero and Francis Longo, were convicted of conspiracy and official misconduct, after prosecutors said they assigned township employees to work on election campaigns and do personal work for them or Wiley. Bunero and Longo were each sentenced to five years in prison.

The four DPW supervisors are the latest in string of North Bergen public officials convicted of abusing their offices while serving under or alongside Sacco, a longtime North Hudson Democratic power broker who for more than two decades has simultaneously served as mayor and state senator, while also working as a North Bergen public schools official before retiring from the district this year.

Township spokesman Phil Swibinski issued a statement in response to Grossi's sentencing, asserting Sacco took decisive action to clean up the public works department after the scandal broke.

"The North Bergen DPW was completely reorganized with new leadership and improved employee management practices when these issues first came to light six years ago," Swibinski stated. "And since that time there has not been any allegation of impropriety in the department whatsoever. While this was an unfortunate episode in the township's history, it's clear that these issues were isolated in nature and have since been resolved."

Steve Strunsky may be reached at sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SteveStrunsky. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        