
    
        
            By Sara Jerde

sjerde@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

CORRECTION: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported Furlong's salary.

A West New York teacher faces drug distribution charges after police were called to an incident at his home, authorities said.

Kenneth Furlong, 24, was charged with possessing cocaine and marijuana and intending to distribute it, East Rutherford Police Chief Dennis Rivelli said in a news release.

Police responded to Furlong's East Rutherford apartment for "an incident" on Nov. 29, Rivelli said.

Rivelli would not provide details about the incident or answer additional questions, citing an ongoing investigation.

Furlong is employed as a teacher at Memorial High School in the West New York School District, Rivelli said. School records show that a Kenneth Andrew Furlong was approved to be a substitute teacher this school year.

A woman who answered the phone in the district superintendent's office said the district had no comment, refused multiple times to give her name and hung up.

The superintendent of the district and the high school principal didn't return requests for comment.

Furlong turned himself in to East Rutherford police with his attorney, John Lynch, and was transported to Bergen County Jail for a Central Judicial Processing hearing.

Lynch also did not return requests for comment.

Furlong made news last year when he was able to donate his kidney to a stranger after being unable to give one to his father.

The husband of the stranger to whom Furlong donated his kidney was not a match with his wife, but did match with Furlong's father.

The successful kidney-swap at Hackensack University Medical Center was thought at the time to be the first of its kind at the facility. 

Sara Jerde may be reached at sjerde@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SaraJerde.

Have information about this story or something else we should be covering? Tell us: nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        