
    
        
            By Kevin Shea

kshea@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

The Mercer County Prosecutor's Office will be investigating "recent allegations" regarding the leadership at the Mercer County Correction Center, a county spokeswoman said Monday afternoon.

NJ Advance Media learned of the investigation while seeking comment from the county about a compliant filed last Thursday by the Mercer County corrections officers union against Warden Charles Ellis and Deputy Warden Phyllis Oliver.

The union, PBA Local 167, alleged mismanagement and malfeasance by Ellis and Oliver. The claim says Ellis enabled the deputy warden to accrue "outrageous" overtime and comp time totals from 2014 through 2016, which allowed her paycheck to balloon to over $200,000 each year.

It's unclear what exactly triggered the investigation, since Ellis and Oliver were also recently accused, in a civil lawsuit, of trying to force a sexual threesome with a female colleague at the jail. The two denied that allegation through a county spokesperson.

The suit claims that after the woman refused Ellis and Oliver's sexual advances, the employee, a nurse at the jail, and her partner, a corrections lieutenant, faced workplace retaliation.

Mercer County spokeswoman Julie Willmot declined to elaborate beyond a statement, which said:

"In light of the recent allegations with respect to the Mercer County Correction Center, the Mercer County Prosecutor's Office has indicated that it will undertake an investigation of the correction center as part of the MCPO's law enforcement responsibilities in Mercer County. The County will fully cooperate with the investigation."

The prosecutor's office could not immediately be reached for comment about the investigation.

Former investigator says Mercer jail mismanaged, lax on procedures

In its latest complaint, the union, which has been battling the county over the administration's proposal to basically close the jail and send inmates to Hudson County, said Ellis and Oliver "whisper" about excessive overtime and violations of rules by the officers.

"But the truth is that Oliver is the offender, and the Warden is her enabler," the union said in a statement.

The union produced Oliver's pay records and overtime requests, which Ellis signed, for the years 2014 through 2016, which they say they obtained through an Open Public Records Act (OPRA) request.

Oliver routinely got overtime for "on call time" or "paperwork" or "reports." Once, she claimed "16 or 18 hours of overtime plus 8 hours of regular work in the same day."

"(Oliver's) overtime claims are in violation of rules and common sense," the union said and urged the county to investigate.

In 2014, the records show, Oliver, then a corrections lieutenant, took home regular pay of more than $93,000, and over $79,000 in overtime. By the time her sick and vacation pay was tallied, her total pay was over $200,000.

In 2015, Oliver banked over $114,000 in overtime and netted over $233,000.

In 2016, Oliver lost a state Civil Service decision that barred her from continuing as a lieutenant, the union said, but was named deputy warden by the county.

"Her reward for this negative decision was a $20,000 increase in pensionable salary and an enhanced management role as Deputy Warden, notwithstanding her lack of qualifications for this promotion," the union argued.

Also, Oliver had built up a compensatory (comp time) bank of over 1,000 hours, which she cashed out in regular, monthly increments during 2016, the records show. The union alleges she waited to do so to use her new, deputy warden salary rate.

Oliver cashed in over 1,100 hours of comp time in regular increments in 2016, putting an additional $68,000 in pay, and totaled over over $208,000 in net pay that year.

Mercer/Hudson jail plan consultants have Hudson ties, union says

During all this, Ellis and Oliver, "meted out harsh punishments against officers for being a minute or two late to work or claimed that an officer they did not favor should be harshly disciplined for minor violations of rules," the union said.

"The PBA submits this is part of a pattern of mismanagement and malfeasance at the jail that creates a false impression of problems in the jail that are being used to support closing the jail," the union's statement said.

Overtime at the Mercer County Correction center is not a new topic, though. An NJ Advance Media study of all 21 counties in 2015 found Mercer led all counties in overtime spending four times in the previous five years.

It averaged more than $8 million a year in jail overtime - more than the most populous county in New Jersey, Bergen, spent in all five years examined.

Kevin Shea may be reached at kshea@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter@kevintshea. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        