
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A 44-year-old Jersey City sex offender deemed "a danger to the community" has again been arrested on charges he moved from his residence without notifying his parole officer as required under Megan's Law.

Raymond Gorczycki, whose last address was on the 100 block of Old Bergen Road, was released from prison on May 22, 2017 and he was released from electronic monitoring on Dec. 8, 2017, the criminal complaint says.



He was ordered to report to his parole officer on Jan. 5, 2018 and a warrant for his arrest was issued when he didn't show up. He was arrested and remanded to prison for the same offense in January of 2016, the complaint says.

"Due to his history of sexual assault against a minor, his extensive drug abuse, his mental health issues, and his failure to adhere to his conditions of supervision by avoiding contact with parole, he represents a danger to the community," the complaint says.

Gorcycki made his first appearance on the charges on Friday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

He has been convicted or pleaded guilty 11 times since 1992, when he was first arrested. He was charged in 2001 with criminal sexual contact, but most of his convictions stem from violations of parole supervision, according to electronic criminal records.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        