  0 0 1 241 1374 Los Angeles Times 11 3 1612 14.0       Normal 0     false false false  EN-US JA X-NONE                                                                                                                                                                      table.MsoNormalTable{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;mso-style-noshow:yes;mso-style-priority:99;mso-style-parent:"";mso-padding-alt:0 5.4pt 0 5.4pt;mso-para-margin:0;mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;mso-pagination:widow-orphan;font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin}California lawmakers have approved legislation introduced by Democrats to counter the potential expansion of immigrant detention facilities under the Trump administration.

The bill by Sen. Ricardo Lara (D-Bell Gardens) would prohibit any city, county or law enforcement agency from entering into a contract with the federal government or a private company to detain immigrants — unless it already has done so by January 2018. It also would bar cities and counties that contract with private companies from expanding their facilities or number of beds.

The state Senate on Wednesday passed SB 29 with a 27-13 vote. It is now headed to the governor’s desk for final approval.

What happens when the congressional representative of this uber-liberal enclave — who also happens to be leader of House Democrats — starts dancing with the devil?

Nancy Pelosi, along with her Senate counterpart, Charles E. Schumer of New York, convinced President Trump to override his advisors and ignore congressional Republicans by agreeing to a three-month extension of the nation’s debt limit, emergency aid for Hurricane Harvey victims and other federal spending.

The next day, at Pelosi’s behest, the president tweeted reassurance to “Dreamers” — immigrants brought to America illegally as children — that they needn’t worry about deportation during the six months Congress works to resolve their ambiguous state.

  0 0 1 131 751 Los Angeles Times 6 1 881 14.0       Normal 0     false false false  EN-US JA X-NONE                                                                                                                                                                      table.MsoNormalTable{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;mso-style-noshow:yes;mso-style-priority:99;mso-style-parent:"";mso-padding-alt:0 5.4pt 0 5.4pt;mso-para-margin:0;mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;mso-pagination:widow-orphan;font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin}After negotiations to help quell opposition from dozens of business associations and agricultural groups, the state Assembly sent a bill to Gov. Jerry Brown on Wednesday that would expand workplace protections for employees without legal residency in the U.S.

The bill by Assemblyman David Chiu (D-San Francisco) would prohibit employers from allowing federal immigration agents on private business property without a judicial warrant. It also would require business owners to give their employees public notice — within 72 hours — of federal immigration inspections of employee records.

Businesses that fail to provide notice to employees face penalties of $2,000 to $5,000 for a first violation and $5,000 to $10,000 for each subsequent violation, unless some exceptions apply.

Employees at many small businesses across California could not be denied up to 12 weeks away from work to care for a new child under legislation sent Wednesday to Gov. Jerry Brown.

The bill, which applies to workers with at least a year of continuous employment at a company of 20 to 49 employees, cleared its final hurdle in the state Senate. Employees would no longer be in danger of being fired when leaving to care for a newborn, similar to existing protections for workers at larger companies.

  0 0 1 24 143 Los Angeles Times 1 1 166 14.0       Normal 0     false false false  EN-US JA X-NONE                                                                                                                                                                      table.MsoNormalTable{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;mso-style-noshow:yes;mso-style-priority:99;mso-style-parent:"";mso-padding-alt:0 5.4pt 0 5.4pt;mso-para-margin:0;mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;mso-pagination:widow-orphan;font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin}"For our lowest-income workers, this is a situation where they cannot afford to take that time working for smaller employers," said state Sen. Hannah-Beth Jackson (D-Santa Barbara), the bill's author.

Californians would be prohibited from openly carrying long guns in public, unincorporated areas of the state under a bill approved Wednesday by the Legislature and sent to the governor for consideration.

The measure, opposed by the National Rifle Assn., was requested by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to plug a loophole in state law that bans openly carrying handguns in areas outside cities.

“Shotguns and rifles should not be carried on our residential streets by untrained and unidentified members of the public,” said Sen. Anthony Portantino (D- La Cañada-Flintridge). “This can cause confusion and endanger public safety for citizens and law enforcement as well.”

Legislators on Wednesday gave final approval to a bill that would recognize online dating services under the state’s Dating Service Contract Act.

The bill, proposed by Assemblyman Kevin Mullin (D-South San Francisco), would set new specific contract requirements for Internet dating services.

The bill's new requirements include allowing online-dating customers to cancel contracts by email and have access to electronic copies of contracts. 

  0 0 1 324 1850 Los Angeles Times 15 4 2170 14.0       Normal 0     false false false  EN-US JA X-NONE                                                                                                                                                                      table.MsoNormalTable{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;mso-style-noshow:yes;mso-style-priority:99;mso-style-parent:"";mso-padding-alt:0 5.4pt 0 5.4pt;mso-para-margin:0;mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;mso-pagination:widow-orphan;font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin}After some intense exchanges on the house floor, the California Assembly on Wednesday passed a resolution that condemned President Trump for his decision to rescind protections for people who were brought into the country illegally as children.

House Resolution 66, coauthored by 57 members in the chamber, urges the president to stand with recipients of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, program, and calls on Congress to find a “bipartisan and more effective” version of the initiative.

It was approved 57 to 1.

Another loss for Rx drug makers: Assembly approves AB 265 limiting use of drug rebate coupons. Now heads to Gov.

 Read more 

Hoping to entice more students into California's community college system, lawmakers on Wednesday passed a bill to make students' first year free.

The Assembly gave final approval to a measure by Assemblyman Miguel Santiago (D-Los Angeles) that waives fees for first-time full-time students.

"We know that if a student goes full time, a student’s success rate is much higher than if they go part time," Santiago said on the Assembly floor.

 Copyright © 2018, Los Angeles Times 