Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Mukhlis Murad, 59, is one of hundreds of Iraqis detained by ICE. A Detroit immigration judge said he could be released on $3,000 bond.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Iraqi and Chaldean residents detained by Immigration and Customs Enforcement have applied for pardons for state violations from Gov. Rick Snyder as they try to avoid deportation back to Iraq.
    Wochit

Jeremiah Suleiman, of Sterling Heights holds a sign among dozens during a rally to stop the deportation of Iraqi-American immigrants outside Patrick V. McNamara Federal building on Friday, June 16, 2017 in Detroit. An ACLU lawsuit seeks to block the possible deportation of 1,400 Iraqi nationals around the country.
(Photo: Elaine Cromie , Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

An Iraqi detainee is expected to be released from a detention facility in Battle Creek after a Detroit immigration judge set his bond for $3,000. 


Mukhlis Murad, 59, appeared Tuesday before Judge Mark Jebson  via video from the Calhoun County Correctional Center.   Murad's family said they will pay the bond amount, which means Murad may be released soon, probably by Wednesday, said his attorney Edward Bajoka.


Murad is expected to be the first Michigan detainee released from custody after U.S. District Judge Mark Goldsmith ruled last week that the Iraqi detainees rounded up in an immigration sweep in June should be granted bond hearings. Murad's case was scheduled for a bond hearing before Goldsmith's ruling.


Most of the roughly 300 Iraqi detainees in Michigan that were targeted for deportation by the Trump administration have criminal records. There are about 1,400 Iraqis nationwide targeted for removal from the U.S.


Murad immigrated from Iraq to the U.S. in 1977 and was sentenced in 1983 to two years in prison for cocaine possession with intent to distribute.


Since being released in 1985, he has had no other criminal convictions, Bajoka told Judge Jebson. Murad was a legal immigrant who faced a final order of deportation, but like many of the other Iraqi detainees, had previously been allowed to stay in the U.S.


Sonya Babbi of Warren marches in support of her husband along with other families and supporters of Iraqi immigrants from metro Detroit who were detained by ICE gather outside of the federal courthouse in downtown Detroit on Thursday August 31, 2017. (Photo: Ryan Garza, Detroit Free Press)

Related:


Judge halts deportation of Iraqis detained by ICE


Iraqi detainees ask to be released in time for the Christmas season


Jebson told Bajoka he will receive a notice in the mail notifying him of a future court hearing. "If you fail to appear, you will be deported," Judge Jebson said. "Good luck to you."


Family members were pleased to hear of the judge's ruling, but said he should have been released earlier. Murad suffers from mental  health  issues such as being bipolar and physical ailments, said family members who appeared in court. 


"It's hard" not having my father," said Murad's daughter, Summer Murad of Farmington Hills. "It's like missing your best friend. It's been devastating, it's been scary."


In 1997, Murad was shot by a robber at a Detroit liquor store he was working at, putting him in a coma and injuring him, said his attorney. He uses a wheelchair in the detention facility in Battle Creek.


His disabilities, and the fact he is Christian, mean his life would be in danger if he were to be deported to Iraq, said his attorney.


"You're sending this guy to a death sentence if you send him back there," Bajoka said. "For him personally, due to his mental health and his physical ailment, he would probably be subject to torture and probably death if he were to return."


In March, the Trump administration reached a deal with the Iraqi government for Iraq to accept the Iraqi nationals with criminal records. ICE then began rounding up Iraqis for deportation, including in a big sweep on June 11 that drew widespread attention and criticism.


Iraqi Americans and their supporters held several protests, saying the detentions were unfair. ICE said the Iraqi nationals already had their cases adjudicated in immigration courts and had orders to be deported.


On June 15, the ACLU and other groups filed a lawsuit on behalf of hundreds of Iraqis detained by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). On July 24, Judge Goldsmith blocked their deportation. 


The ACLU then asked for the detainees to be released while their cases were being considered, saying some were being mistreated and racially abused while in detention. 


Last week, Judge Goldsmith sided with the ACLU, saying it was unconstitutional for the detainees to be held in detention for so long without bond hearings. Murad's attorney had requested a bond hearing before Judge Goldsmith's ruling. Other bond hearings are expected in coming days. 


Clarence Dass, an attorney who represents 25 Iraqi detainees, has applied for bond hearings in coming weeks for 10 Iraqi detainees. "I feel very optimistic" about them getting released, Dass said. "We're optimistic we're going to get these people home."


The detainees have to prove to a judge they're not a flight risk in order to be released. Dass said that most of the detainees have committed minor offenses decades ago. Others, though, who have committed more serious offenses, such as assault, may face more difficulty in getting released. 


ICE officials have maintained that the Iraqi detainees are security threats. In court Tuesday, the government attorney representing ICE agreed that Murad did not pose a significant flight risk and agreed to the $3,000 bond.


Contact Niraj Warikoo: nwarikoo@freepress.com or 313-223-4792. Follow him on Twitter @nwarikoo
