Allan Wilsey

Allan Wilsey

Doc Wilsey didn’t leave people behind.


If you were a worried patient, unnerved by a diagnosis, he’d put his hand on your shoulder and talk you through to the other side.


If you were the child of a friend, bloodied by a bad cut, he’d stitch you up in his home, telling jokes the whole way.

He was tireless, tending to his patients in Louisville, Weeping Water and Papillion, helping in the community and serving on numerous medical committees in the Omaha area.


Of course, that means Wilsey never stopped working.


“He loved what he did,” said Janice, his wife of 34 years. “He treated anybody, anytime, anywhere.”


The one person he forgot was himself.


Wilsey put off getting a colonoscopy, his wife said, and so it was in 2015, in his late 50s, that he noticed blood in his stools.


The diagnosis: terminal colon cancer.


On Friday, Allan Wilsey died at age 60.


Janice Wilsey said her husband’s death is a lesson for those still living that colonoscopies matter.


Wilsey learned after his diagnosis that he was genetically predisposed to the cancer. There’s now a simple, noninvasive test that people can take to learn if they, too, are genetically predisposed.


Her husband, she said, would love to see that message get out.


Treatment bought Wilsey a few years.


Wilsey threw himself into treatment and the time he had left.


What his friends and colleagues remember about him was his dedication to those around him and his desire to thrive on life.


Hank Vice said Wilsey had always thrown himself into the communities of Louisville and Weeping Water. He accompanied the local rescue squads on medical calls. He served at the Cass County Jail.


He was known for his love of the Huskers, tailgating and road trips.


“Doc was involved in just about every way he could be,” Vice said. “You could count on Doc. No matter what, he had your back.”


Hartman echoed the sentiment.


“He was good for our small community,” Hartman said. “He was active in everything that was going on.”


In addition to his wife, survivors include two sons, Justin of Gretna and Andrew of Papillion, two step-granddaughters and a brother, Phil, of Grand Island.


Son Andrew said his father’s desire to contribute came from his upbringing in Oxford, Nebraska.


“With his small-town upbringing, he had a sense of the need to take care of people, especially those closest to you,” Andrew said. “That’s a lot of what community is, making sure the people around you are well taken care of in the best way possible.”


Visitation is 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. Monday at Heafey Hoffmann Dworak &amp; Cutler’s Bellevue Memorial Chapel, 2202 Hancock St.


The funeral is at 11 a.m. Tuesday at the memorial chapel.

Allan Wilsey




Kira Gale was widely known in Nebraska arts and historical circles, most recently for researching and writing about her theory that Meriwether Lewis was assassinated. 

Live Fearless is to live a life free of worry about what may lie ahead. Backed by the compassion of the Cross and the security of the Shield, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Nebraska empowers you to Live Fearless.

Nancy Gaarder helps cover public safety and weather events as an editor on The World-Herald's breaking news desk. Follow her on Twitter @gaarder. Phone: 402-444-1102.


                                    
                                        Whenever Nancy Gaarder posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.




​

Watch more "Live Fearless" videos »

You could potentially ward off certain chronic diseases and have a more productive and quality-filled life.

"Mountain climbers look at mountains and think, 'I can climb that,'" the 52-year-old said. "Swimmers look at (water) and think, 'I could swim that.'"

Omaha man Paul Shadle is one of 25 individuals featured in a national campaign from the nonprofit Fight Colorectal Cancer. The campaign, which features video and images of the individuals, runs through the month of March.