Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:52 pm

Brandon Norton

Brandon Norton

The body of a woman whose husband told police he had killed her was found Friday night in the Missouri River, where the man had said he had dumped it, officials reported.

Officers retrieved the body of Jennifer Norton, 32, of Bellevue from the Missouri River near the Plattsmouth Boat Ramps about 9:30 p.m. Friday after a three-day search, Bellevue Police Capt. Tom Dargy said Saturday.

“We feel very confident that it is the body of Jennifer Norton,” Dargy said.

An autopsy was scheduled for Saturday morning.

Recreational boaters saw the body floating on the water late Friday, prompting a response from authorities with the Bellevue Police Department, Sarpy County Sheriff’s Office, Plattsmouth Police Department, Cass County Sheriff’s Office and Plattsmouth Fire and Rescue.

Brandon S. Norton, 37, was ordered held without bail Thursday. He has been charged with second-degree murder and is being held in Sarpy County Jail.

Norton went to the Sarpy County Jail on Tuesday evening to tell authorities that he had killed his wife during a domestic disturbance Monday. He said he dropped his wife’s body into the river from a bridge at U.S. Highway 34.

The case comes months after an Omaha woman, Camisha Hollis, went missing April 2.

Her mother, Martha Hollis, believes Camisha Hollis’ boyfriend, Marvin Young, was involved in her disappearance, and has said she fears Young killed her daughter. A week before her disappearance, Camisha Hollis, 34, told her mother that she planned to leave Young because, she said, he was abusive and controlling.

Young has not been charged in connection with her disappearance, but he has been charged with neglecting the couple’s three children and resisting arrest.

Brandon Norton




Brandon S. Norton, 37, has been charged with second-degree murder. Norton went to the Sarpy County Jail on Tuesday evening to tell authorities that he had killed his wife.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


