Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:52 pm

A woman linked to a crash that killed three motorcyclists this past summer pleaded no contest Friday afternoon to a misdemeanor charge of willful reckless driving.

Douglas County Court Judge Sheryl Lohaus found Rhonda Boisseau guilty and scheduled her sentencing for March 29. The charge carries a maximum sentence of 90 days in jail.

Motorcyclist Adam D. Kammann, 34, of La Vista; his passenger, Christine Zadina, 37, of Omaha; and the driver of a second motorcycle, Andrew Torrice, 24, of La Vista, collided at 72nd and Cass Streets the night of June 10.

All three died at the scene, next to Crossroads Mall.

In court Friday afternoon, City Prosecutor Matt Kuhse said Boisseau, 57, revved her engine loudly and drove toward a group of motorcyclists at the Bucky’s gas station near 77th and Dodge Streets shortly before the crash.

One of the motorcyclists was Torrice.

Lindsey Clark, a passenger on one of the motorcycles, said she and others saw Boisseau take off after Torrice as he left the station and follow him east on Cass Street.

In September, Boisseau was charged in county court with providing false information to police officers investigating the case and willful reckless driving.

The Douglas County Attorney’s Office looked at motor vehicle homicide charges in connection with the case but decided there was not enough evidence.

Clark and others associated with the group of motorcyclists came to the Douglas County Courthouse on Friday, angry that Boisseau was not charged with a more serious offense.

Boisseau, driving a Volkswagen, closely pursued Torrice out of the lot and east on Cass, Clark said.

“If he would have braked, she would have hit him,” Clark said.

She said she did not understand why prosecutors could not prove Boisseau caused the crash.

“To me, it’s just mind-blowing,” she said.

She did not see the crash, but saw the aftermath.

“As we crested the hill, we just saw the smoke,” she said. “There was three essentially lifeless people laying there.”

Kuhse said the available evidence didn’t point toward a more serious charge.

“I can understand their frustration. Obviously, people died. However, decisions have to be made based on evidence,” he said.

A charge of providing police false information was dropped as part of a plea deal.

Boisseau’s attorney, Mike Wilson, said she would not comment until after sentencing.

In 2016, Boisseau was found guilty of first-offense reckless driving. She was fined $150.

andrew.nelson@owh.com, 402-444-1310, twitter.com/nelson_aj




An investigation into a motorcycle crash that killed three people last Saturday night has found no evidence that one of the bikes was being followed into the crash scene, Omaha police said Friday.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Commenting is limited to Omaha World-Herald subscribers. To sign up, click here.

If you're already a subscriber and need to activate your access or log in, click here.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


