


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Boys and girls, some as young as 5, filled the wooden benches inside the Phoenix Immigration Court, offering a glimpse into the humanitarian crisis.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A migrant boy released from federal custody gets help down from a bus by a private security guard in McAllen, Texas, on June 22, 2018.
(Photo: Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY)

When Isela Blanc arrived at the Phoenix Immigration Court on Friday, the wooden benches in back were already packed with children sitting shoulder to shoulder. 


Friday is the day the Phoenix Immigration Court holds hearings for migrant children who have come across the border illegally unaccompanied by a parent, usually from Central American countries wracked with poverty, gang violence and political upheaval.


Blanc, a Democratic member of the Arizona House of Representatives from Tempe, has been outraged by the family separations that have taken place in recent weeks under the Trump administration's zero-tolerance border policy.


Two days after Trump ended the practice of separating children from parents amid a public outcry, Blanc decided to come to the Immigration Court. She said she wanted to witness the juvenile hearings firsthand. After learning that some of the more than 2,300 children separated from their parents have been placed in shelters in Arizona, she also wanted to see if any of them turned up. 


READ MORE: Texas border chaos: Courts, families, government collide


The next hour and a half offered Blanc a heart-wrenching glimpse into the longstanding humanitarian crisis that has vexed previous presidents, and which President Donald Trump has tried to solve with a heavy hand. 


In the over-air-conditioned courtroom, its walls stark white, sat 14 boys and four girls all nicely dressed, as if they were on their way to church or a fancy party. 


Instead, some would learn within the next few minutes that they were being sent back on the soonest available plane to their home country. Among them, a 7-year-old boy and a 9-year-old girl. 


The boys in the courtroom had on blue dress shirts and ties, hair neatly combed. The girls wore light-colored dresses and hair ribbons. 


READ MORE: USA TODAY tracking where separated children sent


Many of the children appeared to be teenagers. But several, including a 5-year-old girl and a 7-year-old boy, were so little that their feet dangled from the benches without touching the floor. 


As she surveyed the children waiting quietly for the hearings to begin, Blanc became overcome with emotion. She briefly walked out of the courtroom to compose herself.


Moments later, she returned and a court officer announced, "All rise."



    Edmilson Aguilar Punay, a 15-year-old from Guatemala, says the detention center where he was held was so crowded, some people had to sleep standing.
    USA TODAY

John Richardson, the immigration judge who handles juvenile hearings, took his seat at the front of the courtroom wearing a black robe and got right to work. Above his head hung the seal of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Richardson called the number of each case. One by one, each child came forward, taking a seat at a table while donning a set of headphones so they could listen to Richardson's questions translated into Spanish by an interpreter.


"Oh, your English is quite good," Richardson told a 16-year-old girl named Mariela from El Salvador after she told him her name and age in English. "Have you been studying in the shelter?"


READ MORE: How will migrant children, parents be reunited?


Next to the girl sat a lawyer from the Florence Immigrant and Refugee Rights Project, a non-profit that runs a program that provides free legal assistance to unaccompanied children detained in Arizona. At a separate table sat a prosecutor for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the agency responsible for arresting and removing undocumented immigrants from the country. 


Suddenly, the ICE prosecutor spoke up.


The girl had been released to a sponsor in Virginia, but she's been running away, the ICE prosecutor said. She's been hanging out with a gang member, the prosecutor added. 


"Why did you run away?" Richardson asked.


"I had a problem and went to a friend's house and didn't go back home," the girl said.


What kind of problem? Richardson asked. Has someone behaved inappropriately with you?


No, the girl said.


Richardson grew concerned. He recommended that a child advocate be appointed to her case to find out more about what was going on. He cautioned the girl about running away and hanging out on the streets.


It's in your best interests to stay in the shelter, Richardson told her. And if you run away again, he said, the court will have to issue an order that you be removed to El Salvador.


READ MORE: Immigrant mother reunited with 7-year-old son


The Florence Project began to see a sharp increase in family-separation cases at the beginning of the year, but the pace accelerated after the Trump administration announced on May 7 that the zero-tolerance policy had been implemented.


Under the policy, everyone caught entering the country illegally was being referred for criminal prosecution, even parents arriving with children. As a result, more than 2,300 children were separated from their parents at the border and placed in government custody in shelters.



    Darwin, 7, is reunited with his mother Beata Mariana de Jesus Mejia-Mejia after being separated under Trump's zero-tolerance policy. Video courtesy of Mike Donovan
    Arizona Republic

As of Thursday, the Florence Project had received 467 family-separation cases, said Lauren Dasse, the executive director. Of those, 112 cases came after the zero-tolerance policy was announced, she said.


Dasse could not discuss specific cases, but she said it's possible Friday's juvenile docket at the Phoenix Immigration Court included some children separated from parents under the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy.


She also said it's possible some of the youngest children who agreed to be sent back to their home country on Friday had been separated from parents at the border and their parents had already been deported without them. 


Richardson called up more cases. He continued several more hearings to dates in the future. For others, he transferred hearings to courts after learning that the child had been moved to a shelter or placed with a sponsor in another state.


READ MORE: Separated immigrant kids held in AZ shelters 


Of the 25 or so cases Richardson heard that morning, six were of children who agreed to accept "voluntary departure"  back to their home country rather than remaining in the U.S. and fighting their deportation.


Of the six, four were boys, two were girls. The oldest was 17.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The youngest was a boy named Leonardo. He told Richardson he was 7, but looked much younger.


Dressed in a turquoise-colored shirt and black vest, the boy sat in a chair in front of the judge. The top of the boy's head was barely visible.


"Leonardo, are you from Guatemala?" Richardson asked. 


"Si," the boy answered in Spanish.


"Do you want to go back to Guatemala?" Richardson asked. 


 "Si," the boy answered.


"Is anyone going to hurt you if you go back to Guatemala?" Richardson asked.


"No," the boy answered.


"Are your parents in Guatemala?" Richardson asked.


"Si," the boy answered.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Richardson concluded the hearing.


"Leonardo, you will soon be back in Guatemala. As soon as they can find you a seat on an airplane. Hopefully it won't be very long," Richardson said. "Good luck in Guatemala. Goodbye."


Back in his seat on the wooden bench, the boy turned around and looked back. 


Blanc, the lawmaker, saw his face peering over his fingers pressed against the back of the bench.


READ MORE: Non-profit that houses migrant kids pays CEO $1.5M


Recalling the moment afterward outside the courtroom, Blanc wiped away a tear. Standing next to her was Charlene Fernandez, a Democratic member of the Arizona House of Representatives from Yuma, who had accompanied her to the hearings.


"Sitting there, watching the process, listening to the questions, seeing the faces of those children, you can capture their sorrow, their anxiety," Blanc said. "We are failing all these kids and the failure is putting them through this process that is challenging, confusing, and lacks human empathy and understanding."


READ MORE: 'Ripping my heart apart': How to help migrant kids


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.