


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The migrant caravan in Mexico that angered President Donald Trump remains intact for now but will disband in Mexico City next week.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


In this April 4, 2018, photo, the Zelaya siblings, from El Salvador, Nayeli, right, Anderson, center, and Daniela, huddle together on a soccer field, at the sports club where Central American migrants traveling with the annual "Stations of the Cross" caravan are camped out, in Matias Romero, Oaxaca State, Mexico. The children's father, Elmer Zelaya, 38, said the family is awaiting temporary transit visas that would allow them to continue to the U.S. border, where they hope to request asylum and join relatives in New York.
(Photo: Felix Marquez/Associated Press)

MEXICO CITY — The caravan of hundreds of migrants from Central America traveling through Mexico has diminished since angering President Donald Trump earlier this week and helping prompt him to deploy National Guard troops to the southwest border.


Many of the migrants fleeing poverty and gang-violence in Honduras and other Central American countries plan to remain in Mexico, where the government has been processing documents to allow them to stay, according to multiple posts on social media.


But some of the migrants are determined to continue on their journey all the way to the U.S. border to apply for asylum in this country.


“I would say the caravan has not disbanded for now in the sense that planned activities are still taking place,” said Alex Mensing, an organizer with Pueblo Sin Fronteras. 


READ MORE: Human misery driving travelers toward better lives in U.S.



    A church in Puebla, Mexico, has been converted into one of four shelters for several hundred migrants from Central America. Nick Oza/azcentral.com
    

By Friday afternoon, roughly 630 migrants — about half are women and children — arrived by bus in Puebla, about two hours by car south of here. They are staying in four shelters.


Friday, Saturday and Sunday, they will be meeting one on one with volunteer Mexican and U.S. lawyers. The lawyers will explain what asylum laws are in each country to see if they might qualify, according to Jordi Ruiz Cirera, a freelance photographer who said he has been traveling with the caravan.


On Monday, the migrants plan to head for Mexico City, where the caravan will end after a series of demonstrations they plan to hold at key sites to call attention to the plight of migrants fleeing Central America.


MORE: Migrant caravan abandons plans to travel together to U.S. border


Mensing said it’s unclear how many migrants will try to enter the United States and apply for asylum. That will depend on their meetings with lawyers. 


Many have already decided to stay in Mexico, he said, but some have relatives in the U.S. and are expected to continue on.



    Thousands of people are walking towards a better life, but now the numbers are dwindling in response to Trump's U.S. border threats.
    USA TODAY

Trump tweeted on Thursday that the migrant caravan had disbanded under pressure from Mexico and the United States.


"The Caravan is largely broken up thanks to the strong immigration laws of Mexico and their willingness to use them so as not to cause a giant scene at our Border," Trump tweeted. "Because of the Trump Administrations actions, Border crossings are at a still UNACCEPTABLE 46 year low. Stop drugs!"


The Caravan is largely broken up thanks to the strong immigration laws of Mexico and their willingness to use them so as not to cause a giant scene at our Border. Because of the Trump Administrations actions, Border crossings are at a still UNACCEPTABLE 46 year low. Stop drugs!

At its peak, organizers had estimated more than 1,000 migrants had joined the caravan. The caravan left Tapachula, a town in the southernmost Mexican state of Chiapas bordering Guatemala on March 25. Organizers originally said the caravan planned to travel through Mexico to the U.S. border, a journey of more than 2,000 miles, ending in Caborca, in the state of Sonora, south of Arizona.


The migrants arrived in Puebla, the capital of the state with the same name, after leaving the town of Matias Romero in the southern state of Oaxaca.


READ MORE:


Raul Gonzalez, 58, a Mexico City resident who drives a shuttle van for a living, said the plight of Central American migrants is “a very complicated issue.”


He believes Mexico takes its marching orders from the United States, which is why the government is allowing many to apply for documents to remain in Mexico. But he said Mexico is a poor country compared with the U.S. and is kept down economically by the U.S. Therefore, the U.S. should be accepting the Central American migrants, not Mexico, he said.


"There are not enough opportunities here for us. How can we take in more?” Gonzalez said.


The caravan, an annual event, was traveling as a group for protection from criminals who prey on migrants, and to call attention to conditions in Central America pushing people to leave their countries and seek protection in other countries.


"What it really is is a political act to draw attention to the plight of migrants coming from Central America, coming to the U.S. or Mexico, in order to seek refuge or asylum," said Christopher Wilson, deputy director of the Mexico Institute at the Wilson Center, a think tank in Washington, D.C.


With migrants traveling on foot and on freight trains, organizers expected it would take more than a month for the caravan to reach Caborca in late April or early May, and then disperse, with some migrants heading to Tijuana to apply for asylum in the U.S. at the San Ysidro port of entry south of San Diego.



    A big caravan of Central American migrants that has stirred concerns in the U.S. and drawn tweets from President Donald Trump has been halted for days at a sports field in southern Mexico. (April 3)
    AP

The caravan was still roughly 1,750 miles from the U.S. border in the southern state of Oaxaca in Mexico, when Trump became enraged apparently after the Fox News program "Fox &amp; Friends" and other media outlets reported that hundreds of migrants traveling in a caravan were headed for the U.S. and Mexico was doing little to stop them.


In a series of tweets, Trump blamed Democrats, Mexico and Central American countries for allowing undocumented immigrants and drugs to flow into the U.S.


Trump threatened to end the North American Free Trade Agreement to put pressure on Mexico to do more to stop migrants from Central America from reaching the U.S.


RELATED:


The tweets culminated with Trump signing a presidential proclamation on Wednesday directing his administration to work with border governors to deploy National Guard troops to help guard the southwest border.


In the proclamation, Trump characterized the arrival of migrants from Central America as a border-security threat on par with opioids and other illicit drugs "flowing across our southern border" and transnational gangs including MS-13.


"The situation at the border has now reached a point of crisis," Trump wrote in a presidential memorandum. "The lawlessness that continues at our southern border is fundamentally incompatible with the safety, security, and sovereignty of the American people."


Mexico's President Enrique Peña Nieto (Photo: Marco Ugarte/Associated Press)

Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto this week urged Trump to stop with the "threatening or disrespectful attitudes" and constructively discuss the issues with Mexico.


"If your recent statements are the result of frustration due to domestic policy issues, to your laws or to your Congress, it is to them that you should turn to, not to Mexicans,” Peña Nieto said to Trump in a video statement. "We’re not going to permit that negative rhetoric to define our actions. We’re only going to work in the best interest of the Mexicans.”


The Mexican Senate also adopted a resolution urging its government to stop working with the United States on illegal immigration and drug trafficking, the Associated Press reported Wednesday.


This is not the first time a president has deployed National Guard troops to the southwest border. In 2006, former President George W. Bush deployed about 6,000 National Guard troops in response to requests for help securing the border from the governors of Arizona, California, New Mexico and Texas.


In 2010, former President Barack Obama sent about 1,200 troops to the southwest border to help support the Border Patrol.


But conditions at the border were much different then, said Doris Meissner, former commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service under former President Bill Clinton. She is now a senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute, a research group.


Border Patrol apprehensions are way down, Meissner said, and the Border Patrol has far more agents. 


In 2006, the Border Patrol recorded more than 1 million apprehensions of undocumented border crossers, the majority of them from Mexico


In fiscal year 2017, Border Patrol apprehensions fell to 310,000, the lowest levels since the 1970s, as the flow of undocumented immigrants from Mexico has dropped off sharply, while the number of migrants from Central America has increased. 


Border Patrol staffing, meanwhile, has jumped from 12,349 in fiscal year 2006, to 19,437 in fiscal year 2017, according to Border Patrol data.


A young man carries his baggage as Central American migrants traveling with the annual "Stations of the Cross" caravan begin departing by bus from the sports club where they have been camping out in Matias Romero, Oaxaca State, Mexico, on Thursday, April 5, 2018. Migrants in a caravan that drew criticism from U.S. President Donald Trump began packing up their meager possessions and boarding buses to the Mexican capital and the nearby city of Puebla on Thursday. (Photo: Felix Marquez/Associated Press)

Bush ordered National Guard troops to help shore up the Border Patrol while additional agents authorized by Congress were being hired and trained, Meissner said.


Obama, meanwhile, was prompted to deploy National Guard troops mostly due to political pressure after Arizona rancher Robert Krentz was killed while working near the border, Meissner said.


"Trump's decision to deploy troops to the southwest border is quite disconnected," Meissner said. "It is disconnected from facts on the ground. This image that the country is being invaded is not what’s taking place."


Meissner acknowledged that the U.S. faces new challenges because of the ongoing arrival of Central American migrants fleeing poverty and violence in their countries. 


She said the U.S. should be working with Mexico to address what she characterized as a regional problem.


"Mexico is doing law enforcement not simply to please the U.S. but because it has its own important self-interests. We should be supporting them in that and not jeopardizing it," she said.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
