


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Advocates want U.S. immigration authorities to stop holding transgender migrants after Roxana Hernandez, a transgender woman, died while in custody at a facility in New Mexico.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Transgender immigrants from Central America, including Roxana Hernandez (center), head for Mexico City on April 9, 2018. Hernandez, 33, died in the custody of ICE at a hospital in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

Advocates are calling on U.S. immigration authorities to stop holding transgender migrants seeking asylum in detention centers after a transgender woman died while in custody at a facility in New Mexico.


The 33-year-old woman from Honduras, identified by advocates as Roxana Hernandez, was part of the caravan of Central American migrants that traveled to the U.S. border through Mexico.


Immigration and Customs Enforcement said the detainee was being held in the transgender unit at the Cibola County Detention Center in Milan, New Mexico, when she began suffering from complications related to HIV.


She was hospitalized at Cibola General Hospital and then airlifted to Lovelace Medical Center, ICE said in a written statement. She died Friday at the center, and the preliminary cause was cardiac arrest.


Organizers from Pueblo Sin Fronteras questioned whether Hernandez received adequate medical care while in custody of U.S. Customs and Border Protection and then ICE.


ALSO: U.S. government lost 1,475 immigrant children: What you need to understand


Hernandez presented herself to U.S. border officers at the San Ysidro port of entry on May 9 and asked for asylum, after traveling with the caravan more than 2,000 miles, the group said in a statement. 


During her first week in custody “her body and spirit deteriorated quickly,” the statement said.


“Once she was transferred to the immigrant prison in Cibola, New Mexico, U.S. immigration authorities finally recognized (despite her having been in government custody for over a week) that she needed medical attention,” the statement said.
Advocates say immigration authorities do not do a good job of protecting transgender migrants from abuses or providing them with medical care while in custody seeking asylum. They are fleeing persecution and violence in their home countries when they arrive in the U.S., advocates say.


“It is alarming that transgender communities continue to face transphobic violence outside and inside of detention walls," says Flor Bermudez, legal director at Transgender Law Center. “This is why TLC’s Trans Immigrant Defense Effort (TIDE) has organized to demand the liberation of transgender women from detention and the end of all detention and deportations. ICE has shown time and again it is incapable of protecting transgender women in detention. Transgender people should not be detained by ICE at all."


MORE ON THE MIGRANT CARAVANS:



    Central American part of the migrant caravan group says goodbye to friends just before crossing to the U.S. port of San Ysidro in Tijuana on April 29, 2018
    Nick Oza/azcentral.com