


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In Arizona, U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions promises to prosecute every migrant who crosses the border illegally.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Attorney General Jeff Sessions addresses the Association of State Criminal Investigative Agencies at their Spring Conference May 7, 2018, at the Scottsdale Resort at McCormick Ranch.
(Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions promised to prosecute and separate parents who smuggle their children illegally into the United States as he revealed more details about his "zero-tolerance" approach to border enforcement.


"If you cross this border unlawfully, then we will prosecute you," he said. "It’s that simple."


Sessions made the announcement Monday during speeches in Scottsdale, before the Association of State Criminal Investigative Agencies, and in Calexico, where he toured the U.S.-Mexico border. 


RELATED: AG Sessions gives pep talk, policy overview during speech in Scottsdale


In Arizona, he unveiled his plan, in partnership with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, to prosecute all individuals caught crossing the border illegally, saying his Department of Justice would take as many cases "as humanly possible" until they reached a 100 percent prosecution rate.


But he also confirmed long-rumored plans to go after parents who attempt to bring their children into the country illegally. Several media reports described that DHS was already separating children from their parents along some parts of the border.



    Attorney General Jeff Sessions talks about illegal immigration to the Association of State Criminal Investigative Agencies May 7, 2018,
in Scottsdale.
    Tom Tingle, The Republic | azcentral.com 

Sessions' Monday remarks made the new policy clear.


"If you are smuggling a child, then we will prosecute you and that child will be separated from you as required by law," Sessions said. "If you don’t like that, then don’t smuggle children over our border."


In many instances, families have traveled together to the U.S. border to seek asylum. It's also common to have parents entrust their children to a smuggler as a favor or for profit. 


Most recently, when hundreds of Central American migrants in a caravan arrived at the border, volunteer lawyers were giving parents documents swearing that the children were theirs, and asking them not to be separated.


RELATED: Most migrants from caravan now admitted to U.S.


At the time, a DHS spokesman said the department doesn't have a policy to separate families as a way to deter people from coming to the United States, but that it instead acted in the best interests of the children if they couldn't certify the relationship between adults and children traveling together.


"Unfortunately, we have seen many instances where human traffickers have used children to cross the border to gain illegal entry to our country as they know they are unlikely to be detained," said Tyler Houlton, DHS press secretary. "This is one of the very loopholes we would like to see Congress end in order to gain operational control of our border.”


Sessions' announcement on family separations sparked immediate backlash from migrant-advocacy groups, as well as praise from groups advocating for lower immigration into the United States.


The Florence Project, which provides free legal and social services to migrants in detention centers, condemned the move, but said family separations are already taking place in Arizona, and it could become more widespread under this new policy.


The group said this announcement puts parents in a tough predicament: either staying together in their home countries facing tough living situations such as gang violence, or seek out safety but deal with months or years of separation from their children.


RELATED: More prosecutors, judges sent to Southwest border


"No parent should have to make this impossible decision, and the U.S. government’s choice to actively pursue this policy as a means of deterrence is unconscionable," said Laura St. John, the group's legal director. 


St. John said that even before Sessions' announcement, the Florence Project already had worked on 135 cases of families being separated in Arizona this year. She added that the final tally is likely to be higher than in previous years, especially under this new policy.


In those instances, the adults were placed in detention centers to process their claims, while the children were placed in the care of the Office of Refugee Settlement, oftentimes navigating the U.S. legal system without legal counsel. 


"We fear that expanded use of family separation will result in some parents accepting deportations out of desperation because they cannot bear the trauma of being separated from their children," St. John added. "For some, this decision is a death sentence.”



    Central American part of the migrant caravan group says goodbye to friends just before crossing to the U.S. port of San Ysidro in Tijuana on April 29, 2018
    Nick Oza/azcentral.com

Jessica Vaughan, director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration Studies, a research group that favors tighter immigration enforcement, welcomed the announcement by Sessions.


Prosecuting everyone caught crossing the border without documents, including parents, will help deter adults with children from attempting to enter the country illegally, she said.


“We know from experience that a policy of imposing stiff consequences has been effective in helping reduce the flow of illegal crossers, as it increases the unpleasant risks relative to the benefits that people are hoping for when they decide to try to come illegally,” she said in an email.


RELATED: Sessions announces new illegal-immigration policy


Vaughan said parents with children are willing to make the dangerous trip to the U.S. border because until now they have been able to avoid “major consequences.”


They have “even been rewarded with release to settle where they like, and often skip out on the very generous due process we offer them, only to join the ranks of other illegal residents,” she said.


“This unending surge of families has been a real problem for many American communities that have had to accommodate them. It’s been a problem for the schools, it’s been a public safety problem in some places, and it’s been a major budget drain, not to mention a cash cow for the criminal smuggling organizations,” Vaughan added. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The American Immigration Lawyers Association criticized the Justice Department's plans not only to separate children from their parents, but also to prosecute asylum seekers who they believe have made "false statements" or have committed fraud, calling them "morally abhorrent."


"This is the latest push by the administration to undermine America's asylum system," said Benjamin Johnson, the executive director for AILA. "Families have been fleeing the violence and turmoil in Central America for years. Our nation's leaders should identify ways to aid them instead of treating them like lawbreakers." 


Johnson rejected claims that attorneys were coaching asylum seekers, and added that his group would continue to advocate for due process. 


RELATED: Caravan migrants set to seek asylum in the U.S.


U.S. Rep. Raúl Grijalva, an Arizona Democrat, also criticized the announcement and said he would work with his colleagues in Congress to block the Trump administration from further targeting families and asylum seekers. 


"When Sessions says ‘zero-tolerance,’ he really means ‘zero-compassion’ for any immigrant fleeing economic hardship and oppression," Grijalva said.


“Separating families at the border — including those with a legitimate asylum claim —sets a cruel precedent that has no place in our nation’s immigration process," he added. "It endangers the mental health of children, traumatizes families already fleeing unimaginable hardship, and is contrary to the legal obligations of the United States to those seeking asylum."


In 2017, Homeland Security referred more than 65,000 new cases for criminal prosecution to the Justice Department, according to Syracuse University's Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse.


That same year, the U.S. Border Patrol recorded more than 303,000 apprehensions along the Southwest border. And while many of those individuals attempted to cross the border illegally more than once in a year, a 100 percent prosecution rate would still be a considerable increase in workload for prosecutors.


Last week, Sessions announced the Justice Department would send 35 prosecutors to the border, including six in Arizona, as well as 18 immigration judges to help process asylum claims along the Southwest border.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
