


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Central American migrants who traveled through Mexico in a caravan are presenting themselves at the U.S. border in a bid for asylum.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The Arizona Republic's Daniel Gonzalez reports on supporters of the migrant caravan who have gathered at the border fence Sunday, April 29, 2018.
    Nick Oza, The Republic | azcentral.com

Central American migrants and supporters of the migrant caravan hold up signs from the U.S. side of the border looking south into Mexico on April 29, 2018.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

TIJUANA, MEXICO — A group of about 200 Central American migrants made a final triumphant walk on Sunday, singing and cheering as they made their way toward an official border crossing to apply for asylum in the United States.


The day was supposed to cap a 2,500-mile journey that began more than a month ago on the Mexican border with Guatemala.


But once the migrants, many of them women carrying small children in their arms, reached the San Ysidro port, the caravan appeared to collide head-on with the Trump administration.


Moments before the migrants arrived, U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials announced that none of the migrants from the caravan would be processed for asylum because the agency had reached capacity for the day for migrants seeking asylum.


SEE ALSO: 5 things to know about migrant caravan Trump wants to stop


The afternoon announcement stunned organizers and immigrant-rights advocates, especially considering statements earlier this week by Department of Homeland Security officials that teams of asylum officers were being dispatched to the border to quickly process the migrants.


"They know we are coming. The whole world is watching," Irineo Mujica,  an organizer with the transnational group Pueblo Sin Fronteras said. "They are trying to please Donald Trump." 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The caravan has angered Trump for weeks.His administration's view is that the group represented a threat to border security and national sovereignty.


The CBP posture appeared timed to intentionally block the caravan, said Brian Griffey, a researcher with Amnesty International, who was in Tijuana to observe the treatment of the migrants.


“They know we are coming. The whole world is watching... They are trying to please Donald Trump.”


"Instead, they are trying to push them back into the Mexican arena without an individual assessment of the persecution these people claim they are fleeing," Griffey said. "Seeking asylum is not a crime. They need to let them in and deal with their claims."


After the migrants arrived at the port, organizers huddled with American lawyers to discuss a plan, then sent a group of about 100 migrants through the entrance gates of the port. But late Sunday afternoon it was unclear whether any of them had been processed.


Another group of about 50 to 75 migrants, meanwhile, sat down on the cement in an area that had been fenced off by Mexican immigration authorities, prepared to wait until they were allowed into the port.


Some organizers led migrants in chants of  “Si se puede,” It can be done, as they waited. 


“I’m nervous because I don’t know if we will be separated and even more what will happen next.”


Kevin McAleenan, the Customs and Border Protection commissioner, said in a written statement that the agency had "reached capacity at the San Ysidro port of entry for CBP officers to be able to bring additional persons traveling without appropriate entry documentation into the port of entry for processing."


Jackie Wasiluk with CBP Public Affairs in San Diego said in an email that, "As sufficient space and resources become available, CBP officers will be able to take additional individuals into the port for processing." 


"At this time, I don’t have a timeline for when that will be," her statement said.


Another CBP spokesman, Ralph DeSio, clarified that the port was at capacity for Sunday, but that the migrants could try again on Monday.


Alex Mensing with Pueblo Sin Fronteras said 50 people approached the port of entry on Sunday; Border Patrol told them it was at capacity. As of 5:30 p.m., they were still waiting there.


Mensing said the remaining members of the caravan who intended to seek asylum would camp by the border crossing.


"We are going to stay here until every single one of the asylum seekers is able to exercise their right to seek asylum," he said.


He used the disappointing moment to make a political statement: “We hope that someday, the priorities of the United States government are such that we take care of people who are fleeing violence, before we try to round up people in our cities and deport them in ICE raids.”


Isabel Rodriguez, a widow who had made the journey north from El Salvador with two grandsons, seemed undeterred by the latest setback.


"We’ve withstood, on the train, many days of exhaustion, hunger, cold and heat," Rodriguez said. "We’ve withstood it and we’re here as one united community."


The day started out with a mixture of excitement and nervousness and migrants prepared for the moment they would apply for asylum.


“The hard part starts now... Right now is the beginning of the long long fight for (asylum) status. We just hope the laws are applied equally to people who have decided to become public. And that it’s fair. We don’t ask for special treatment we just ask that it’s fair.”


"Yes, I’m nervous,” said 18-year-old Karina Gomez from Nicaragua who traveled in the migrant caravan with her 44-year-old mother, Emilia Palacio. “I’m nervous because I don’t know if we will be separated and even more what will happen next.”


Her feelings captured the anxiety that was palpable among the migrants who traveled to the United States in a caravan that President Donald Trump has made clear are not welcome, first by deploying National Guard troops to the southern border and then dispatching teams of immigration judges, prosecutors and credible-fear officers to process asylum claims quickly, a move immigrant advocates say is aimed at deporting migrants with tenuous cases as quickly as possible.


WANT MORE CARAVAN COVERAGE?


On Sunday morning, before heading for the port, the migrants took buses from shelters in the center of Tijuana to the spot where the border fence reaches the Pacific Ocean.There they were greeted by several hundred supporters who chanted and cheered in an hour-long rally in solidarity with the migrant caravan.


“The hard part starts now,” said Mujica, one of the main organizers of Pueblo Sin Fronteras, the transnational group that organized the caravan, which was intended to offer protection to migrants by traveling safer as group and also call attention to the poverty, gang violence and political turmoil in Central America driving families to flee.


"Right now is the beginning of the long long fight for (asylum) status. We just hope the laws are applied equally to people who have decided to become public. And that it’s fair. We don’t ask for special treatment we just ask that it’s fair," he said.


Four couples from #migrant#caravan are getting married near #border fence in Tijuana as they prepare to ask for asylum in the US. Could it stengthen their case? pic.twitter.com/BVrscByOcs

Earlier, on a cement platform overlooking the beach and the border fence beyond, four young couples exchanged vows in a hasty marriage ceremony.


The couples, several with young children, traveled together but had never been officially married.


But presenting themselves as married couples, they hoped to reduce the chances of being separated while being processed inside the U.S. and perhaps increase their chances of being released while they pursued their asylum claims, said Emma Lozano, a Christian pastor from Chicago who performed the ceremony.


Supporters of #migrant#caravan from both sides of the border have converged at fence between #Tijuana and #San Diego. pic.twitter.com/amWB8aAaTW

About 80 U.S. families have also offered to sponsor migrants seeking asylum, said Heather Cronk, co-director of Showing Up For Racial Justice, a group that supports racial-justice issues.


Having an American sponsor might improve migrants chances of being released from detention while pursuing asylum in the U.S., she said.


"Many of (the sponsors) are motivated by the rhetoric that President Trump is using saying, 'We are closing our doors, we are closing our borders. These are folks from across the country from New York, to Virginia, to Wyoming to California who are eager to open homes and their hearts to refugees."


Central American migrants and supporters of the migrant caravan from both sides of the border have converged at the fence between Tijuana and San Diego near Friendship Park in Tijuana, on April 29, 2018. These migrants will decide whether to present themselves to U.S Border officers at the San Ysidro port of entry and apply for asylum. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

On the other side of the border, in San Diego, about 100 people marched along the beach from Border Field State Park to the border. Over the crashing of waves on the shore, they banged drums and chanted phrases like, “undocumented, unafraid!”


Many of them had spent the past week walking from Los Angeles to San Diego as part of the March Without Borders. The more than 100-mile walk was intended to reflect support for the caravan.


Along the way, the participants had watched videos of the migrants walking through Mexico and chanting; they called out the same refrains as they marched through Southern California. They traversed conservative sections of Orange County. One participant said people threw eggs at the group.


“It was intense,” said Marcia Suarez, 23, an Argentine immigrant who lives in New York City. But, she said, “the caravan went through much worse and they kept going.”


In addition to lots of international media, there is a large Mexican police presence as #migrants from #caravan gather in central Tijuana to walk to the U.S port. pic.twitter.com/Qqen87OK2o

Another march participant, 23-year-old Monica Torres, teared up when she finally reached Friendship Park Sunday morning and could see the migrants and their supporters through the tall fence.


This time, the two groups were divided by the fence, but sang the same chants.


“To be honest, it’s a bit surreal,” said Torres, who is protected by Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, the program created via executive action by President Barack Obama that Trump has been trying to end. She said it was the first time she had been to the border since she’d crossed from Mexico into the U.S. 15 years ago.


She defended the migrants’ right to seek asylum in the United States. Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen has encouraged the migrants to seek shelter in the first safe country they enter, including Mexico.


“Mexico is not a country to seek asylum,” Torres said. “We migrated from there. Mexico is not an option.”


Central American migrants and supporters of the migrant caravan from the U.S. side looking south into Mexico on April 29, 2018. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

Rubilio Mendez, 34, a migrant from Guatemala who traveled with the caravan, said he has no family in the U.S. and was unaware of the program matching migrants with American sponsors.


Migrants who don’t pass credible-fear interviews, the first hurdle to applying for asylum, risk being quickly deported.


Rubilio Mendez said he fled Guatemala after gangs threaten to kill him, leaving behind his wife and five daughters.


“Many of (the sponsors) are motivated by the rhetoric that President Trump is using saying, 'We are closing our doors, we are closing our borders. These are folks from across the country from New York, to Virginia, to Wyoming to California who are eager to open homes and their hearts to refugees.”


If deported back to Guatemala by the U.S, he said he would not stay.


"I can’t go back to Guatemala,” he said. “I will be killed."


In Friendship Park, Olimpia Blanco, a 23-year-old immigrant from Mexico who lives in Los Angeles, carried a sign reading, “queer and trans solidarity."


MORE FROM AZCENTRAL:


The message was intended as a show of support for the Central American transgender women seeking asylum.


Blanco said she was happy to see rainbow signs on the Mexican side of the border and a multi-colored kite whipping around in the sky read, “refugees welcome here.” She hoped the symbolism would be comforting to the gay and transgender migrants seeking safety.


"It’s a universal sign of, 'OK, there’s someone here that’s thinking of me, too,'" she said.


Marely Ramirez of Coronado walked with the group, waving a huge Honduran flag. Many of the migrants in the caravan are fleeing violence and political instability in that country.


Ramirez is from Mexico, but she said she identifies with the struggles of those seeking opportunities in the U.S.


"I am an immigrant and I know the struggles of anyone who is coming from south of that border, trying to have a better life," she said. 


The San Diego event was peaceful. There didn’t appear to be any anti-immigrant protesters present.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
