


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Paul Thornton, 46, was arrested after police investigated a report of an adult male and juvenile female "making out."

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Paul Thornton
(Photo: Florence Police Department)

A captain at the Red Rock Correctional Center in Eloy has been arrested on suspicion of having a sexual relationship with a minor, Florence police said Friday.


Paul Thornton, 46, was arrested after police investigated a report of an adult male and juvenile female "making out" in the area of Anthem at Merrill Ranch in Florence, police said. 


A 16-year-old girl told police that she had been in a relationship with a man identified as Thornton for about 11 months, and that the relationship became sexual in April 2017, police said in a news release. 


Investigators determined Thornton knew about the girl's age while he was in a relationship with her, police said.


Police began the investigation Monday.


Thornton was arrested and booked Friday  on four counts of sexual misconduct with a minor, police said. 


The Red Rock Correctional Center is a private prison under contract with the Arizona Department of Corrections.


READ MORE:


Woman found dead in alley in Scottsdale entertainment district


Guns, other weapons stolen from Phoenix police vehicles at precinct stations


Peoria police seek help identifying man who was found dead in December
