


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A hearing in U.S. District Court in Phoenix is addressing whether or not the inmate-care provider failed to care for inmates in order to avoid fines.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Arizona inmates have complained about poor health care in the prison system.
(Photo: Getty Images)

A physician who worked as a temporary contractor for the health-management company that administers to the medical needs of Arizona prisoners took the witness stand Tuesday and Wednesday in U.S. District Court in Phoenix to describe how the management company canceled and postponed crucial inmate care to avoid costs and court punishment.


Dr. Jan Watson was called as a witness in an ongoing class-action suit against the Arizona Department of Corrections after the judge in the case was enraged by reading statements she made to a KJZZ reporter last December.


The online version of the KJZZ story was republished in The Arizona Republic.


The class-action suit, Parsons vs. Ryan, was brought in 2012 by the Arizona Center for Disability Law on behalf of 13 inmates in Arizona Department of Corrections prisons, alleging that the department was providing inadequate health care.


RELATED: Judge calls for hearing after KJZZ report on Arizona prison health careJudge approves Arizona inmate health-care settlementInmates claim harassment by Corrections Department over testimony in lawsuitArizona could face fines over failures in prison health care


It settled in 2014, and then U.S. Magistrate Judge David K. Duncan stayed on to monitor compliance with the settlement. But by June 2017, Duncan was becoming increasingly upset that the DOC and Corizon Correctional Healthcare, the company to whom it subcontracts medical care, were not complying with the terms of the settlement, and his court pronouncements became ever more angry.


In October, he issued an order to show cause why the DOC should not be held in contempt of court and, by November 2017, he was threatening to fine the DOC and Corizon $1,000 for each instance of non-compliance. Attorneys for the state acknowledged that they had at least 1,000 lapses in December alone, which would amount to $1 million in fines just for that month.


At a hearing on Dec. 20, 2017, Duncan exploded after reading the article posted online by the radio station KJZZ suggesting that Corizon was tutoring medical providers on how to avoid having to report non-compliance and making “an end run around the monitoring program.”


Watson, who has practiced medicine for more than 40 years, spoke slowly and calmly Tuesday as David Fathi, an attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union, led her through a litany of cases in which her recommendations to send inmates to consultations with specialists were postponed or denied.


During her short tenure with the DOC — May to October 2017 — she worked three days a week at the Eyman Prison Complex in Florence, which is one of the state’s maximum-security prisons.


She said she saw at least 20 scheduled patients a day, not counting inmates who presented with urgent symptoms such as seizures, chest pain and sudden illness.


She noted that because Corizon’s pharmacy was in another state, it took days to fill prescriptions, and the prison would frequently run short on the antibiotics and other basic medicines it kept on hand.


RELATED:Arizona prison riot: 12 inmates, 1 guard injured at Red Rock Correction CenterArizona prison raises minimum number of free pads for incarcerated women


Early in her testimony, she read emails that had been sent to her asking her to cancel “consults” with a cardiologist and an infectious-disease specialist, because “after 30 days we get nailed with a monetary fee,” and "we get fined $1,000 a day just for that consult.”


Watson talked about a man with cerebral palsy for whom she repeatedly tried to get medical treatment, and even new crutches, to no avail. She also spoke about a man who suffered 14 seizures in one day who she could not get to a neurologist. There was also a man with HIV she could not get to see an infectious-medicine specialist.


She said she attended meetings in which prison medical staff said, “I’ll show what you need to do to beat the monitors.”


Watson said she decided to stop working at the prison after a supervisor told her that if an inmate who previously had a heart attack had recurring chest pains, she was to make him comfortable and let him die.


"I couldn't get it out of my mind," Watson said.


She sought out the KJZZ reporter, she said, to ask if he could put her in touch with the ACLU.


Daniel Struck, an attorney for the state of Arizona, then cross-examined Watson, questioning entries on her work application for Corizon and trying, unsuccessfully, to trip up her accounts of patient care.


And on Wednesday, Struck went methodically through the emails that Watson had exchanged with the KJZZ reporter Jimmy Jenkins -- Struck had subpoenaed them from Watson -- trying to get her to say that she had done so for self-aggrandizement.


"Ultimately, my goal was to change the quality of care," she responded.


Corrections Director Charles Ryan was also supposed to testify Wednesday, but other witnesses took more time than anticipated. The hearing will continue March 25-26.


Struck had filed a motion to have Duncan step down or be removed from the case, saying that Duncan's increasingly angry demeanor and statements in the courtroom “call into serious question his ability to be fair and impartial in this case.”


“Magistrate Judge Duncan’s tone and demeanor changed in 2017,” the motion stated. “His earlier frustration, and even anger, over defendants’ instance of non-compliance with certain performance measures escalated to hostility, confrontation, personal animus, and bias and prejudice, devoid of impartiality.”


The motion then went on to list examples of his emotive statements and claimed his seeking out the KJZZ article amounted to “improperly obtained out-of-court information.”


For those reasons, the state claimed, another judge should have presided over proceedings, and the case should be stayed while the court considers whether Duncan should be removed.


On Monday, Duncan fired back, denying the motion to stay, and he said the motion to disqualify would be considered after both sides file briefs. At the start of Tuesday’s hearings, he said the matter would be considered in due time.


His demeanor was calm through the entire proceeding.


READ MORE:U.S. Supreme Court ruling curbs some rights of immigrants awaiting deportationNewlywed couple in Grand Canyon helicopter crash die within days of each otherWith hundreds of child brides in Arizona, the Legislature looks at restrictions


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
