


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A doctor at Florence prison agrees to Arizona Medical Board order that includes probation for improperly prescribing testosterone and other hormones.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The Arizona Medical Board placed Dr. Stephen J. Graham on probation for three years.
(Photo: Lesley Webster/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

A Florence prison doctor who improperly prescribed testosterone and other muscle-building hormones that posed a medical risk to patients has been placed on probation by a state licensing board.


The Arizona Medical Board placed Dr. Stephen J. Graham on probation for three years and required he complete medical-education courses on ethics and record-keeping, according to the board's February order. 


It's the second time that Graham, an ophthalmologist, has been sanctioned by the medical board for his prescribing of controlled substances since 2003.


Graham, who works as a doctor at the privately operated Florence Correctional Center, told the Arizona Medical Board that he never prescribed testosterone or other hormones to prisoners. Rather, he wrote prescriptions to his friends at a fight gym that included cages and mats, he testified during an investigative hearing last November.


"They are either my coaches or training partners. It was a fight gym," said Graham, who testified that the gym has since closed and he ceased prescribing hormone therapies. 


The medical board determined that he improperly prescribed to seven men various hormones such as testosterone, a growth hormone called sermorelin, a thyroid hormone and DHEA. 


The medical board said the male patients had not been diagnosed by Graham and did not have documented low testosterone. Graham also kept sparse medical records, lacking such details as family history, outside medical records and incomplete lab results. He was missing consent forms on two of seven patients, according to medical-board staff.


During the hearing last November, board members described Graham's therapies as concerning given the type of medications and potential for harm. 


The board said possible side effects of Graham's prescribed hormone therapies included abnormal rages, arthritis, cardiac complications, hypertension, increased cancer risk and testicular atrophy.


Graham, who could not be reached by TheArizona Republic, said that his prison employer had policies that prevented the prescription of hormone therapies to inmates in most cases. He noted that the prison is regulated by three federal agencies, the U.S. Bureau of Prisons, the U.S. Marshals Service and Immigration and Customs Enforcement.


Officials with Nashville, Tennessee-based CoreCivic, which operates Florence Correctional Center, said that Graham was placed on administrative leave while the company investigated the medical board's findings. 


"It was determined that order allows him to continue with his current employer in any manner deemed appropriate and Dr. Graham is free to return to work in a direct patient care role," said Amanda Sluss Gilchrist, a CoreCivic spokeswoman. 


Graham formerly worked as a medical director for Life X MD, a hormone clinic with locations in Scottsdale; Bloomfield Hills, Michigan; and North Palm Beach, Florida


Graham told the medical board that he no longer works at Life X, and that he worked at the Florence prison and prescribed hormone treatments for his gym friends and acquaintances.


In 2003, the medical board put Graham on probation after determining he improperly prescribed drugs through an internet site, Prescribus.com. 


He would interview website patients over the phone but not physically examine the patients. He would then email a prescription to Prescribus.com, which would be sent to a pharmacy to be filled and shipped to the customer.


Graham was paid $20 to $25 for each telephone consultation, according to a medical-board document.


A Mesa pharmacy used by Prescribus.com filled more than 10,000 prescriptions based on the telephone consultations, but Graham testified that figure represented medication ordered by all Prescribus.com doctors and that he was responsible for a portion of those prescriptions. 


Based on the results of the investigation, Graham agreed in 2003 to surrender his Idaho Board of Medicine medical license and a certificate that allowed him to prescribe controlled substances in that state, records show. 


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
