


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Nevada, facing a prison-bed shortage, will send 200 violent inmates, including gang members, to a CoreCivic private prison in Eloy, Arizona.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Nevada, which is facing a shortage of prison beds, will send 200 of its most violent inmates to a CoreCivic private prison in Eloy in November 2017. Earlier this year, the Mesa City Council also voted to house its prisoners at the Eloy facility.
(Photo: Getty Images)

Nevada, facing a shortage of prison beds, will send 200 of its most violent inmates to a private correctional facility in Eloy.


The Silver State will pay $9.2 million to Nashville-based CoreCivic Inc. (formerly Corrections Corporation of America) as part of a two-year deal to house the inmates in the Saguaro Correctional Center.


That medium-security facility opened in 2007 and also houses inmates from Hawaii.


CoreCivic also incarcerates inmates for the state of Arizona, the city of Mesa, California and the federal government at prisons in Eloy, Florence and Tucson, according to its website. Arizona heavily relies on private prisons, including those of CoreCivic, to ease overcrowding.


"We are confident our state-of-the-art facility, combined with CoreCivic’s deep experience managing a wide range of inmates, will lead to a successful partnership," Jonathan Burns, a CoreCivic spokesman, said in a statement. "We appreciate Nevada's trust in CoreCivic to provide them a high quality, flexible solution to their current needs."


RELATED: Privatizing Mesa jail to cost Maricopa County nearly $6 million


Brooke Keast, a Nevada prisons spokeswoman, said her state has a shortage of beds and does not have any private prisons within Nevada that it could use. She said the transfer of prisoners will begin in November.


"We don't have a lot of options with private prisons here," she said.


Nevada Department of Corrections Director James Dzurenda told The Las Vegas Review-Journal that his agency would send “the most destructive and the most dangerous” inmates to Arizona.


Keast said Nevada would send inmates who "pose issues for us here," including those in strategic threat groups — meaning gang members.


She said the transfer of inmates would open roughly 370 beds in Nevada's own prison system. Many cells in Nevada prisons now are being used only by a single violent offender who must be isolated. With the departure of those inmates, the cells can be shared between two less-violent inmates, she said.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE: 


Critics speak out against Mesa private jail plan


My Turn: Why private prisons make sense for Arizona


Diaz: Mesa's jail deal makes us all losers
