
    
        
            By Plain Dealer staff

CLEVELAND, Ohio - Youngstown businessman Amer Othman Adi was deported to  Jordan by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in a late Monday night flight.

Adi, owner of the Downtown Circle Covenience Store and Deli, has been in the U.S. for 39 years and has been accused by immigration officials of using a previous 1980 marriage to an American woman as a ruse to get a green card to stay in this country.

He subsequently remarried and he and his wife of 30 years, Fidaa Musleh, have four children.

An ICE spokesperson recently said that several courts have previously held that Adi does not have a legal basis to remain in the U.S.

Adi's attorney, David Leopold, said he spoke with his client this morning, and reported that he is doing fine. Adi has reunited with his mother there, Leopold said.

But he noted, "It's a sad day, because rather than use resources to go after 'bad hombres' (a term used by President Donald Trump), the Trump administration is focusing on families, business people like Amer Adi, students, moms and dads."

Adi was arrested by ICE officials when he reported for a meeting with them on January 16.

He had been told late last year that he would be deported, and was ready to leave January 7 when ICE granted a temporary stay. Adi's sister-in-law, Sheila Musleh,  said she planned to take over and manage the businesses.

After his arrest, Adi went on a hunger strike and was transferred to the Northeast Ohio Correctional Center in Youngstown.

His bid for a stay of removal was denied by ICE on January 25.

Adi has been supported by Congressman Tim Ryan who had introduced a "private bill" asking for a six-month stay of deportation so the case could be re-examined. The bill had been approved by the House Judiciary Committee.

Ryan issued a statement today, saying, "It is a sad day for Amer, his family and our entire community.  In a highly irregular rebuke of Congressional authority by ICE, Amer Othman was ripped from his four daughters, his wife, and the country that he has called home for over thirty years.

"Amer was a pillar of the community and brought commerce to a downtown that craved investment," Ryan continued. "He hired members of our community. He paid taxes. He did everything right. There are violent criminals walking the streets, yet our government wasted our precious resources incarcerating him.

"I hope President Trump comes to realize that when his words become public policy in places like Youngstown, families like Amer's are ripped apart," he added. "I am deeply saddened and extremely disappointed with this outcome."

A rally regarding the case, "Stop Deporting Democracy," is being held at 5:30 p.m. today on Market Square, at the corner of West 25th Street and Lorain Avenue, in Cleveland.

Fidaa Musleh and daughter Linda Adi are among several people scheduled to speak.

Leopold said options for Adi's return are still open.

"We will find a way to bring him back. Legally, they can deport him, they can banish him, but they can't take his American spirit," Leopold said.

"It's just sad that we are living under the tyranny of a repressive immigration crackdown which has nothing to do with border security, nothing to do with illegal immigration, nothing to do with community safety."


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        