Advertisement

Supported by

By J. David Goodman

Amid a Democratic electoral wave that swept through New York and beyond on Tuesday, one incumbent Democrat in a restive corner of residential Queens found herself cast ashore.


Elizabeth S. Crowley, a two-term City Council member who descends from a powerful Queens political family, remains locked in the city’s only contest that is still too close to call. The race, which may not be decided until next week at the earliest, was an outlier for both its uncertainty and the raw emotions that it brought to the fore.


Several dynamics propelled Ms. Crowley’s Republican opponent, Robert F. Holden, a longstanding civic association leader and city college professor, to the verge of an upset victory: anger over the city housing homeless in neighborhood hotels; fear that the eventual closing of Rikers Island would mean a local jail; and a virulent dislike of Mayor Bill de Blasio.


To complicate matters, Mr. Holden is actually a registered Democrat.


As of Thursday, with unofficial results still showing Mr. Holden up by 133 votes out of more than 20,000 cast, neither side had declared victory. Hundreds of absentee and paper ballots could swing the vote and could not be counted until next week.

“The more paper ballots are out there, the more optimistic I am,” Ms. Crowley said in a telephone interview on Thursday.


Mr. Holden, 66, a lifelong Democrat who said he had long ago voted for George McGovern and more recently for Bernie Sanders, first challenged Ms. Crowley in the Democratic primary in September.


It was the first political race for Mr. Holden, a centrist, even conservative politician of an older Democratic sort. He channeled anger at Mr. de Blasio that was present in many neighborhoods, especially among white residents in less dense areas of the city, and seized upon local discontent over homeless policy that helped lead to the ouster of a long-serving state assemblywoman, Margaret Markey, in a Democratic primary in 2016.


“He’s very unpopular; I didn’t have to do a poll to find out,” Mr. Holden said of the mayor. “I’m conservative on some issues, progressive on others,” he said, adding that his resistance to housing homeless in local hotels and a new shelter that the city “tried to shove down our throats” animated his desire to get into the race.


Mr. de Blasio, when asked of Mr. Holden during a postelection news conference on Wednesday, said he did not “understand Democrats who run as Republicans.”

“If you can run as a Republican in Donald Trump’s America, you just bought the whole label,” the mayor said. “I don’t know the guy, I’ll try and work with him, but he just signed up for something very troubling in my book.”


Told of Mr. de Blasio’s comments, Mr. Holden said, “I’ve spoken to him many times and yet he wants to label me a Trump supporter.” Mr. Holden, the head of the Juniper Park Civic Association and community board member, said the two had spoken when Mr. de Blasio was public advocate.

“He labels you,” he said. “I go for the best candidate. Nobody can tell you that Hillary Clinton was a better candidate than Bernie Sanders.”


Council District 30 borders Brooklyn to the south and includes the neighborhoods of Maspeth, Glendale, Middle Village, Ridgewood, Woodside and Woodhaven — mostly middle class enclaves of single family homes and small apartment buildings that are more white and conservative than surrounding areas.


Ms. Crowley broke what had been a long Republican hold when she first won her Council seat in 2008. She kept it in 2013. On the Council, she has been active on criminal justice reform, particularly on Rikers Island, and supportive of the idea of closing the facility — a stance that caused her problems in the campaign.


“I think it was the scare tactics in the end,” she said. “That I want to put a jail in the community, and that I didn’t fight de Blasio hard enough with the homeless shelter. Or that I wasn’t independent, which is completely untrue.”

Ms. Crowley benefited from party support during her race: Her cousin, Representative Joseph Crowley, is the powerful Democratic leader in Queens; her parents both served in the City Council. If she were to lose, it would be the second time that the vaunted Queens machine — seen as influential in the looming fight over who will become City Council speaker — failed to defend an incumbent in the area.


“I really believe Liz did everything she could possibly do to win this race but the headwinds that she was flying against were too strong,” said Councilman Rory Lancman, a fellow Queens Democrat whose own staff helped on Ms. Crowley’s campaign.


Ms. Crowley outpolled the mayor in the district on Election Day by more than 15 percent, according to her campaign.


After Mr. Holden lost the primary, county Republican leaders decided to offer him their vacant line. He already had a spot on the lines for the Reform and Conservative Parties, an indication that his views were not shared by most Democratic candidates in the city.


“He has a very moderate to conservative view of things,” said Joann Ariola, the new head of the Queens County Republican Party. “Bob Holden has a long history with the Republican Party in supporting Republican candidates,” she added. “He saw how the district was turning to the negative.”


Eric Ulrich, a Republican councilman in Queens who prevailed in his election Tuesday despite facing a Democratic challenger backed by Ms. Crowley, said Mr. Holden’s strength could have easily been foreseen, and he did not have kind words for the incumbent.


“She will not be missed by many people on the City Council,” Mr. Ulrich said. “She was not a force to be reckoned with. I think she was very ineffective. She rubbed people the wrong way.”


When told of Mr. Ulrich’s comments, Ms. Crowley said, “It’s unfortunate that Eric thinks that way. I had a ton of support from my colleagues who are still holding out hope that we’re going to pull this off.”










Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS