Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Bob Fredericks


		
		
		
		
	


									January 9, 2018 | 12:08pm
											| Updated January 9, 2018 | 3:30pm
												

Sheriff Joe Arpaio, the polarizing immigration hardliner who was pardoned by President Trump over the summer, plans to run as a Republican for the Arizona Senate seat held by the retiring Jeff Flake.

“I am running for the US Senate from the Great State of Arizona, for one unwavering reason: to support the agenda and policies of President Donald Trump in his mission to Make America Great Again,” Arpaio tweeted Tuesday morning.

A defiant Arpaio, 85, faced jail time for ignoring federal court orders in a case that involved his department’s use of racial profiling to crack down on illegal immigrants.

But the president, who had frequently hailed the sheriff on the campaign trail, came to his rescue, clearing the way for him to re-enter politics.

The former Maricopa County sheriff will likely face off in a GOP primary against Kelli Ward and Rep. Martha McSally, who was expected to announce her candidacy soon and is viewed as the Republicans’ strongest candidate, the Washington Examiner reported.

“I have a lot to offer. I’m a big supporter of President Trump,” Arpaio told the conservative paper.

“I’m going to have to work hard; you don’t take anything for granted. But I would not be doing this if I thought that I could not win. I’m not here to get my name in the paper, I get that every day, anyway.”

Flake, like fellow Arizona Republican Sen. John McCain, has feuded with the president, who dubbed him Jeff “Flakey” after one dust-up.

Trump would likely back Arpaio, which could give him a big financial boost and attract voters fed up with illegal immigration, even though it has waned significantly since the president took office.

Trump won Arizona in 2016 by about 4 percentage points.

Hillary Clinton was surging in the Grand Canyon State until ex-FBI chief James Comey disclosed that the feds were taking another look at her use of a private email server after her emails were found on a laptop shared by aide Huma Abedin and her husband, convicted perv Anthony Weiner.


			Read Next
		


			
				Starbucks store forced to close after fake news post spurs...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Starbucks store forced to close after fake news post spurs...			
		

Share Selection

131,249

63,137

56,447

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters