Staten Island: To Voicer Beverly Cooke, who says that "around 50% of the people in the United States voted for Donald Trump." So let's set the record straight: More Americans voted for Hillary Clinton than any other losing presidential candidate in U.S. history. She outpaced Trump by almost 2.9 million votes, with 65,844,954 (48.2%) to his 62,979,879 (46.1%). Yes, he won the Electoral College and became President. I get it. That said, Trump can't put to rest losing the popular vote to her and created by executive order a voter fraud commission to find those 2.9 million votes he claims by illegal immigrants. While we are on percentages, President Trump, who once said the Dreamers "have to go" and recognizing that his approval rating is in the 30s and polls in favor of keeping the Dreamers here are around 59%, it appears he may have caved to the Democrats' demands. Folks, it's all about him. And "Who will pay for that wall?" said Trump. "Mexico!" shout his supporters. Just saying. Michele Corelli

Wyckoff, N.J.: Voicer Beverly Cooke would be better served brushing up on her math than writing factually false letters to the editor. She wrote "Around 50% of the people in the United States voted for Trump." Let's get past that not all "people in the United States" are eligible to vote and assume she meant "registered voters." According to the U.S. Election project, 231 million individuals were eligible to vote in the 2016 election. The final election results show that Trump got just under 63 million votes. In other words, he got 27% of eligible voters, not 50%. Marc Schaeffer

Bronx: I'm rather surprised Hillary Clinton didn't become President, after viewing all the idiots lining up to buy her book. Mentally, she is clearly unstable to justify this book. Has she been cognitive enough to realize she didn't win? Do we really need a book to explain it to us? She is an embarrassment, narcissistic, incompetent person, who, thank God, the majority of the American people saw four more years of Obama in her and elected President Trump. Linda Ranallo

Manhattan: I kind of smile when I read that Hillary Clinton now favors repealing the Electoral College. Is it like people who get hurt by a thing then turning against it and favoring gun control or pollution control or health care or urban planning etc.? So now that she lost, she favors a getting rid of the longstanding system that did her in. Bravo, Hillary, there goes your leadership. Suzy Sandor

Manhattan: On Nov. 8, 2016, Hillary Clinton got nearly 3 million more votes than Donald Trump. Contrary to the Trump mantra, "the American people" chose Clinton, not him. So why all this clamor that in spite of the Electoral College, James Comey, the Russians, Anthony Weiner, and the wild and woolly media campaigns, she should take sole blame for "losing" the election? She's stated several faults of her own, and has taken reasonable responsibility (which is more than Trump ever will, for anything). But for most of us, the real losers in November were the American people. Carol Robinson

Manhattan: So Anthony Weiner's lawyers are asking for probation after Weiner had agreed to a plea deal of between 21 to 27 months. They actually wrote to the judge that he is no predator. Well, that is exactly what he is. He has repeatedly preyed on women and his most recent victim was 15 years old. I understand that the judge has final say on what Weiner's sentence will actually be, but will someone explain to me how Weiner can sign an agreement agreeing with the prosecutors' request of between 21 to 27 months in jail and then turn around and ask for probation. Sam Soffer

Brooklyn: I believe everyone has a right to say whatever they want, even if it's offensive. Although ESPN anchor Jemele Hill should stick to sports, not politics, she does have a right to say what she wants and then it's up to ESPN to act. Getting offended at every word we don't like has to end. The Constitution does not protect your being offended, but it does protect you to say what you want. Our rights are being eroded and once they start with laws to prevent free speech we are done as a country. Mike Viehl

Vallejo, Calif.: I rarely feel moved to write an organization about political positions that they hold for their company, but I am outraged at the actions taken because of Jemele Hill's tweet about Trump from her personal account. What she said is true and holds true for millions of African Americans. The fact that he can be upset about what she says and can advocate for her termination is the equivalent of living in a slave state. Come on ESPN, I thought you were more progressive and tuned into the hundreds of people of color that you employ and the thousands of athletes that you highlight daily. Ask them how they feel about the bigot in chief. Gwen Jackson

New Orleans: So now Trump is going about after ESPN and wants an apology. I hope that they don't fire Jemele Hill. Donald J. Trump is the worst at insulting and demeaning people and has no right to expect better from anyone else — he is training our children to be disrespectful and rude. It is outrageous that he spends his time on this with the hurricanes and North Korea. Miriam Bernstein

Brooklyn: After receiving a shady flyer from the Kings County Democratic County Committee before the primary elections claiming four different judicial candidates did not take part in a mysterious "screening process," I became concerned about how judges are elected. The KCDCC seems rather nefarious and is certainly not transparent. I feel the Brooklyn Democratic Party machine is ripe for some serious investigative journalism and I heartily invite the Daily News to open up this can of worms. Tricia Bastian

Brigantine, N.J.: What happened to Melania Trump's election promise project to combat cyberbullying? Let's see: Her husband is a notorious cyber bully and he is vindictive. She drops the project for fear he would send her and her parents back to Slovenia. All she does is appear at lunches, dinners, parties, and photo ops dressed in outrageously priced designer outfits and not made in the USA. It appears Trump's "buy American" does not apply to his family. Also who actually writes the tweets she supposedly sends? Irene Webb

Brooklyn: Why doesn't the MTA assign the two center doors on the subway car as "exit only" and the two outer doors as "entrance only?" This can be done by marking the doors/floors inside the car and on the platform and it will eliminate all the pushing and shoving of people getting on and off the subway and blocking doors etc. Ali Riojas

Somerdale, N.J.: Christopher Columbus certainly deserves statues and other memorials in his honor, just not for discovering America. He sailed west on four voyages and completely missed the entire continents of North and South America each time (they are connected by the way). All he discovered was lots of ocean and some islands. However, his vision, his daring and tenacity merit recognition. Actually, it is what he didn't do that was his greatest achievement. He did not sail off of the edge of the Earth. Because of that, many others would follow and create our modern world, imperfect as it may be. Bob Porch

Bronx: Statues are erected in parks and other public places to honor those who did great things, it does not mean they were perfect or saints. Statues set up in churches are for people who led saintly perfected lives and are called saints. Kevin Harrington

Houston: I absolutely enjoyed reading your Sept. 13 review "Depeche Mode gets 'spiritual' at Madison Square Garden." It made me feel like I was there enjoying every song and every twirl Dave Gahan gave. My first DM concert was in 1988, the Music for the Masses Tour. I've been to all of their concerts since then, but this one will be especially welcoming. I live in Houston and I can't tell you how refreshing it will be to take a break from what our city has been through. Thank you for giving us a glimpse of what to look forward to. Leticia Martinez