Brookfield, Conn.: I disagree with the Daily News' position that to parole Judith Clark would have been giving her some kind of "special leniency" ("Why she stays locked up," editorial, Oct. 28).

To me serving 36 years is not equivalent to a "get-out-of-jail card," especially since, as you pointed out "she credibly demonstrates repentance."

I am a former resident of Rockland County and understand the impact Clark's crime has had on the victims, their families and the county's residents, but I also believe in redemption. I applaud the courage shown by Gov. Cuomo in acknowledging Clark's rehabilitation and granting her the possibility of reentering society, and I hope that in 2019 the Parole Board can show the same courage. Concetta Grazia

Astoria: Society does not need to worry about Judith Clark being released. Please do not allow the "officials" to speak for the entire population; I encourage you to listen to the voices of individuals who've had the pleasure of crossing paths with Judy along their own journeys.

Lastly, how did the word "leniency" appear when referencing a woman to be released on parole, one who has already done 36 years? I believe there must have been a typo. Stephanie Reis

Chappaqua, N.Y.: I am writing to state my disagreement with your position expressed in the Oct. 28 editorial "Why she stays locked up." I do not agree that granting parole to Judith Clark, a reformed and remorseful woman who has done 36 years for her crime, would have been a depreciation of the seriousness of her crime. Thirty-six years behind bars is very serious time. Additionally, your sentiment that granting parole for Clark would have required "leniency" by the Parole Board does in my opinion require cruelty be part of the conversation. Karen Graff

Dumont, N.J.: I read clueless liberal Voicer Charles Morgan's awful letter. Mr. Morgan, you have never met me, have never spoken to me, know absolutely nothing about me, and yet you seem to know me well enough to label me a torch-burning racist. Please allow me to humiliate you by responding. In my letter, I referred to that left-wing political hack Frederica Wilson as "Huggy Bear." I stand by that reference, and it has absolutely nothing to do with her race. I called Ms. Wilson Huggy Bear because anyone with two eyes and a brain can see that Wilson likes to dress like a pimp, with her flamboyant hats and floral outfits. Not a black pimp, not a white pimp. Just a pimp. There is nothing racial about that reference. It is you, Mr. Morgan, who threw race into that argument. It is you, the typical liberal, who has to inject color and race into every argument. The race card is on page one, paragraph one of the Democratic Party handbook. It is you, therefore, who is the true bigot, not me. So, Mr. Morgan, I stand by everything I said, and none of it has anything to do with race. I will surround myself with the Gen. John Kellys of the world, and you can surround yourself with the hacks like Wilson, and then let's see who is right more often than not and who speaks the truth. Shame on you, Mr. Morgan. I pity you. John Scott

Manhattan: Your "A vast Jewish conspiracy" editorial (Oct. 26) reads: "Foes of a Brooklyn housing project are trying to sink it by spinning a conspiracy theory so far-fetched and held together so tenuously by the fact that key players happen to be Jewish, it can only be called anti-Semitic." What is surprising about it? For centuries Jews have been accused in continent after continent, or in more than one at the same time, wherever, whenever, of fomenting God knows what devilish mind-boggling plots. The U.S. is no exception, though now there seems to be many more cases of anti-Semitism here and in Europe. The presidency changed from Obama to Trump, whose son-in-law is Jewish, but who also counts among his adherents many white supremacists whose hatred includes hatred for Jews — and Trump is not keen to disappoint his adherents. Therefore, anti-Semites in our country do not shy away from acting out their hatred for Jews, knowing that they have not much to fear from this President. Cecile Low

Tulsa, Okla.: Kevin Spacey is not gay; he is a pedophile ("Kevin Spacey comes out as gay after Anthony Rapp allegations," Oct. 30). As Wanda Sykes put it, he does not get to hide under the rainbow. So report him for who and what he is. This gay man is appalled by this pedophile behavior and remembers all Spacey's denials for the last 20 years that he was not gay. Well, he is not; he is a pedophile! Chris McCutchen

Bronx: Why penalize taxi drivers who want to work in the present-day sweatshop that driving a cab has become ("10 hacks fail 'test' of time," Oct. 28)? The Taxi and Limousine Commmiss should've discouraged them from taking the test. That taxi exam is a joke and so are the so-called taxi schools which just want to make money off the prospective drivers. The yearly drug test is another farce that drivers have to go through and foot the bill for. I wonder to what taxi school did the black-car driver go that asked me how to get to Long Island City from 50th St. and Eighth Ave. Surely, he did not get his money's worth from whichever school he attended. Virgilio Carballo

Seaford, L.I.: With Election Day fast approaching, Americans are once again put in charge. It's our golden opportunity to begin to rid ourselves of all remaining vestiges of "good ol' boy" New York politics. Our political parties have, for too long, become expressions of a mob mentality governed by money, power and greed. We look for wisdom, confidence, compassion and intriguing new ideas from our leaders, but often must settle for ignorance, nastiness, dishonesty and a black hole of fresh thought. Our nation is populated with millions upon millions of young, well-educated, potential voters. If they care for their futures and those of their families and neighborhoods, they need not blindly follow their parents' unquestioning zeal to keep the status quo. Question authority, educate your mind, vote. It's your right and your best hope. Bob Bascelli

Sebastian, Fla.: Multiple women accuse Bill Cosby of rape and sexual harassment — must be true.Multiple women accuse Roger Ailes of sexual harassment — must be true. Multiple women accuse Bill O'Reilly of sexual harassment — must be true. Multiple women accuse Harvey Weinstein of rape and sexual harassment — must be true. Trump parades multiple women accusing Bill Clinton of sexual harassment — must be true.Multiple women accuse Trump, who bragged on tape about it, of sexual harassment — not true. Fake news! Yeah, right. Harold Lichtman

Brooklyn: I can't stand the MTA these days! Almost every single day there is a delay with the trains. I never know when the train or bus is coming because it's not consistent. Also, in the morning, there's a significant difference in how many trains go northbound in comparison to the amount of trains going southbound. There's always a Manhattan-bound train passing every few minutes, while I have to wait for the southbound train, which comes every 20 minutes. Most days, when I get to the train station, my platform is completely full, while the other platform has a maximum of nine people. Now, when I go to the train station, I expect to be disappointed, and I'm almost always right. Fatima Almiron

Manhattan: Please understand that this letter is coming from someone who was a professional nanny in New York City for many years, and every time I see this I get very upset and worry about the child. I see many parents putting small children in their shopping carts when they are empty. The huge problem with that is too many of the sidewalks in our city are filled with holes, and if you hit one just right, the cart will lurch forward and fold up on the child, causing the child a lot of pain. Those shopping carts were not made to transport children, especially toddlers. I passed three people in one day doing this. I sometimes stop them and explain this, because I don't want to see a child get hurt from this action. I am begging parents, please stop putting your children in your shopping carts. It is not safe! Barbara Zimet