Just three hours after the New Yorker unmasked Attorney General Eric Schneiderman as a violent sociopath, the state's top law enforcement official resigned. Schneiderman's public persona as a strong advocate for women betrayed his personal tendency to strangle, degrade and belittle them, leaving many readers breathless. Not so the fusillade of men who rushed to burnish their bonafides with female voters by battling over who cares about them more.

Gov. Cuomo leaped first out of the gate, calling for the next attorney general to be a woman, and naming Nassau County District Attorney Madeleine Singas as a special prosecutor to investigate Schneiderman. The Manhattan DA, Cy Vance, immediately objected, grasping at a chance to rehabilitate his tattered reputation with women.

But since the attorney general's office is already investigating Vance for failing to pursue charges against Harvey Weinstein, any involvement would be a "blatant conflict of interest," as the governor's counsel correctly pointed out.

Of course, in January, the governor himself initially declined to return $111,400 in campaign contributions from Weinstein. But three months later he made up for lost political capital by directing the investigation into Vance, coincidentally on the same day that Cynthia Nixon announced her campaign for governor.

Still with me?

That didn't quite solve Cuomo's woman problem though. Nixon quickly joined the chorus of angry Democrats in chastising the governor for excluding Senator Andrea Stewart Cousins — the only black woman in state legislative leadership — from negotiating a new government sexual harassment policy.

Instead, four men brokered the backroom deal, including Sen. Jeff Klein. Klein is currently under investigation by the Joint Commission on Public Ethics for forcibly kissing a staffer. That staffer, Erica Vladimer, together with six other women who've reported sexual harassment in the Legislature, released a warning at the time: "lawmakers should not rush through bills as part of the budget supposedly in the name of standing up for survivors — that's not progress, it's a pat on the back."

Their repeated requests for a public hearing fell on deaf ears.

Yet, Cuomo never fails to prematurely congratulate himself for the "most sweeping policy" in the nation, as he did last week at a press conference with DAs Singas and Vance.

Cuomo had said earlier that Schneiderman's victims "should have their day in court," but ignored a question from Politico's Laura Nahmias about whether anyone had actually spoken to the women about what they want.

Instead he took the first question from RNN's Dominic Carter, who once served jail time for punching and kicking his wife. The whole charade devolved into farce, with the only woman on the dais forced to nurse her fellow DA's wounded pride by praising him as a "giant in law enforcement."

And lest we forgot, in 2011 Cuomo — who has now reinvented himself as a hero of women — named Sam Hoyt as a senior economic development aide, despite the fact in 2008 Hoyt, then a state legislator, abused his power by having an extramarital affair with a 19-year-old intern. Once in his new job, another woman accused Hoyt of sexual harassment. Surprise, surprise.

The #metoo movement has finally centered women's voices, but how can men possibly hear what they're trying to say when they're too busy shouting over each other? Instead of listening to them, men across political parties seem more interested in using women to further their own self-serving agendas.

Enter Pete Gleason, a Manhattan lawyer who injected himself into the mix Friday by claiming that in 2013 he advised two women not to report their abuse at the hands of Schneiderman. Rather than referring them to a qualified counselor, or even another lawyer who might actually have their interests in mind, Gleason thought it best to call a retired reporter who used to work at the New York Post.

The reporter then passed along the information to none other than Michael Cohen, the future President's personal lawyer. Cohen presumably shared the information with his client, Donald Trump, who was at the time, wait for it . . . under investigation by Schneiderman.

Gleason claims he went to all this trouble for the sake of the women whom he did not consult before weaponizing their pain.

With a record number of women currently running for office across the country — an obvious backlash to the 2016 thrashing of Hillary Clinton at the hands of a man accused by nearly two dozen women of sexual misconduct — it's currently in vogue to stand up for women. But too many men are just virtue signaling to women without examining their own behavior, or the institutions and agencies they command.

They need to first do the work, humbly and quietly. Then talk to us about claiming credit.

Grenell is a Democratic political consultant.