
    
        
            By Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

Multnomah County needs to increase jail staffing and workplace diversity, curtail its reliance on deputy overtime and stop reducing the number of inmate beds, according to the annual citizens review of the county's correctional facilities.

A grand jury report released Wednesday also noted the inmate population at the county's two main adult jails is disproportionately black, and cited the need for additional services for newly released prisoners as well as alternatives to incarceration for those with mental illness involved in low-level crimes. 

The annual review of the corrections system is required for all Oregon counties. The Multnomah County report was compiled after a seven-member panel inspected the county's downtown Portland Detention Center, Inverness Jail, Donald E. Long Juvenile Detention Center and Columbia River Correctional Institution for several weeks beginning in September. 

Multnomah County Sheriff Mike Reese plans to respond to the report on Thursday, said Lt. Marc Shrake, a sheriff's office spokesman. He said Reese and other sheriff's office officials were still reviewing the grand jury report on Wednesday.  

Among the report findings, the grand jury deemed the number of deputies on staff as "insufficient," and said work shifts at the detention center are often understaffed due to shortages. As a result, the report said, inmates aren't getting adequate recreation time or proper supervision, which could put them and employees at risk. 

Detention center inmates are supposed to be let out of their cells for recreation from two to six hours a day, but "these goals are rarely met," the report said. At the Inverness Jail, inmates in dorms have access to an outdoor area nearby. 

Court proceedings are often delayed because there aren't enough deputies to transport inmates to the courthouse, according to the report.

The county has 16 openings for jail deputies, one slot for a jail sergeant and is bracing for more vacancies in 2018 due to retirements. The grand jury found it takes about two years to hire and train a new deputy and that the sheriff's office is having trouble finding qualified applicants.

The last study to try to quantify adequate jail staffing was in 2006, the report said. It determined that 440 deputies were needed. There were 451 corrections officers as of late 2017, the report said.

The grand jury found the amount of overtime jail deputies work to be concerning and post-traumatic stress disorder to be common among them. The report cited instances in which deputies worked two consecutive 16-hour shifts, and followed by an eight-hour shift. Deputies may also exchange shifts with each other, which in some cases allows for a shorter work week and consecutive days off.

Training hours increased in 2017, with each deputy receiving close to 40 hours of instruction, the report said. All four correctional facilities are in compliance with the Prison Rape Elimination Act, which is a federal law designed to prevent the sexual abuse of inmates in jails and prisons.

Among the report recommendations for the county to address staffing concerns is drafting a new study to determine the amount of deputies and other staffers needed to effectively run the correctional facilities. The report also recommends the county recruit more women and people of color as deputies, promote more women and minorities to supervisory and executive positions, and participate in community events that support diversity.  

Inmates receive a full medical evaluation within two weeks of being booked, but not all of them stay long enough to go through all the tests, which includes HIV, Hepatitis C and venereal disease, the report said. 

The county corrections health department estimates that nearly 40 percent of the jail population has a diagnosed mental illness, but some at the jail believe the number of inmates with mental issues could be as high as 80 percent, the report said. The grand jury found 3 percent of released inmates pick up free 30-day prescriptions provided by the county health department pharmacy about a half-mile from the county detention center in downtown Portland.

The report also points to a shortage of services for released inmates that address addiction, homelessness, mental health and other needs as well as a lack of aid specifically geared for women.

According to the report, about eight inmates are placed on suicide watch a day compared to one or two a week in 2012. Though Multnomah County's black population hovers near 6 percent, the grand jury noted that the inmate population was substantially higher: about 25 percent at the detention center and nearly 27 percent at the Inverness Jail as of October. 

At the Donald E. Long Juvenile Detention Center, the youth population in September was 43 percent black, 30 percent white and 17 percent Hispanic, the report said. Youth with mental health issues also are disproportionally jailed at the juvenile detention center, according to the report.

Use of force on youth at the juvenile detention center has decreased due to an increased emphasis on de-escalation, the report said, and the amount of time youth are spending in their cells has been cut in half over the last three years.

Among the recommendations for the juvenile detention center is for the county to continue to work with other agencies to help lessen the number of youth coming into contact with law enforcement.

Read the full report 

-- Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com503-221-8343; @EvertonBailey


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        