
    
        
            By Eder Campuzano

ecampuzano@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

A Southern Oregon county has terminated its agreement to hold detainees for the Immigration and Customs Enforcement division of the Department of Homeland Security.

The Josephine County Sheriff's Office announced Wednesday that it would no longer set aside jail beds for those arrested by federal immigration authorities. The move comes days after the Springfield City Council voted to end a similar agreement.

The Josephine County Jail typically held between two and five ICE arrestees as they were transferred to other facilities. In a release, Sheriff Dave Daniel said the decision "had nothing to do with any sanctuary issue or designation provided by state law."



Instead, Daniel said, lawsuits against Columbia, Clackamas and Wasco counties over ICE detentions spurred the sheriff's office to reconsider the deal.

The Josephine County Sheriff's Office received $45,000 in federal dollars last year to detain those inmates, Daniels said. Clackamas County settled its case for $30,000 in 2015.

Josephine County law enforcement has made headlines since 2012 when voters struck down a public safety levy meant to fund county-wide law enforcement. The result was a spike in property crime with little recourse for residents outside the county seat of Grants Pass, where city taxes fully fund the municipal police force.

Several attempts at county law enforcement funding failed at the ballot in the years that followed. The proposed levies were meant to replace the cash from federal timber receipts that had long been drying out.

Voters approved a measure to partially restore funding to the sheriff's office and juvenile detention center in 2017. In ending his department's agreement with ICE, Daniel said the county had to consider "risk versus reward."

"The decision to terminate the ICE contract was not for political reasons, it was a business decision to reduce liability, increase operations and to better serve Josephine County citizens," he wrote.

Follow @edercampuzano

// 


--Eder Campuzano | 503.221.4344ecampuzano@oregonian.com


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        