Gallery: Wapato jail


    
        
            By Guest Columnist

BY MICKEY OAKLEY

The Oregonian's front-page article on Nov. 11, "Wapato Jail sold to firm for $10.8M," is nothing short of fiducial irresponsibility. If I gave my financial investor money and they made a decision to sell my investment for a loss of about 80 percent, it would be nothing short of criminal. It would be a dereliction of duty for which I would fire them on the spot and insist they be investigated and prosecuted if warranted.

I am opposed to this sale for several reasons, not the least of which is the squandering of a viable solution to the problem of homelessness. I also find it interesting that in the same paper in which this article appeared, just a mere three pages in, was another titled, "City looking for spare rooms." Apparently, due to the lack of affordable housing and an increase in homeless families, the city is reaching out to landlords, property managers and others to find 40 affordable units to house those people.

I agree - as do others I've spoken to -- with the lone "no" vote of Multnomah County Commissioner Loretta Smith on the sale. Her idea to transform the jail into a homeless shelter fits both a need and the will of many of your voters. With some creative thinking and willingness on the part of all agencies involved, this could work and be the solution to a problem that will only get bigger as Portland becomes a less affordable place to live.  

Imagine, if you will, a place where those who have been pushed out of housing due to high rents or the inability to find living wage jobs, could have a roof over their heads, access to social services, mental health services and public transportation all in close proximity to each other. Think of the original Columbia Villa, done better than even the revamped Columbia Villa, with 21st century know-how and resources. Would services have to be relocated? Yes. Would the locations they now occupy then be available for redevelopment? Sure. Would the trade-off benefit more than just the current buyer of the jail? That is highly likely.

The Multnomah County Commission seems to be only able to come up with short-term solutions to long-term issues. Come down out of your ivory tower and listen to the common folk. We have ideas, we have initiative and we have common sense. Let us help you all shine in the positions you hold.

I understand that the vote has already been taken, but I have to ask why, after all this time, did you decide to 'fire sale' the Wapato Jail now? Please rethink this decision, if at all possible. You can do better. You should do better.

The voters put you in office and gave you their trust to make the best decisions regarding their well-being and that of our city, as well. We expect you to spend our hard-earned tax dollars wisely, efficiently, effectively and to always do what is in the best interest of those you serve. All of them, even the homeless ones.

Mickey Oakley lives in Southeast Portland.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        