
    
        
            By Anna Marum


                     The Oregonian/OregonLive
                    

A Utah man was in jail Thursday after police say he evaded authorities for an hour in a high-speed chase that spanned two counties.

Police arrested Rudy Foki Paea Fifita, 30, of West Jordan, Utah, on two counts of attempting to elude police, four counts of reckless endangerment, as well as reckless driving.

At about 3:20 p.m. Thursday, an Oregon State Police trooper in a marked police car tried to pull over a Dodge pickup for speeding. The driver, later identified as Fifita, was headed westbound on I-84, near the Columbia Gorge town of Rufus, and did not stop, police said.

Instead, Fifita cut across the grassy median, pulled a U-turn and headed eastbound on I-84. At that point, the trooper stopped following him.

About 10 minutes later, a Sherman County deputy saw the truck speeding several miles south, and attempted to pull over Fifita near the town of Moro. He once more refused to stop, police said, so the deputy stopped chasing him.

A short time later, an Oregon state trooper saw the Dodge headed south, out of Sherman County and into Wasco County. Wasco County deputies, along with state troopers, tried to stop Fifita by putting down spike strips at two separate locations, but Fifita swerved around them.

The suspect was later seen driving through the town of Tygh Valley "at unsafe speeds," police said. Out of concern for the public's safety, all police agencies halted their efforts to stop him.

Around 4:25 p.m., a Wasco County deputy found Fifita in the Dodge at a home just off US 197 about 4 miles south of Tygh Valley.

As he tried to get back on the highway, police said, the deputy fired several rounds at the truck. Fifita then came to a stop and police arrested him without further incident.

In addition to Fifita, two others were also in the car: Tiffany Joan Roubmai, 23, of Haiku, Hawaii, and their one-year-old son. No one was injured, police said.

It is unclear why the deputy fired his weapon, or exactly where he was aiming.

Lt. Cari Boyd, a spokeswoman for Oregon State Police, said she was unable to provide any more information about the shooting because the investigation is still open.

Fifita was lodged at the Northern Oregon Regional Correctional Facility in The Dalles.

-- Anna Marum


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        