
    
        
            By Jim Ryan

jryan@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

A Clark County man arrested on suspicion of sexual assault earlier this week is now accused of first-degree kidnapping, records show.               

Douglas L. Braaten, 61, is suspected of offering a ride to a woman in Portland, taking her to the Columbia River Gorge and sexually assaulting her, court records show. He's also accused of first-degree unlawful sexual penetration and first-degree sex abuse.

The Multnomah County Sheriff's Office said Wednesday that Braaten, a La Center resident, was accused of prostitution and unlawful sexual penetration.

Court records show that prosecutors didn't file prostitution charges in the case. A sheriff's office spokesman declined to comment on the agency's investigation until it's complete.

The woman was eating at a Portland 7-Eleven on Tuesday night when Braaten honked at her and offered her a ride, according to a probable cause affidavit filed Wednesday in Multnomah County Circuit Court. She initially declined but eventually accepted, the court document says, and she asked him to drop her off somewhere in Portland.

He passed the place she wanted to be dropped off, looped around and passed it a second time, the affidavit says. He started heading east on Interstate 84, and the woman got scared and texted 911. She reported she was being kidnapped, and she was able to provide the direction of the car.

Braaten drove to the Bridal Veil exit and into a parking lot, according to the document. The woman said she felt threatened. Braaten said he was going to have sex with her, the document says.

She said they started to fight, the affidavit states. He pulled her pants down and touched her inappropriately, according to the affidavit.

The woman saw police lights go by and kicked the car horn, the affidavit states. Authorities arrived and took Braaten into custody. They took the woman to a hospital for treatment and a sexual assault kit.

Braaten and the woman didn't know one another, the affidavit says. He's being held in the Multnomah County Inverness Jail and is next set to appear in court March 15, records show.

Braaten is a registered sex offender in Washington, according to records. 

— Jim Ryanjryan@oregonian.com503-221-8005; @Jimryan015


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        