
    
        
            By Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

The first known use of an attack dog to bite an inmate to get him out of his jail cell in Oregon amounts to an excessive use of force, a federal lawsuit filed Monday alleges.

The dog bit the inmate's thigh and left arm, pulled him to the ground and continued to tear at his arm inside a locked cell at the Columbia County jail in St. Helens last Aug. 1.

The six sheriff's deputies involved waited about six weeks to file any reports on the cell extraction and when they did included "false and misleading'' information that contrasted with images from body cam video, the suit alleges.

Former inmate Christopher Bartlett filed the civil rights lawsuit in U.S. District Court in Portland against Columbia County and the deputies. He seeks $500,000 in damages.

He alleges that the dog attack amounted to assault and cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment.

"The defendants knew that their conduct was wrong and conspired to 'sweep it under the rug,' and make it appear as if the attack had never happened,'' attorney Jacob Johnstun wrote in the suit.

Bartlett, who is homeless, was in custody at the time, accused of contempt of court.



The lawsuit claims that at least one of the guards was retaliating against Bartlett because he called her a disparaging name after there was a delay in providing him his lunch tray that day.

The sheriff's office had no policy governing the use of a police dog in the jail at that time, according to a grand jury convened by the Columbia County District Attorney's Office to investigate the case and jail conditions.

The grand jury urged the sheriff's office to adopt a policy, requiring the prior approval from the sheriff or other high-ranking officer to use a dog to bite an inmate in the jail, except in cases of imminent risk of injury or death.

The grand jury found that using a dog could be the best way to quell a disturbance, prevent an escape or extract a combative inmate from a cell and that the dog used against Bartlett, a Belgian Malinois, was properly trained.

District Attorney Jeff Auxier declined to prosecute any of the deputies in the case, saying he couldn't prove beyond a reasonable doubt that they used unreasonable force to maintain order and defend themselves.

Auxier said the deputies tried to move Bartlett to a different cell in a different unit, but he refused to put his hands through the cell door's food port to be handcuffed and safely escorted out. He was warned that if he didn't come out of his cell, he would be bitten by the dog that was loudly barking outside the cell, Auxier wrote.

Bartlett's lawyer said his client was taking a nap when the dog was sent in to attack him and bit him for 20 seconds even though Bartlett wasn't resisting.  Bartlett also was taken for a mental health evaluation after the dog encounter. He suffers from delusional thinking and has been diagnosed as hypomanic, according to the suit.

The sheriff's office has since adopted a written policy that allows for a dog's use of force in the jail against an inmate when necessary to protect the inmate or jail staff from serious injury.

"Our main concern is that this will set the wrong kind of precedent in Oregon and allow this kind of excessive force,'' Johnstun said. "It's completely unnecessary. There are multiple other methods to deal with a situation like this that causes a lot less harm to the inmate. We hope this kind of thing does not happen again.''

Read lawsuit here

Read Columbia County grand jury report and declination to prosecute deputies here.

-- Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com 503-221-8212 @maxoregonian


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        