Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:52 pm

A reader-submitted photo of the scene of a car accident that killed power to the traffic lights at 72nd and Dodge Streets on April 25, 2015.

A reader-submitted photo of the scene of a car accident that killed power to the traffic lights at 72nd and Dodge Streets on April 25, 2015.

Metro area


A fire at an apartment complex near 86th and Q Streets displaced three adults Friday night.

The fire started on a chair in one of the apartments at 5312 S. 86th Court, according to emergency radio traffic. By the time firefighters arrived shortly after 8:30, there was heavy smoke on the first floor.


The fire was declared under control within minutes. No serious injuries were reported, and the Red Cross was contacted to assist the displaced residents. — From staff reports


Two teenagers have been arrested in connection with a carjacking near North 24th and Hamilton Streets.


About 5 p.m. Thursday, officers met with a man who said he was at his parked vehicle when two teens wearing dark clothing with hoods approached him. The man told police one of the teens had a gun and demanded the keys to the man’s car. The teens got into the car, a 2007 Toyota Camry, and drove away.


About 20 minutes later, officers spotted the stolen vehicle near North 45th and Fort Streets. A pursuit ended near 30th and California Streets, where the teens were arrested.


Police said a 17-year-old boy was booked on suspicion of robbery, flight to avoid arrest and evidence tampering, and a 16-year-old boy was booked on suspicion of robbery and flight to avoid arrest. — Jay Withrow


A 38-year-old Council Bluffs man died Thursday after he was ejected from a garbage truck in a crash just north of the Bluffs.


The Pottawattamie County Sheriff’s Office said the crash occurred a little after 1 p.m. on Mynster Springs Road west of Old Lincoln Highway.


Jeremy Daniels was treated at the crash scene for serious injuries and then taken to a Bluffs hospital, where he was pronounced dead, the Sheriff’s Office said.


A preliminary investigation indicated that a 2007 Sterling Sanitation vehicle was westbound on Mynster Springs Road from Old Lincoln Highway when it turned over while negotiating a curve. Daniels was ejected, the Sheriff’s Office said.


The truck is owned by S &amp; L Sanitation Enterprises.


— Jay Withrow


The traffic signals at the busy intersection of 72nd and Dodge Streets won’t be operating Sunday morning, the City of Omaha said.


Between 7 a.m. and noon, the traffic signals will be out to allow for maintenance work, the city said. Traffic from all directions will be under stop-sign control. The city said drivers should consider an alternate route . — From staff reports


Nebraska


Law enforcement officers announced Friday that they had seized 37 pounds of methamphetamine during an operation in central Nebraska.


The estimated street value of the drugs was $829,000.


The Nebraska State Patrol and the Central Nebraska Drug and Safe Streets Task Force received information that a large shipment of drugs may be traveling through Nebraska. Officers then made a stop on Wednesday at the Alda exit on Interstate 80.


They arrested two men, ages 26 and 27, both of Coachella, California. They were arrested on suspicion of possession of methamphetamine with intent to deliver and taken to the Hall County Jail. A third man, considered a person of interest in the case, was questioned and released, the State Patrol said. — Bob Glissmann


Iowa


DES MOINES — Public health officials say 28 people in Iowa have been sickened by chicken salad sold at Fareway grocery stores and an additional 66 illnesses are probably linked to the product.


The Iowa Department of Public Health is advising consumers to throw away any chicken salad bought at Fareway produced between Dec. 15 and Feb. 13 and sold in plastic deli containers with a Fareway store deli label.


The chicken salad was produced and packaged by a third party for the Boone, Iowa-based grocery chain that has more than 100 stores in Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, Nebraska and South Dakota.


Fareway voluntarily stopped selling the product Feb. 2.


Salmonella, a bacterial illness, can cause diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and fever. Some people develop severe symptoms that require hospitalization. — AP




The ruling affected about $2 million a year in sales taxes paid by the Omaha-based firm.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


