Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Society criminalizes mental health, a Nashville grand jury recently opined. Learn more about what local experts are doing to fix that problem.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall said the community, including law enforcement, needs to stop criminalizing mental illness.
(Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Too many Tennesseans with mental illnesses are arrested and jailed instead of being referred for treatment, a recent Nashville grand jury determined. 


There must be more societal awareness of what to do when someone is having a mental health crisis, jurors also decided. 


The vast majority of people who have a mental illness do not pose an immediate risk to the community, regardless of whether they own a firearm. People diagnosed with a mental illness committed less than 5 percent of gun-related killings in the U.S. between 2001 and 2010, according to a 2015 study recently cited in The New York Times.


However, law enforcement and mental health experts agree people with a mental illness who are in the middle of a crisis are too often arrested and jailed when they would be better served by a hospital or through therapy.


Related: What happens when Nashville police respond to calls about mental illness


More: When someone finds a gun and uses it in a crime, should the gun owner be liable? | Special report


The assessment from the grand jury comes as Nashville and other communities affected by mass shootings try to learn how to appropriately recognize and treat a mental health issue before a problem escalates into a tragedy.


"Instead of solving the problem of why people keep getting in trouble, we seem to just throw them in to the criminal justice system. We treat too many affected individuals as criminals instead of getting them the treatment they need," reads the report, a publication written and released every three months by grand jury members. 


"We recommend giving the people a chance to thrive by helping them to define their issue, and learning how to deal with them in a meaningful way instead of confining them to a jail facility." 


Nashville police say Travis Reinking, 29, shot and killed four people while injuring others in April when he fired an AR-15 style rifle at an Antioch Waffle House. Reinking pleaded not guilty and is undergoing a mental evaluation.


In previous interactions with law enforcement, Reinking exhibited behaviors prompting requests for mental health evaluations. In 2016, Illinois police took Reinking to the hospital for an evaluation after he told them Taylor Swift and others were stalking him. 


There is no record of the results of that evaluation or of a judge forcing Reinking to receive treatment for a mental health problem. 


More: A history of red flags didn't keep guns out of hands of Waffle House shooting suspect


Dwight Lewis, a former Tennessean editor and the foreman of the grand jury from January to March, said the grand jury heard from officials like Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall “who recognize the need for mental health care."


“There are people who are in law enforcement who are concerned now and would like to see more done,” Lewis said. “They realize that there is a serious issue.”


Lewis said that, as state funding was cut for several years, resources to treat mental illness have shrunk across the state.


“Too many people are not getting the help they need,” Lewis added. “What happens is they get out and they go back again.”


More: Sheriff Daron Hall explains how the jail is securing the Waffle House shooting suspect


In conjunction with the construction of a new downtown jail, Hall and the sheriff's office are creating a facility intended to treat someone in the middle of a crisis instead of taking them to jail. That's because he believes law enforcement has contributed to criminalizing mental illness. 


"To me, our goal ought to be to hold people accountable ... but also to divert people who are in the criminal justice system for reasons that may not be their own decisions," Hall said. 


Related: Mental illness stretches Nashville justice system


The facility will have 64 beds, split evenly between men and women accused of misdemeanors. Hall said people will receive inpatient treatment for up to 30 days, paid for using money previously allocated to pay for those same offenders to stay in jail. 


Without police and prosecutors agreeing to allow mentally ill offenders to enter a diversion program, Hall said the facility never would have happened. 


The facility, known as the Behavioral Care Center, is set to open in fall 2019. 


The state also wants to expand these pre-arrest diversion programs. Last year Gov. Bill Haslam and the General Assembly included $15 million in one-time grant money to help communities create the means to provide the appropriate treatment — instead of jail —for people with a mental illness. 


More: New law requires TBI report when mentally unfit try to buy guns


There must be more training for law enforcement, teachers and anyone else who interacts with people who have a mental illness, according to the grand jury report. 


"If we recognize the issues earlier, the grand jury believes that it will result in less incarceration and a better quality of life for all of us," the report states.


"We believe that funds to do much of this are already available, it is simply a matter (of) reallocating funds where they can do the most good. Instead of using the funds to incarcerate, the funds can be used to treat and educate." 


The Nashville grand jury deals with cases brought almost exclusively by Nashville police. The Metro Nashville Police Department requires mental health crisis training for officers, offering a program created in conjunction with local nonprofit behavioral health agency the Mental Health Cooperative. 


On average, Nashville police work with mental health professionals twice a day to determine if those exhibiting signs of a mental illness may hurt someone or themselves. 


"When patrol officers are making contact with individuals in the field, they’re operating in a chaotic environment. It’s not a situation that’s sterile or ideal for making a mental health assessment," said Lt. Grant Carroll, a training leader for Nashville police.


Nashville officers rely heavily on the cooperative's mobile crisis response team, experts who respond to situations in which someone may pose a risk to others. 


However, there is a training method — developed in Memphis nearly 30 years ago — that provides law enforcement the tools needed to de-escalate a situation and determine how best to treat someone who is in a crisis. 


The so-called "Memphis Model" is now a national standard for how law enforcement should interact with someone who has a mental illness.


Commercial Appeal: Memphis police Crisis Intervention Team approaches 30 years, but how effective is it?


The department's Crisis Intervention Team includes officers who volunteer to receive training on how to ensure the safety of the person experiencing the crisis and the community. That training also helps officers make initial evaluations, which tends to prevent jailing someone unnecessarily.


"What we’re looking for is to not make these officers social workers or psychologists. ... Can you de-escalate and try to bring it so that you can divert that person into health care and not into jail?" said Dr. Randolph Dupont, a clinical psychologist at the University of Memphis who helped develop the training. 


There are 2,646 law enforcement agencies that use CIT training, according to the center. However, only 18 of Tennessee's 95 counties have an agency with CIT-trained officers. 


Nashville does not use CIT, instead preferring to use the combination of officers and the mental health counselor crisis team. Dr. Carol Hart, head of the police department's Behavioral Health Services Division, said all officers receive "mental health first aid" training. 


"We’re really training the officers a whole lot more lately than we did in years past on how to respond to people who are having a mental health crisis," Hart said. 


Reporter Adam Tamburin contributed to this report. 


Reach Dave Boucher at dboucher@tennessean.com or 615-259-8892 and on Twitter @Dave_Boucher1. 


If you or someone you know is undergoing a mental health crisis, there are organizations ready to help. 


 


 


 
