Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Dickson County, Charlotte election ballots now set

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Vote button.
(Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The ballot is set for the Dickson County August election with familiar names running for key offices, and some new faces, too.


The April 12 candidate withdrawal deadline passed, setting the stage for the county and Charlotte elections.


County Mayor Bob Rial, who is running for a third four-year term, will be unopposed this election year.


Sheriff Jeff Bledsoe, also looking to serve a third term, faces three challengers: former Dickson County deputy Ken Daron (now with Hickman County); former longtime state trooper Chris “Big Mac” McClellan; and Dickson Police officer Jeremy Wall, currently the SRO at Dickson County High School.


Jerry Burgess, who also came into office in 2010 when the county voted for sweeping change, will be running against Richard Neblett and Phil Littleton for the road superintendent job.


The road commission seats will no longer appear on the ballot this year and going forward after those positions were dissolved by the county commission.


For Circuit Court clerk, incumbent Pam Myatt Lewis is running against Jamie Wall. The General Sessions Court clerk race is between Donny Arnold and Leslie Shelton.


The following incumbents are running unopposed for county government positions: Trustee Glynda Pendergrass, County Clerk Luanne Greer, and Register of Deeds Shelly Lynch Yates.


Several incumbents are being challenged for Dickson County Commission seats, with the District 9 race likely to be one of the most closely watched. County Commissioner Tony Adams will be facing off against former state representative David Shepard, who served Dickson County in the state Legislature for 16 years.


In the District 1 commission race, Randy Simpkins will face off against Christina Neitzer and in District 2, incumbent Jeff Eby will run against former commissioner Robert Wetterau and Mitchell Grimes.


In District 3, current commissioner Dwight McIllwain, who was voted by the commission into the position after Shane Chandler stepped down in November, is facing Dutch Bryant, Kirk Davidson and Wayne White.


Districts 4, 5, 7, 10 and 11 are uncontested with Stacey Batey, Cotton Dawson, Carl Buckner, Booty Reed, and Linda Hayes, respectively, running alone for those commission seats again.


In District 6, Becky Spicer is being challenged by John Malone; in District 8 Kyle Sanders will face Clayton Ellis and Rebecca Videau; and in District 12, Jeff Spencer is being challenged by Dalton Hall.


The three county school board seats each have one candidate with Josh Lewis as the only returning incumbent. Sonya Brogdon is the lone candidate seeking the District 2 board seat, and longtime former educator and teacher union leader Patricia Hudson is the only candidate running for the District 4 seat.


Both Tim Potter, District 4, and Rick Chandler, District 2, announced they were not seeking re-election in February. Potter had served as board chairman for 10 years.


Charlotte citizens who are registered voters will have two choices for town mayor, a rarity with Mayor Bill Davis holding that office for many years. Davis is being challenged by Charlotte Council member Alex Spann.


In the Charlotte Council race, only one candidate will be the odd person out. Six positions are open and seven people are running for those seats: Bill Gilbert, Ben Killebrew, Melinda Miller, Jim Robertson, Shelia Sesler, Stevie Smith, and Sherri Thiel.


In addition to the county general and Charlotte elections, the Aug. 2 election includes the state and federal primaries.


The voter registration deadline is July 3. Early voting will be July 13-28.


For election information, call the Dickson County Election Commission at 615-671-1146.



Here are the candidates who qualified to be on the ballot (*denotes incumbent):


DICKSON COUNTY GENERAL ELECTION


County Mayor


Bob Rial*


Dickson County Commission


1st District


Christina Neitzer


Randy Simpkins*


2nd District


Jeff Eby*


Mitchell Grimes


Robert Wetterau


3rd District


Dutch Bryant


Kirk Davidson


Dwight McIllwain*


Wayne White


4th District


Stacey Batey*


5th District


Cotton Dawson*


6th District


John Malone


Becky Spicer*


7th District


Carl Buckner*


8th District


Clayton Ellis


Kyle Sanders*


Rebecca Videau


9th District


Tony Adams*


David Shepard


10th District


Booty Reed*


11th District


Linda P. Hayes*


12th District


Dalton Hall


Jeff Spencer*


Circuit Court Clerk


Pam Myatt Lewis*


Jamie Wall


Trustee


Glynda Pendergrass*


Sheriff


Jeff Bledsoe*


Ken “Guido” Daron


Chris “Big Mac” McClellan


Jeremy Wall


County Clerk


Luanne Greer*


Register of Deeds


Shelly Lynch Yates*


Road Superintendent


Jerry Burgess*


Phil Littleton


Richard Neblett


General Sessions Court Clerk


Donny Arnold


Leslie Shelton


Dickson County School Board


2nd District


Sonya Brogdon


4th District


Patricia Hudson


6th District


Josh Lewis*


CHARLOTTE ELECTION 


Mayor


Bill Davis*


Alex Spann


Charlotte Town Council (6 positions)


Bill Gilbert


Ben Killebrew


Melinda Miller


Jim Robertson*


Shelia Sesler*


Stevie Smith


Sherri Thiel*
