Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The plaintiff in a lawsuit challenging the date of Nashville's mayoral election on Thursday appealed a judge's ruling that kept it set for August, asking the state's highest court to intervene and force a special election in May.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mayor David Briley, who took over after Megan Barry resigned from office on Tuesday, will run for the job in the August election.
    Michael Schwab

Attorney Jamie Hollin, representing plaintiff Ludye Wallace, in court on Wednesday.
(Photo: Joey Garrison / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The plaintiff in a lawsuit challenging the date of Nashville's mayoral election on Thursday appealed a judge's ruling that kept it set for August, asking the state's highest court to intervene and force a special election in May.


Attorneys for plaintiff Ludye Wallace — the head of the Nashville NAACP and a former city councilman who has qualified to run for mayor — filed an emergency motion asking for the Tennessee Supreme Court to to take up the case. A notice was filed with the Tennessee Court of Appeals, where appeals would typically go first.


It comes after Davidson County Chancellor Claudia Bonnyman on Wednesday dismissed Wallace's lawsuit, affirming the Davidson County Election Commission's 3-2 vote last Friday to set to the election for Aug. 2.


"This case involves a pure question of law regarding a matter of unusual public
importance: When the Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County —Tennessee’s capital city and most populous municipality — must hold an election to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor," the appeal reads.


"Given its subject matter, this case qualifies for the exercise of this Court’s reachdown
jurisdiction."


►More: Judge rules to keep Nashville mayoral election in August


►More: Lawsuit: Nashville mayoral election must be in May, not August


►More: Nashville mayoral election set by commission for August, but legal challenge looms


An election is required following the abrupt resignation last week of former Mayor Megan Barry. Former Vice Mayor David Briley was sworn-in as the new mayor shortly after her resignation.


Jamie Hollin, attorney for Wallace, had said an appeal was coming. 


A Tennessee Supreme Court rule allows the state high court to assume jurisdiction of a case if it is considered one of "unusual public importance" that needs an expedited decision.


In her ruling, Bonnyman cited case precedent in siding with Metro and also agreed with the city's interpretation on a key question — the definition of a general metropolitan election.


The Metro Charter says an election to fill a vacancy in the mayor's office must take place during the next general metropolitan election unless it is more than 12 months away.


The city has argued that this year's August election — which has Davidson County court clerk, sheriff and register of deeds races but doesn't historically have a race for mayor  — is a type of general metropolitan election, and thus the mayoral election should take place then. 


Attorneys for Wallace have argued that this year's August election is not a general metropolitan election and that the next one is not until August 2019, which by state law they say means a special election is required between 75 or 80 days following Barry's exit. That would put the election date between May 20 and May 24.


The plaintiffs say only elections that are on the regular four-year cycle to elect mayors are general metropolitan elections definition under the charter. They also say that Metro general elections are designed to not share ballots with partisan races — but holding one this August would break that tradition. 


They've also highlighted a 2007 Metro Charter amendment approved by Nashville voters that says a special election is required to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor whenever more than 12 months remain in an unexpired term.


Other possible mayoral contenders include Nashville businessmen Bill Freeman and David Fox, who finished behind Barry in the 2015 mayoral election, At-large Councilwoman Erica Gilmore, At-large Councilman John Cooper and state Rep. Harold Love, Jr.


Hollin worked on Freeman's 2015 mayoral campaign.


Wallace's lawsuit says he is seeking a special election in May because he lacks the financial resources to campaign months longer to August. He's denied having any other motives. Wallace still has time to remove his name from the ballot before the April 5 deadline.


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 
