Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Questions are piling up about how Mayor Megan Barry's final plan for Nashville General will remake Nashville’s health care landscape.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Nashville General Hospital has renovated its emergency room.
    Larry McCormack / The Tennessean

Katherine Morgan, center, director of nursing - critical care, speaks with nurses Vanessa Carter, left, and Quanisha Bell at Nashville General Hospital on Dec. 12, 2017.
(Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

A month into the seven-month proposal to shutter inpatient services at Nashville General Hospital, questions are piling up about how Mayor Megan Barry's final plan will remake Nashville’s health care landscape.


Closing the inpatient portion of the facility that serves many of Nashville's low-income and uninsured residents would send people to other hospitals, which in aggregate can absorb the patients. But just how the city will work with hospitals to take on new patients remains unclear.


Nashville General serves as a safety net in a city persistently rethinking its responsibility for treating them, in a state grappling with some of the unhealthiest people in the nation.


There are plenty of beds around the city to take on the patients — although Nashville General's secured ward for inmates carries its own set of challenges. But money is the overarching issue facing the mayor, the city’s hospitals, the supporters of Nashville General and the patients.


Leaders from Nashville's health care community are wondering how the redistribution of an average $70 million in uncompensated care annually would affect their bottom lines. They also wonder how the city is going to design its proposed indigent care fund.


Privately, they have plenty of questions and are trying to position for a future without the safety net. Every day Nashville General is open is better for them financially because it's less uncompensated care on their balance sheets.


There are few answers.


On top of the financial questions, and as Nashville General's supporters rally to protect it, a shallowly buried rift is emerging: Some patients don’t feel welcome at the larger health systems.


Some patients are referred to Nashville General because they are uninsured and require expensive, long-term care. Many associate the city’s other hospitals with care they can't afford. 


"I feel sad some people don’t feel like they are welcome at our facility because that is our mission and our work," said Karen Springer, CEO of Saint Thomas Health. "But we have to understand there are cultural barriers (we as providers) have to understand."


More: Why the sheriff thinks Nashville General overhaul would cost his department $3.5 million


More: Nashville General board member resigns, mayor apologizes for surprise hospital announcement


There are eight hospitals in Davidson County, including the VA, and experts agree the city’s other hospitals could absorb the people who are inpatient at Nashville General.


Vanderbilt University Medical Center is the city’s most crowded hospital.


It operates closest to full capacity — an average of 84 percent, according to state data. But using its internal calculation — all hospitals use their own — puts it at 97 percent capacity for fiscal year 2016, according to a bond filing. By those measures, it is least ready to take many people from an average of 44 people a day at Nashville General.


Nashville General staffs its positions based on recent and historical figures of demand. It’s licensed for 150 beds, staffed for 114 — if people were in double occupancy rooms. But the hospital currently operates 86 single-bed rooms with an average of 44 beds filled a day.


“There’s capacity. That’s the point,” said Paul Keckley, a health care analyst not involved with the proposal. “I think the question is, is the patient population that use (Nashville General’s) services one that the other three systems want to serve? There’s historically been this stigma around (Nashville General) that it’s pure indigent, it’s the safety net … it means more debt and more pressure on their margins."


The number of self-paying patients, including those without insurance, at Nashville General increased to 56 percent in 2017 from 51 percent the year before, according to its 2017 audit.


All hospitals provide care to people who cannot, or don’t, pay. But they have to balance the care with payments from other sources. Nashville General saw its patients under TennCare or Medicaid and Medicare fall from 2016 to 2017 while its commercial mix stayed the same.


Spreading Nashville General patients across the city “would shift a great burden of uncompensated care and Medicaid recipients to Nashville’s largest three hospitals,” said Michelle La Vone Richardson, market analyst at Decision Resources Group.


More: Nashville General CEO: Change needed, but nixing in-patient care imperils hospital's goals


More: Draft Nashville General audit findings mixed amid a push to close in-patient services


More: Mayor Barry announces stakeholder team for contentious Nashville General Hospital overhaul


Hospital leaders, state officials and several elected officials at city and state levels are reticent to weigh in on the plans for fear of being wedged between the mayor and the community.


The city’s broader system of clinics that treat the poor are scrambling since Congress has not reauthorized funding for community health clinics for places, such as Neighborhood Health and Connectus Health, that refer into Nashville General. This exacerbates the question of where Nashville's poor will get care.


There’s a growing number of Nashvillians who have insurance but are considered underinsured because they can’t afford the high deductible, which increases demand at clinics and hits doctors’ and hospitals’ bottom line.


“Facility expansions, physician innovations and health care alliances over the years renders Nashville more prepared than ever to handle the long-time-coming demise of Nashville General, but conservative health care reform under President Trump means Nashville’s sickest, poorest residents could lose access to critical health care services,” La Vone Richardson said. “Nashville General’s closure of inpatient services could reinforce this loss and exacerbate the burden of disease in one of the nation’s least healthy states.”


Joseph Webb, CEO of Nashville General, said he's not heard about whether the ER would stay open or if clinics would stay in the existing building. He said he hasn't had a direct conversation with the mayor about the plan since the announcement.


Joseph Webb, CEO of Nashville General Hospital, speaks during an interview in his office Dec. 12, 2017. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)

The prospect of a future without Nashville General could be more of a challenge than opportunity, depending on how the details unfold, Keckley said.


Joshua Nemzoff, a health care mergers and acquisitions consultant not involved with the city, thinks the switch to primary care is the right track for the city to take. 


“There’s absolutely no need in Nashville to have that hospital with all the other hospitals all with inpatient services,” Nemzoff said. "Most (mayors) take the political route and keep the hospital open."


Keckley predicts it's going to lead to "delicate discussions" about the role of not-for-profit health care in a community and the responsibility of an investor-owned system. 


An influx of uninsured patients could spark systems to ramp up competition for insured patients to help offset uncompensated costs, La Vone Richardson said. The systems are already racing to get clinics, alternative modes of treatment and freestanding ERs to capture a few more insurance and consumer dollars. 


The most pressing question for hospital leaders is the indigent care fund that would offset care provided to poor Nashvillians. The mayor’s office has released no additional details in the last month.


The mayor’s spokesman has expressed frustration with media questions about details and timing of the plan, specifically how it would affect the TennCare budget.


Sean Braisted, a spokesman for the mayor, said previously "Metro will work with key stakeholders over the coming months to look at best practices in other cities and find a model that works for Nashville."


It would be easier for the city to partner with one system on a transition, Keckley said, as that could smooth the flow of information regarding patient history and treatment. But an exclusive contract could put the other two systems at a disadvantage in receiving reimbursement for patients who choose to go there instead.


Joe Hagan, spokesman for TriStar Centennial Medical Center, said TriStar Health, a subsidiary of HCA, thinks there is enough existing infrastructure to pick up Metro’s patients and hopes “they will create a mechanism to ensure these patients’ care is adequately funded."


VUMC also is watching what happens with the fund, said John Howser, VUMC's chief communications officer. The hospital is committed to its specialty staffing arrangements no matter the inpatient or outpatient setup, he said.


“How they are going to do the fund ... will be important to everybody. Everybody wants to help, but we also want to know there are funds ... and they’ve shared that so how is that going to work? Are they going to get a card?” Springer said.


More: Nashville General requests nearly $20 million in funding; Mayor's office wants an explanation


More: Meharry to train students at HCA hospital under 'historic' agreement


More: Cutting Nashville General inpatient services could require Tennessee to put more money into TennCare


Winding down hospital care and transferring patient records, treatment information and data to one or more systems in the proposed time frame is “warp speed and unusual,” Keckley said. The hospitals do not share electronic medical records.


If the city has plans for operations, staffing, IT, purchasing, among others, “tied in a neat bow,” then it might be doable, he said, echoing concerns that came up in more than a dozen conversations.


“I’m doubtful, but I’m not in their meetings. It would say to me it’s someone with a non-health care background who has an overly simplistic view of how health care operates,” Keckley said. “It’s going to be a pretty significant transition. It’s not overnight. It’s not plug-and-play. It takes time.”


Meharry President Dr. James E.K. Hildreth is putting together a stakeholder committee of 14 people — primarily city, Meharry and Nashville General leaders — that will meet for the first time on Dec. 18 at Meharry to talk about the transition. The meeting is not open to the public.


The makeup of the committee changed and expanded since its inception in late November. It now includes Renata Soto, co-founder and executive director of Conexion Americas, and Heather Rohan, president of HCA Healthcare's TriStar division. 


Originally, Dr. Jonathan Perlin, a trustee of Meharry and chief medical officer of HCA, was the only committee member affiliated with another health system. Perlin is no longer a member.


HCA is partnering with Meharry on a medical student training program beginning in 2018, which will change the school's relationship with Nashville General. Neither VUMC nor Saint Thomas is represented on the committee. 


Saint Thomas Health's Springer said her system is ready to help where and how it can, but details need to be hashed out fast. She said she's spoken to the mayor's office and the president of Meharry.


“We’ve got to get moving now. Everyone has to take off their resistance mode and get into the details quickly,” she said. "This is all political, and I don’t want to be political. I just want to help people. That’s all we are about."


This article was updated with additional details about changes to a committee convened by Meharry Medical College.


Reach Holly Fletcher at hfletcher@tennessean.com or 615-259-8287 and on Twitter @hollyfletcher.


 


 
