Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

"The greatest impact is just more fear," says one student about the sanctuary city ban that will take effect in Tennessee in January.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Governor Bill Haslam will allow House Bill 2315 to become law without his signature. The measure bans sanctuary cities and mandates police compliance with ICE.
    Elizabeth L Atkins, The Tennessean

The Castro family left to right, Bella, 11, Jose, 23, Dulce, 18, and their mother, Maria, pose for a portrait in Nashville, Tenn., Tuesday, May 22, 2018.
(Photo: Lacy Atkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

As news broke Monday of Gov. Bill Haslam's decision, the prayer vigil was canceled.


Scheduled for immigrant families and faith leaders for the night before Haslam's deadline to veto, sign or do nothing and allow a bill banning sanctuary cities to take effect, the planned vigil was to be symbolic of the Latino and Hispanic immigrant community's fight until the end to oppose the legislation.


They had prayed in Public Square Park, trusting that their fate and that of the legislation critics call a "mass deportation bill" was in the hands of God. They had called the governor and marched through downtown Nashville proclaiming that, despite some not having legal status in the United States, they were without fear.


About the bill: Gov. Bill Haslam to allow measure banning sanctuary cities, ordering ICE compliance to become law without signature


But when Haslam finally confirmed his decision to allow the bill to become law, fear was discernible. Instead of a vigil to pray that the governor would act in their favor, immigrant families gathered Monday for a community meeting to ask questions and learn what was next.


"Essentially, our phones started ringing off the hook, and our Facebook inbox began filling with messages," said Stephanie Teatro, a co-director of the Tennessee Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition, explaining how undocumented immigrants in the state were suddenly "fearing it would be unsafe to bring their children to the hospital or call the police."


Silverio Arzate, of Nashville, chants with other demonstrators during a protest against HB 2315, a bill that will ban sanctuary cities in Tennessee, at Legislative Plaza in Nashville, Tenn., Wednesday, May 16, 2018. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)

House Bill 2315, which will take effect in January, withholds state funding from local governments who enact "sanctuary policies," including refusing to cooperate with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's attempts to verify individuals' immigration status or to honor detainer requests made to jails and prisons to ensure someone remains behind bars until ICE can take custody.


Dozens of immigrant families crammed into a small gathering space Monday night at Casa De Dios USA, spilling out of the room in the church on Dickerson Pike.


Dulce Castro, an 18-year-old recipient of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, was at the meeting and concerned for her mother and father, who are undocumented.


"They've always been afraid, but we have to go places," said Castro, whose family lives in Madison. "My mom takes my sister to school. My dad has to work to support the family. But there's always fear."


Her father, Martin, came to the United States from Mexico more than 20 years ago, Castro said. She and her mother, Maria, and brother, Jose, who is 23, came when she was 6 years old. Her 11-year-old sister, Bella, is the only citizen in the family.


Wiping tears from her eyes the next night, Castro, a rising sophomore at Cumberland University, broke from her speech Tuesday at the YMCA Latino Achievers annual scholarship awards event to address her mother and father in Spanish.


Demonstrators make signs during a protest against HB 2315, a bill that will ban sanctuary cities in Tennessee, at Public Square Park in Nashville, Tenn., Wednesday, May 16, 2018. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)

Her dad, a construction worker, had called at the last minute to break the news that he wouldn't be able to make the event because his car had broken down.


Castro thanked her family for giving her "the strength to stand up and fight for their rights," explaining that she plans to go on to law school to become an immigration attorney to represent people in situations similar to theirs.


In the back of her mind, though, Castro knows that the education she has worked to fund through scholarships — since she in ineligible for public in-state tuition — could have to be put on hold.


Her parents have told her that if they're arrested by ICE or removed from the country, she's responsible for taking care of her younger sister.


Demonstrators hold signs during a protest against HB 2315, a bill that will ban sanctuary cities in Tennessee, at Legislative Plaza in Nashville, Tenn., Wednesday, May 16, 2018. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)

Like the Castro family, 20-year-old Ana Gutierrez, of Knoxville, said her parents have laid out the steps she must take in the event they're ever separated from the family.


"We have a plan as a family that we need to revise, especially with this new law," said Gutierrez, who is a student at Berea College in Kentucky. "In my case, if my parents were to be apprehended or taken somewhere for some reason in terms of immigration, it would be me who would take care of my brothers."


Just a few months ago, Gutierrez was given power of attorney for her 7- and 14-year-old brothers as her parents, out of caution, have begun to prepare for anything to happen.


It's a hard type of conversation to have with her family over dinner when she comes home during school breaks, Gutierrez said, and she knows her brothers have heard the discussions.


As for how the new legislation will impact her family, Gutierrez said they'll likely stay home even more. Though the farthest her family typically goes from their Knoxville home is the 15-minute drive to church, she said that come January, they'll be more selective about which events they go to.


"The greatest impact is just more fear," she said. "Fear doesn't allow for anyone to live the happy life that everyone wants to achieve. You obviously can't go about your daily routine if you are fearful of something."


Bertha Rivas, center, of Nashville, holds her hand up during a protest against HB 2315, a bill that will ban sanctuary cities in Tennessee, at Public Square Park in Nashville, Tenn., Wednesday, May 16, 2018. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)

The bill was passed in the General Assembly less than a month after an ICE raid at an East Tennessee meatpacking plant where 97 immigrants were detained, spreading fear among immigrant communities around the state that other roundups could become the norm if the bill takes effect.


Despite critics of the bill portraying a scenario in which local police departments will be tasked with making arrests for ICE and bringing a higher number of immigrants to local jails, law enforcement in Nashville say they expect little to change as a result of the legislation.


Metro Nashville Police Chief Steve Anderson wrote to Haslam May 9 that he didn't support the legislation as it was written, expressing concerns with the bill's broad and "subjective" definitions of sanctuary policies and worrying that it would cause confusion and fear of police in immigrant communities. But the department does not expect to have to adjust any of its policies.


"As we have read it, we don't see there being any impact on this department," said Don Aaron, spokesman for Nashville police.


In an email Wednesday, spokeswoman Karla West said "the legislation does not change anything for the Davidson County Sheriff's Office."


Currently, when an inmate is fingerprinted upon being booked into the Davidson County jail, anyone who has indicated their place of birth is outside the United States has their fingerprints sent to ICE, which decides whether to issue a detainer, West said.


ICE must issue the detainer prior to an inmate's release date in order for the sheriff's office to honor it.


"Sheriff (Daron) Hall has always believed if anyone arrested and booked into jail is wanted by another law enforcement agency, our duty is to cooperate with that agency as long as the appropriate paperwork is provided," West said in response to a question on whether Hall supported the new legislation.


Though in practice, Nashville police officers don't inquire about subjects' immigration status, the department does not have a policy in place barring officers from doing so, Aaron said, which the new legislation outlines as a prohibited sanctuary policy.


The department isn't involved with the receiving of detainers since it does not oversee the local jail, but has worked with ICE in the past on some criminal gang investigations, Aaron said, as it does with other federal agencies such as Homeland Security, the FBI, ATF and U.S. Marshals Service.


Despite insistence by local law enforcement that the legislation won't translate to officers being compelled to go out and round up undocumented immigrants, that worry remains among those in Tennessee's Latino communities, said Camila Herrera, integration director for TIRRC who spoke in Spanish Monday to those gathered at the church meeting.


"They are very scared," Herrera said. "Families are very scared. They don't know what the new normal could look like once it takes effect."


Reach Natalie Allison at nallison@tennessean.com. Follow her on Twitter at @natalie_allison.
