Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Metro Council members pressed members of Mayor Megan Barry's administration on controversial plans to end inpatient care at Nashville General Hospital at a special joint council committee meeting Monday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Nashville General Hospital has renovated its emergency room.
    Larry McCormack / The Tennessean

Metro Council
(Photo: Shelley Mays / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Metro Council members pressed members of Mayor Megan Barry's administration on controversial plans to end inpatient care at Nashville General Hospital at a special joint council committee meeting Monday.  


But many council members left with questions still unanswered as Barry seeks to turn the city-owned, safety-net hospital into an ambulatory surgery center and outpatient clinic. 


More: Mayor Megan Barry: Nashville General must evolve to succeed


More: Nashville General to end inpatient care, Mayor Megan Barry announces


One even said he felt insulted as a result.


"I take it as a total area of disrespect right now by the administration and whoever else to come in here on such a pivotal decision that we have to make, and have such vagueness and not necessarily answer our questions," Councilman DeCosta Hastings said. 


"My family utilizes this hospital. My mother who had no insurance has been saved by some of the things that go on," he said, tearing up. "This bothers me."


More: Mayor Barry slammed over handling of Nashville General Hospital plans


Barry's new hospital model would require council approval. She's promised "stakeholder involvement" ahead of formalizing a final hospital plan, but her team did not say what that would look like Monday. 


The mayor's office has also said it will seek additional Metro funds to stabilize the facility for the current fiscal year, but how much is unclear. 


Some council members Monday also questioned why a study hasn't been performed to lay out details and cost projections of the mayor's plan. 


"There's been a recommendation that's been made, and I think just in all fairness as a council body, we're entitled to have (a study) that supports this," At-large Councilwoman Erica Gilmore said. "In all fairness, I think we deserve that, and the people and employees of Metro General deserve that."


More: Nashville General board member resigns, mayor apologizes for surprise hospital announcement


Citing the fiscal instability of the historically cash-strapped hospital, Barry announced her move on Nov. 9 immediately after Meharry Medical College unveiled plans to send students to HCA in a new partnership. Since then, she's faced a barrage of criticism over the rollout, particularly from African-American leaders. Neither council members nor hospital authority board members said they had been briefed. 


Metro Finance Director Talia Lomax-O'dneal told the council Metro has provided $690 million in total subsidies to Nashville General Hospital over the past 13 years. For the current fiscal year, the hospital board requested $55 million to operates it's budget, but Barry and the council kept the subsidy flay at $35 million. 


Lomax-O'dneal said the administration wants to ensure "everyone is at the table" before a final plan is put together on the hospital's future. She said stakeholders brought in will include hospital and Meharry employees, health care experts, council members, hospital board members and others. 


Gilmore and Councilman Nick Leonardo asked for more specifics of an "indigent care fund" that Barry has proposed. The mayor has said it would seek to ensure other local hospitals aren’t "unduly burdened" by the increases in the number of indigent patients they would serve with Nashville General closed. 


Neither the source of the fund nor amount have been identified. Lomax-O'dneal said the administration is still finalizing these plans along with others. 


"Let me just remind everyone that when this was announced, the mayor did not announce that this was effective immediately," she said. "What she said was that we were going to work on a transition plan and that it might take us six to nine months to get there. So, what we're asking is that you all give us the time to go in and to be able to determine what the right decisions are for this city.


"Your questions are very valid, and they are things that we are actively looking at."


Addressing the council Monday, Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall said eliminating inpatient care at Nashville General Hospital would require as much as $3.5 million in additional funding for his department to house inmates who have historically gone to Nashville General for treatment. 


More: Nashville General CEO: Change needed, but nixing in-patient care imperils hospital's goals


Freda Player-Peters, political director for the Service Employees International Union, which represents several hundred hospital employees, said Nashville General currently has around 800 employees.


"What's going to happen to these dedicated employees?" she said to the council. 


Barry has promised to make "make every effort" to ensure hospital workers are re-hired by Metro or in health care.


Councilwoman Sheri Weiner, an audiologist professionally, said she would be seeking as much information from the hospital as possible before deciding on the best path. 


"As a medical practice consultant myself, I always advise my practice owners to make strategic decisions based on a robust analysis, and clearly that's not here," Weiner said. "We don't have all the information we need."


Budget and Finance Committee chairwoman Tanaka Vercher said Monday's meeting marked just the beginning ahead of any final decision-making. 


"I know there's a lot of questions that are unanswered on this, but we're going to continue move forward with this and seek answers. We owe it to our constituents" 


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-714-0539, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 


 


 


 
