Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Time is running out to be eligible to cast a ballot in the transit referendum if you're not registered to vote.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Calling it a necessary "investment in Nashville's future," Mayor Megan Barry on Tuesday unveiled a monumental proposal for a $5.4 billion mass transit system, the most expensive and complicated project in Metro history.
    Wochit

Transit supporter Adam Nicholson waits in the lobby with other constituents to observe the Metro Council meeting at the Metro Courthouse  on Feb. 6 in Nashville.
(Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The referendum to determine whether Nashville residents will support a $5.4 billion mass transit plan is just over a month away, but would-be voters have even less time to ensure they're eligible to weigh in.


Davidson County residents planning to cast a ballot in the May 1 election should make their moves in the coming week to meet the cutoff.


The last day to register to vote in the May 1 primary is April 2. The state requires both online and printed voter registration applications be submitted at least 30 days before an election.


Tennessee allows you to register online to vote. Visit GoVoteTN.com to do so, but you must have a Tennessee driver's license or ID card issued through the Tennessee Department of Safety and Homeland Security to complete the registration online.


Otherwise, you can download and print off a voter registration application at nashville.gov/Election-Commission/Register-to-Vote.aspx and mail it to the Davidson County Election Commission.


Voter registration applications can also be picked up at public libraries and the offices of the county election commission, county clerks and register of deeds.


If you're a United States citizen, resident of Tennessee, will be 18 on or before the next election, have no felony convictions or have had your voting rights restored, you're eligible to vote.


You can find your polling place at maps.nashville.gov/pollingplacefinder.


In addition to the referendum to raise taxes to fund a mass transit system, there will also be candidates up for vote in the Davidson County Democratic primary, including sheriff, public defender, register of deeds and multiple judges and court clerks.


A 0.5-percent sales tax surcharge would increase Nashville’s rate from 9.25 percent to 9.75 percent beginning July 2018 and to 10.25 percent in 2023.


A 0.25-percent surcharge on the hotel-motel tax would then jump to three-eights of a percent in 2023, to 6.375 overall.


A 20 percent surcharge would be added to the local car rental tax, increasing the rate from 1 to 1.2 percent.


A 20 percent surcharge would be added to Nashville's business and excise tax, meaning a business that currently pays $1,000 in taxes would spend an extra $200 on the tax each year.


Reach Natalie Allison at nallison@tennessean.com. Follow her on Twitter at @natalie_allison.
