Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Hall provides a 10,000-square-foot warehouse where more than 5,000 of Nashville's needy will pick up Christmas toys for their children

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Daron Hall offers a 10,000 square foot warehouse — and employee and inmate volunteers — to keep a space where Nashville's needy can get Christmas presents for their kids
    Brad Schmitt/The Tennessean

Pastor Dale Robble, left and Sheriff Daron Hall stand with arms full of toys outside the Last Minute Toy Store in Nashville, Tenn., Thursday, Dec. 7, 2017.
(Photo: Lacy Atkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall is the man who saved Christmas — or at least the man who helped save a major toy give-away program for Nashville's needy.


For more than 20 years, volunteers from churches throughout the city have run the Last Minute Toy Store at the 61st Avenue United Methodist Church in the Nations. About 5,000 people who couldn't afford Christmas presents for their kids picked up presents there each year.


A long line for the “Last Minute Toy Store” of the 61st Avenue United Methodist Church. (Photo: Keel Hunt/Special to The Tennessean)

But the church closed earlier this year, leaving organizers with no venue and no leadership.


"Panic started," said Pastor Dale Robble of Highland Park Church, a major organizer for the toy store.


But several volunteers — led by Beth Morris of St. Mark's United Methodist Church and Robble — stepped up to try to save it.


The hardest part -- finding a church, or any venue, to host it.


That's when Nashville bar owner Steve Ford (Loser's, Winner's) — a mutual friend of Hall and the pastor — brought the men together. 


Bicycles stored for Last Minute Toy Store to be held this year in Davidson County Sheriff's Office warehouse (Photo: Brad Schmitt / The Tennessean)

Hall offered a 10,000-square-foot warehouse at 5117 Harding Place, near the Metro jail in the Antioch area. The sheriff also provided employee and inmate volunteers and the equipment needed to move thousands of toys.


"It’s the old sheriff with the white horse riding in to save the day," Robble said.


Hall said he was happy to do it; he already had been searching for a new way for the sheriff's office to help the community.


"There was definitely divine intervention," Hall said.


The program also lets Hall provide a way to reward inmates who are actively seeking treatment inside Metro Jails for addiction and anger issues.


Pastor Dale Robble, left and Sheriff Daron Hall pose for a portrait inside the Last Minute Toy Store in Nashville, Tenn., Thursday, Dec. 7, 2017. (Photo: Lacy Atkins / The Tennessean)

About 37 inmates will be able to give a toy store ticket to family members so they can shop for gifts for the inmates' kids. 


Organizers will start taking donations of new unwrapped toys this weekend, from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday and 1 to 4 p.m. Sunday.


For more information on dropping off donations — or on how to qualify to receive toys — go to the website LastMinuteToyStore.com.


Hall also said the toy give-away itself will be a safe place for recipients — he said deputies will not be checking to see if there are any outstanding warrants for people visiting the Last Minute Toy Store.


Reach Brad Schmitt at brad@tennessean.com or 615-259-8384 or on Twitter @bradschmitt.


 
