Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Support

Support

Chat Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Jeremy Harrison, owner of All in One Recycling, discusses challenges business has faced in recent months

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Complaints and questions plague Murfreesboro-based recycling company.
    Mariah Timms/DNJ

All in One Recycling facility at 824 Industrial Blvd. in Murfreesboro has had customer issues since summer 2017. Currently a recording on the answering service tells customers the trucks are down.
(Photo: Nancy DeGennaro/DNJ)Buy Photo

Murfreesboro waste management company All in One Recycling Inc. has been under fire on social media and with the Better Business Bureau after more than 150 customers filed complaints about being charged for services they say never arrive.


"We understand what the problem is, we know that people aren’t getting picked up," owner Jeremy Harrison said in a Friday morning phone interview with USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee. "We're just trying to stay afloat until we can get our trucks back in."


More: All in One Recycling the subject of numerous complaints to state consumer affairs board


The way the company is trying to stay afloat may be costing it even more customers.


The trucks are down, they have been down, they are still down, Harrison explained. 


He said the truck issues have been going on for about four weeks, although complaints date back several months before. 


"Until we get our trucks back, we don't have any way to provide this service," he said. "We've been in business for seven years and this is...we just never had enough money to reinvest, to be able to buy new trucks."


A new recycling truck can cost around $350,000, Harrison explained. 


The company aims to pick up residents' recyclables, except glass, and return them to the All in One warehouse. At the warehouse, items are sorted, packaged and sent off  to be processed. 


At one time, the company had approximately 5,000 customers, Harrison said. With service every two weeks, each day would involve picking up from 400 to 600 households. 


"When something goes wrong with a truck or you have an issue, you have a lot of people affected," Harrison said. 


Matt Marson, who lives near Rockvale, is still collecting his recycling even though it hasn't been picked up by All in One Recycling, Inc., since the middle of December. He's had to start storing it in his garage. (Photo: Submitted)

The BBB estimates that All in One owes customers a combined $23,000 from just the month of January 2018.


Harrison said the company has shut off all automated billing and has not cashed any checks that have come in since about Jan. 1.


It is unclear if any pickups have been made in that time, either.


They have issued almost $30,000 in refunds over the past three months, Harrison said, but the number of people still waiting for service and refunds far exceeds that number.


A yearly payment for the company is approximately $150. If each of those refunds was for an annual charge, only 200 of the several thousand customers have been refunded. 


The company's billing system was disabled entirely about a month ago, Harrison said. Some customers may have been charged on Jan. 15, but he said they "went back in and tried to issue refunds to those people."


Harrison said a major issue in the system was that his front office clerical staff, apparently just one person, experienced a high turnover rate. 


"The lady that's in there is supposed to be handling all that," he said, referring to the calls, voicemail and emails that come into the main office.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

“It was back in the summer that we were going through all this junk with them,” customer Matt Marson said. “We were considering canceling, then got the email everyone got saying they’ll try to do better.”


As an All in One subscriber, Marson paid for a recycling bin and the expectation it would be picked up every two weeks. He lives near Rockvale in southwestern Rutherford County, and his growing family needs every penny to be spent wisely, he said. 


Although a few pickups have come through in fits and spurts since July, Marson said his recycling bin has been sitting on the curb since Dec. 18 without a single pickup.


Marson’s account automatically renewed and he was charged $150 for another year’s service in August 2017. He said he had been trying to get in touch with the company since well before that date.


“We weren’t aware it was going to auto draft,” he said. “If we’re not getting a service that we’re paying for, we want our money back.”


Despite phone calls and emails, Marson has had no progress on getting his recycling picked up or being refunded the remainder of his last payment. 


"Nothing's changed," he said. "We're stuck in a weird spot."


"There was no communication, just silence," customer Wes Ballard said. "I guess that's all we're going to hear."


Ballard said he was able to cancel out his credit card information with the company, but not all of his neighbors were so successful. 


The BBB of Middle Tennessee released findings Thursday on the number of complaints they have received in recent months.


The complaints against All In One haven’t been limited to Rutherford County residents. Of the 155 complaints submitted to the Better Business Bureau of Middle Tennessee over the past year about the company, more than three dozen were submitted by Williamson County residents, where the company also apparently provides services. 


Thirty complaints came from Brentwood residents, and another eight came from Nolensville residents, according to Robyn Householder, CEO for the BBB of Middle Tennessee. 


Others were filed from customers in Antioch, La Vergne, Rockvale, Shelbyville and Smyrna. 


All in One customers may be leaving in droves, if the waiting list of another local recycling company is anything to go by.


Stones River Recycling, another concierge recycling company, has seen a dramatic increase of new customers over the past month. 


Since Dec. 21, 2017, they've had 20 to 50 people signing up a day, adding up to more than 300 new customers since Christmas, according to co-owner Jason Dietz.


In order to deal with the influx of custom, Dietz has bought three new vehicles, and started adding staff, including a dedicated customer service person. He and his partner are considering adding a third shift. 


The company began in October 2016 and runs weekly pick-ups on the same day as trash day.


"I wouldn't try something that I don't think me and my team could pull off," he said. "We want people to understand what's going on and be patient with us. Come over to us with a clean slate."


The company planned to send out 244 bins to waitlist customers Friday. After that, another 150 to 200 people (and counting) are still on their wait list as many in the area look for anywhere to turn. 


The Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce Development filed a distress warrant against All in One Recycling in July 2017 naming $2,229.11 in unpaid unemployment taxes dating back to 2015.


Harrison said he knew nothing about it, and intended to call both his accountant and the Department of Labor to get the issue handled.


"It's what, $2,200? I'll get that settled with them," he said. 


A distress warrant allows the sheriff of the relevant municipality, in this case Davidson County, to demand payment on taxes owed.


In August, court documents show that an attempt to retrieve those missing tax payments by wage garnishment was unsuccessful due to a lack of funds available in the bank account used.


All in One owed $2,358.11 from that judgment, including court fees, according to court documents.


Although bound by confidentiality, the TDLWD confirmed that no payment on that balance has been made, but neither has an appeal been filed. 


"To our knowledge, we have not received anything from either the bank or the employer relative to the execution filed on the distress warrant," a department spokesperson said in an email. 


Additionally, if All in One has continued to miss payments since that time, each missed payment would be earning interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month.


The Attorney General's office reached out to All in One for information about the complaints in mid-December 2017, according to Davidson County Circuit Court documents. 


In response, Harrison and his lawyer asked for the names of the people who had filed complaints, which the AG's office declined to provide. 


"How are we supposed to correct the problem if you won't tell us," Harrison asked. "We're chasing our tail. We have to know who the people are so that we can solve the problem."


No further information is available from the Attorney General's office on the investigation at this time. 


Although the All in One lot is quiet, there is still active in the warehouse. 


Waste Management, Republic Service, Rutherford County Schools and other county agencies all take certain items to All in One for processing. 


"They would have to drive to Nashville otherwise, and that would run up their budgets," Harrison said. "We allow them to come drop it at our place, it's a convenience factor for them."


"Between the truck issues and the employees turning over, clerical people turning over, it is what it is," Harrison said. "I know it's frustrating for everybody that has our services. It's unbelievably frustrating for us."


He hopes his customers will stick with the company as they try to move forward on their issues. 


The clerical issues, he stated, were directly related to so many phone calls coming in and people getting overwhelmed. 


"We're just trying to make do until we can get our trucks back," he said. 


Elaina Sauber contributed to this reporting.


Reach Mariah Timms at mtimms@dnj.com, via phone at 615-278-5164 and on Twitter @MariahTimms. 
