Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Tennessee Supreme Court heard oral arguments Monday in a lawsuit that seeks to move up Nashville's August mayoral election to May.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mayor Megan Barry admitted to having had an extramarital affair with Sgt. Robert Forrest Jr., the police officer in charge of her security detail, on Jan. 31.
    Michael Schwab

Attorney Jamie Hollin speaking before the Tennessee Supreme Court Monday, April 9, 2018.
(Photo: Joey Garrison/ Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Tennessee Supreme Court heard oral arguments Monday in a lawsuit that seeks to move up Nashville's August mayoral election to May as justices eye issuing an opinion on the closely watched case later this week.


It was a lively 45-minute exchange on the lawsuit filed against the city with the five justices pressing attorneys from both sides. The justices gave few clues on which direction they're leaning. 


Multiple justices had questions about the logistics and the financial cost for Metro government if the city were forced to hold a special election in May — just weeks after holding a local primary election already set for May 1.


► More: Lawsuit: Nashville mayoral election must be in May, not August


► More: Judge rules to keep Nashville mayoral election in August


The Davidson County Election Commission says it would cost about $1 million to get ready and hold a new special election.


"How is that practical?" Justice Holly Kirby asked. "You can't just wave a wand. Things have to be printed, set up in a computer. There are many, many practical considerations to running an election."


Chief Justice Jeffrey Biveis said under the plaintiff's interpretation of the city's charter, Nashville would have to regularly hold multiple stand-alone elections each four-year term when officeholders leave before their term ends — "costing all this additional money for Metro."


►More: Nashville mayor's race: At least 11 candidates qualify as deadline passes


►More: State Rep. Harold Love Jr. says he's running for Nashville mayor


Attorney Jamie Hollin, lead attorney for plaintiff Ludye Wallace — head of the Nashville NAACP and a candidate for mayor — acknowledged costs concerns are in the "public interest."


"But I would say that the counterbalance to that is the voters have an interest in having a mayor that they actually elected," he said. 


The state's high court has taken up the case on appeal after Davidson County Chancellor Claudia Bonnyman ruled on the side of Metro last month.


The election is required following the March 6 exit of former Mayor Megan Barry, who resigned as part of a guilty plea of felony theft related to her nearly two-year affair with her former police bodyguard.


Fourteen candidates, including Wallace and Mayor David Briley, have qualified to run for the election. A third candidate, At-large Councilwoman Erica Gilmore, was in attendance at the hearing. 


Hollin said adding the mayor's election to the May 1 ballot — a move at one point pursued by the plaintiff — is no longer viable. But he said there's still time to hold a special election between May 21 and May 25.


Under a proposed timeline, a new qualifying deadline would be set for Thursday to qualify to run for a mayoral election in May.


Metro attorney Lora Fox, arguing for the city, said it would be "physically possible but very difficult" for the Davidson County Election Commission to hold a mayoral election in May. Nevertheless, Fox said the language in the city's charter, not the cost of a special election, should be the only consideration in setting the date.


The Metro Charter says an election to fill a vacancy in the mayor's office must take place during the next general metropolitan election, unless it is more than 12 months away.


The city has argued that this year's August election — which features Davidson County court clerk, sheriff and register of deeds races but doesn't historically have a race for mayor  — is a type of general metropolitan election, and thus the mayoral election should take place then. 


When it was the city's turn to address the court, Justice Cornelia Clark noted that Davidson County races set for this August are offices created by the Tennessee Constitution.


"Are they then also municipal elections?" she asked.


Attorneys for Wallace have argued that this year's August election — because it does not typically have races for mayor, vice mayor and the Metro Council — is not a general metropolitan election.


They contend the next general metropolitan election is not until August 2019, which by state law they say means a special election is required between 75 or 80 days following Barry's exit.


Bivins — flipping around the line of questioning that he had for the plaintiff's attorney — pointed out that under Metro's interpretation of a general metropolitan election, a special election would not be triggered for three years out of a four-year term when someone prematurely leaves office.


"Doesn't that fly in the face of having (a provision for) special elections?" asked Bivins, the chief justice.


A Metro Charter amendment approved by Davidson County voters overwhelmingly in 2007 says a special election is required to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor or council whenever more than 12 months are left in an unexpired term. Barry's old term has more than 18 months remaining. 


The plaintiff's attorneys have made the amendment a key part of their argument. But Fox told the court that Metro's position is that the ballot summary of the amendment — which spells out that provision — is inaccurate and does not represent the actual text. 


She said the provision on what constitutes a general metropolitan election did not change with passage of the 2007 amendment. 


"We need to look at what was meant in 1962 when this charter was adopted," Fox said. 


During a rebuttal period for the plaintiff, Hollin began by saying that the city's interpretation that the ballot summary is inaccurate "calls the integrity of the referendum process and the democratic process itself into question."


"Now wait a minute," Bivins interjected. "Let's not demagogue this.


"The world's not going to end if this election is held in August."


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 
