Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Metro Councilwoman Erica Gilmore is entering this year's race for Nashville mayor, becoming the first formidable candidate to announce a challenge against Mayor David Briley.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Erica Gilmore announces her candidacy for mayor.
    George Walker IV

Metro Councilwoman Erica Gilmore announces her candidacy for mayor  Wednesday, March 28, 2018 in Nashville, Tenn.
(Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Metro Councilwoman Erica Gilmore on Wednesday entered this year's race for Nashville mayor, declaring, "I'm seasoned, I'm experienced," and becoming the first formidable candidate to announce a challenge against Mayor David Briley.


Gilmore, one of five at-large council members, said in a statement that she's uniquely qualified for the job, and pointed to the need to tackle the city's rising homicide rate as a top priority — and reason to not postpone running until next year.


Her campaign also claimed the title, "Nashville's leading progressive elected official."


"I have a track record of getting results,” said Gilmore, who served two terms as the District 19 council member prior to being elected to a countywide at-large seat in 2015. “I know I have the right message that will appeal to voters from all walks of life, in every zip code of our great city.


“What we need more than continuity, is a mayor with a strong mandate from the voters," she said. “We have runaway economic inequality in Nashville right now. We’ve successfully built a thriving and prosperous ‘New Nashville.’ But far too many hard-working families aren’t sharing in the fruits of our city’s success.”


► Who else is in: David Briley announces run for Nashville mayor in August election


► Former candidate out: Bill Freeman says he won't run for mayor of Nashville this year


► Who else is not running: Sheriff Daron Hall won't run for Nashville mayor, endorses David Briley


Former Mayor Megan Barry resigned March 6, and the election is set for Aug. 2. But the Tennessee Supreme Court is scheduled to hear a lawsuit seeking an expedited election in May. The winner will finish Barry's former term and quickly face another election in August 2019.


Gilmore's entry comes after Nashville businessman Bill Freeman, At-large Councilman John Cooper and Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall each passed this past week on running for mayor after mulling bids. 


Freeman and Hall have rallied behind Briley, the former vice mayor who was elevated as mayor when Barry stepped down.


Gilmore, 42, said she met with the Briley on Tuesday and told him she planned to enter the race.


The Briley campaign, through a statement from his treasurer Hannah Paramore, said, "We welcome Councilwoman Gilmore to the race."


Paramore said that "in just a few short weeks, David Briley has brought focus to the job of managing the city, tackling challenges and making progress on opportunities that will benefit all of Nashville."


"He has delivered a steady, guiding hand when it was needed to regain public confidence," she said. "David Briley is the right person to lead our city, and I am confident that the widespread support that is rapidly forming behind David will result in his winning the special election.”


Nashville City Council member Erica Gilmore speaks at a press conference Friday, Jan. 26, 2018 at Nashville General Hospital held in response to Mayor Barry's announcement of a proposed $13.2M subsidy for the hospital. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)

Historically, sitting Nashville mayors have faced only nominal, if any, opposition in elections. But Briley is in the unusual position of having not been elected for the job. 


Nevertheless, Gilmore — the daughter of Rep. Brenda Gilmore, D-Nashville, who is running for state Senate in August — will be considered an underdog against Briley, a liberal who has quickly picked up backing from prominent members of the business community. 


Gilmore's support is strongest among African-American voters, but she will need to expand her base to win a head-to-head mayoral election. She could be challenged in fundraising against Briley, who has been aggressive early on in amassing his campaign war chest.


Gilmore said she's "100 percent certain" she will have enough money to compete, pointing to her support during her time on the council and predicting she will need to raise between $300,000 and $1 million.


Discussing why she thinks she can win, Gilmore singled out her strong performance in her 2015 council election, where she received the most votes of any at-large member during the first-round general election. She finished second behind Cooper in the runoff election that took place the next month.


“My whole life, I’ve been a builder of bridges, bringing people together across differences in politics, background, class, and geography,” Gilmore said. “I’m eager to bring these leadership skills of collaboration, partnership, and coalition-building to the mayor’s office." 


Gilmore had shown signs of running for mayor for weeks, including appointing Lee Molette as treasurer for a mayoral campaign the day after Barry's resignation. 


In an interview with The Tennessean, Gilmore did not criticize Briley, saying she's only highlighting things she can offer.


"I want to see him do well because I love the city of Nashville," she said. "And if he does well, we all do well."


But by countering the case for "continuity," Gilmore is taking on the most widely cited argument in support of Briley — that Nashville needs stability following a period of political turmoil. 


► More: High-powered business leaders back David Briley for mayor, urge others to stay out of August election


The Nashville Business Coalition, a group aligned with the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce, backed Briley immediately after Barry resigned and urged other candidates to not enter the race to prevent the unprecedented occurrence of back-to-back years of competitive, contested campaigns.  


Gilmore said she found the group's position "really unfortunate considering that we have almost 1 million people in this city."


"It does a disservice to the city and it communicates a lot of different meanings depending on where you're from and what lens you look through," she said, adding that anyone should be able to run regardless of their background. 


"It says that we're supposed to have an election," Gilmore said, referring to the Metro Charter, "and I'm offering myself up for that leadership and to let the people decide and give them the opportunity to participate in the democratic process."


On the council, Gilmore has been a vocal champion of greater funding for Nashville General Hospital and regularly criticized the Barry administration for falling below government contracting benchmarks of minority- and women-owned businesses. 


She's also a supporter of Nashville's May 1 transit referendum, and plans to vote for the $5.4 billion plan, but said the city needs to work to address equity issues. She listed public safety, education, workforce development and cost-of-living as issues she would tackle as mayor.


►More: 2 more names join Nashville mayoral race discussion; another says he won't run


►More: Council members propose requiring inpatient care remain at Nashville General Hospital


As for her achievements, Gilmore cited economic development in District 19, which includes parts of North Nashville, downtown, Salemtown, and Germantown, and a push for affordable housing.


She also said she is fought for  increased codes enforcement of blighted areas, crime reduction, a "living wage" ordinance and "Ban the box" hiring policy. She said she also supports the African-American Music Museum at new 5th + Broadway development downtown. 


Gilmore, raised in Nashville, attended Howard University. She currently works as assistant dean of student conduct at Tennessee State University after prior stops at Fisk University and the University of Phoenix as a teacher. She lives with her 17-year-old daughter Anyah Gilmore-Jones.


She recently took a temporary leave from the council to recover from a minor surgery but said she is doing fine. 


Ahead of the April 5 candidate qualifying deadline, it is still unclear whether Briley will draw another significant challenger.


Nashville NAACP President Luyde Wallace, who is leading the lawsuit seeking the May special election, has also qualified to run. Former Councilman Roy Dale and community and spiritual activist jeff obafemi carr have each picked up papers to run but have not said whether they will enter the race.  


State Rep. Harold Love Jr., D-Nashville, is considered another potential contender but hasn't announced his plans. Businessman David Fox, who came in second behind Barry in the 2015 mayoral election, has not returned messages from the Tennessean on whether he will run. 


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 
