Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The top vote-getters in Nashville's Democratic primary are expected to win the general election in August; Republicans aren't running in the races.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


People vote inside the Joelton First Baptist Church on Tuesday, May 1, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn. Voters will decide whether to raise four taxes, including the sales tax, to fund a $5.4 billion transit plan for Davidson County.
(Photo: Mark Zaleski/For the Tennessean)Buy Photo

Incumbents and candidates with Metro Council experience came out on top Tuesday in the contested Davidson County races. 


Sheriff Daron Hall and Criminal Court Clerk Howard Gentry easily defeated their opponents in the Democratic primary election, according to unofficial election results. 


In the open-seat races, former Councilman Lonnell Matthews Jr. won the Juvenile Court clerk race and Councilwoman Karen Johnson received the most votes in the Register of Deeds contest. 


The top vote-getters in Nashville's Democratic primary are expected to win the general election in August since no Republicans are running in any of the races.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Elections for these county seats typically draw a small, die-hard group of voters to the polls. But the divisive referendum on the $5.4 billion mass transit plan prompted more people to turnout in those races. The mass transit plan failed Tuesday night. 


NASHVILLE VOTING: Breaking down the races in the May 1 Nashville election


Here is how the primary election played out in the Davidson County office races: 


Matthews won the Juvenile Court clerk race, defeating the four other candidates vying for the open seat. He received nearly 38 percent of the vote.  


Matthews, also the mayor's office neighborhoods director, is expected to replace retiring Juvenile Court Clerk David Smith, who was first elected in 2010. 


Rep. Sherry Jones, a longtime Nashville lawmaker, is in second. The other candidates were Michael Joyner, Jeff Crum and Tyese Hunter, an Antioch-area Metro school board member.  


Councilwoman Karen Johnson won the three-person race for Register of Deeds. She received 55 percent of the vote. 


The seat opened up after Register of Deeds Bill Garrett decided to retire after two decades in office. 


Richard Exton, a real estate appraiser, came in second. Pam Murray, a former East Nashville councilwoman who was ousted in a 2009 recall election, also ran for the seat.  


Incumbent Daron Hall easily won the Davidson County Sheriff's race, defeating challenger Kenny Hardy for the second time. Hall took 82 percent of the vote.  


Hall has held the office for 16 years. He beat Hardy in 2014 with 80 percent of the vote. 


Incumbent Howard Gentry also handily defeated his challenger, Steven Murff, in the Criminal Court clerk race. Gentry won nearly 82 percent of the vote. 


Gentry, a former Nashville vice mayor and a onetime candidate for mayor, has served as Criminal Court clerk since 2011 when the Metro Council appointed him to replace David Torrence.    


Murff, a former director of Davidson County Specialty Courts, unsuccessfully vied for that council appointment in 2011. 


His May 1 primary bid for the seat was considered a long shot. It was Gentry's second election for the post. 


In the final days of the race, an official confirmed Murff had been fired from a position in Nashville's General Sessions court in 2016 for "deficient performance," including falsifying attendance records, according to personnel records. Murff called those allegations "meritless and unproven."


Martesha Johnson (Photo: Submitted)

Martesha Johnson, who ran uncontested in the May 1 primary, will become the first African American to serve as the city's top public defender.


She currently serves as an assistant at the Nashville Public Defender's Office. Dawn Deaner currently leads the office but chose not to seek another term. 


Richard Rooker ran unopposed in the Davidson County Circuit Court clerk race in the May 1 primary. He has served as clerk since 1993. 


Brenda Wynn, who did not face an opponent in the primary, is expected to continue serving as Davidson County clerk. 


She was appointed in 2012 by the Metro Council to replace former clerk John Arriola. The May 1 race was her second re-election for the seat. 


Charlie Cardwell, who has served as Metro trustee since 1993, ran unopposed in the primary. He is expected to serve his seventh term in office.  


Joey Garrison and Adam Tamburin contributed to this report. 


Reach Holly Meyer at hmeyer@tennessean.com or 615-259-8241 and on Twitter @HollyAMeyer. 
