Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

He describes himself as a budget hawk.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Kenneth Eaton will run for Williamson County mayor.
(Photo: Submitted)

 Kenneth Eaton, a former mayoral candidate in Nashville, is now taking a shot at the mayoral seat in Williamson County.


It's a different campaign, but his message remains the same - dissect budgets line by line and address wasteful budgeting.


"After studying the budget, I feel like it's time we get a business man in," said Eaton, who has about 40 years of experience with car dealerships and real estate.


"We need to tear that budget apart, go line by line, see exactly where the money is being spent, clean the waste up and fund the schools properly."


He added: "I'm finding there's a lot of cronyism going on. There's a lack of accountability on the finances."


Eaton, 60, serves on the board of the Tennessee Republican Minority Coalition. Last year, he was a delegate for then presidential candidate Donald Trump at the Republican National Convention.  He's also been involved with the Davidson County Republican Party. 


Eaton has sought offices ranging from U.S. Senate to Davidson County Clerk. 


Eaton ran for Nashville mayor in 2003 and 2007. While he announced plans to run for the 2015 election, he eventually dropped out of the race.


Williamson County Mayor Rogers Anderson announced his run for re-election earlier this year. The 16-year incumbent filed his candidate petition earlier this month.


Eaton filed his candidate petition Thursday. 


Reach Melanie Balakit at mbalakit@tennessean.com.


About the Williamson County election


Several county offices are up for election in 2018.


Positions include: county mayor, county commission seats for 12 districts, county trustee, sheriff, circuit court clerk, juvenile court clerk, county clerk, register of deeds, seven seats for the Williamson County school board and three seats for the Franklin Special school board. 
