Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Tennessee Supreme Court has agreed to immediately take up a lawsuit against Metro challenging Nashville's August mayoral election date.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mayor Megan Barry admitted to having had an extramarital affair with Sgt. Robert Forrest Jr., the police officer in charge of her security detail, on Jan. 31.
    Michael Schwab

The Tennessee Supreme Court
(Photo: Larry McCormack / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Tennessee Supreme Court will decide a closely watched legal dispute over the date of Nashville's next mayoral election.


The state's high court agreed Thursday to immediately take up an appeal that seeks to overturn a lower court's decision to dismiss a lawsuit filed against Metro government challenging Nashville's August mayoral election. The suit argues the Davidson County Election Commission violated both the Metro Charter and state law, and that a special election should take place in May.


In an order granting the plaintiff's emergency motion for the Supreme Court to intervene, the court laid out an expedited briefing timeline that will culminate with oral arguments at the Supreme Court on April 9.


Attorneys for plaintiff Ludye Wallace, the local head of the Nashville-area NAACP and a candidate for mayor, had petitioned for the Supreme Court's jurisdiction — citing the "unusual public importance" of the case — after Davidson County Chancellor Claudia Bonnyman dismissed the lawsuit last week. Wallace has argued that former Mayor Megan Barry's resignation should have triggered a special election in May. 


►More: Plaintiff in Nashville mayoral election case appeals to Tennessee Supreme Court in hopes for May vote


►More: Judge rules to keep Nashville mayoral election in August


The Davidson County Election Commission voted 3-2 on March 9 to hold the mayoral election during the upcoming Aug. 2 election, which state primaries as well as school board and court clerk races are held. Bonnyman cited case precedent on the issue in her ruling to side with Metro. 


On Monday, the Supreme Court ordered Metro to provide a timeline of all dates necessary to adjudicate the case, including deadlines for mailing of absentee and military ballots, voter registration, and early voting. 


If the high court were to overturn Bonnyman's decision, the timing could raise logistical questions for a race in May. For example, candidates running the August election face a April 5 deadline to qualify. That's four days before the Supreme Court's oral arguments. 


Twenty-one council members signed a letter this week urging the Metro Nashville Department of Law to support an expedited review by the Tennessee Supreme Court of an appeal challenging the election date for the city's next mayoral election currently set for Aug. 2


►More: Nashville council members support Supreme Court's immediate review of mayoral election date


►More: High-powered business leaders back David Briley for mayor, urge others to stay out of August election


But Metro Department of Law Director Jon Cooper disagreed with the emergency motion, arguing the case does not meet the statutory requirements for the Supreme Court.


The election is required following the exit of Barry, who resigned on March 6 as part of a guilty plea of felony theft related to her nearly two-year affair with her former police bodyguard. 


The Metro Charter says an election to fill a vacancy in the mayor's office must take place during the next general metropolitan election, unless it is more than 12 months away.


The city has argued that this year's August election — which features Davidson County court clerk, sheriff and register of deeds races but doesn't historically have a race for mayor  — is a type of general metropolitan election, and thus the mayoral election should take place then. 


Attorneys for Wallace have argued that this year's August election — because it does not typically have races for mayor, vice mayor and the Metro Council — is not a general metropolitan election.


They contend the next general metropolitan election is not until August 2019, which by state law they say means a special election is required between 75 or 80 days following Barry's exit. That would put the election date between May 20 and May 24.


Under state law, if another election occurs prior to those dates, the special election could take place then. Metro's local primary election is on May 1. 


In addition, plaintiffs have pointed to a Metro charter amendment, approved by Davidson County voters in 2007, that says a special election is required to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor or council whenever more than 12 months are left in an unexpired term. Barry's old term has more than 18 months remaining. 


►More: Bill Freeman says he won't run for mayor of Nashville this year


►More: David Briley announces run for Nashville mayor in August election


Mayor David Briley, the former vice mayor who succeeded Barry after resignation, has announced he will run for the seat this year. His term will end in August 2019, setting up another mayoral election then. 


Nashville businessman and former 2015 mayoral candidate Bill Freeman announced Wednesday he won't run for mayor this year. Other possible candidates, including At-large Councilwoman Erica Gilmore, At-large Councilman John Cooper, state Rep. Harold Love Jr., Nashville, and Nashville businessman David Fox, who also ran unsuccessfully in 2015, have not publicly said whether they plan to run. 


Reach Joey Garrison 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 
