Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A new poll tests the public's mood on Nashville Mayor Megan Barry's upcoming big-ticket agenda, headlined by proposals for a Major League Soccer stadium, the redevelopment of Metro's Greer Stadium site, and mass transit.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mayor Megan Barry kicks off petition-drive for transit funding
    Joey Garrison/The Tennessean

Mayor Megan Barry introduces the plans to bring Major League Soccer to Nashville at the Council Chambers in Nashville on Oct. 2, 2017.
(Photo: Lacy Atkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

A poll now being conducted across Nashville tests the public's mood on Mayor Megan Barry's upcoming big-ticket agenda, headlined by proposals for a Major League Soccer stadium, the redevelopment of Metro's Greer Stadium site, and mass transit.


The telephone survey appears to have been commissioned by the mayor's campaign committee. It offers a glimpse into the behind-the-scene political calculations in play with all three projects.


In perhaps a sign of things to come on transit, it gauges support for — or opposition to — four tax increases to fund light rail in Nashville and an expanded city bus system. Barry plans to unveil a transit plan, including details of a proposed referendum on funding for transit, later this month 


More: Barry: Sales tax hike likely part of funding plan for Nashville mass transit


The Tennessean obtained the full poll, which surveyed Nashville voters this week, as Barry is entering her third year in office.


A person affiliated with Barry's campaign confirmed the campaign had a poll out this week.


The poll tests support for light rail. It then asks about favorability or opposition to a $5 billion transit system over 30 years that would be paid for by "a combination of" higher sales taxes, hotel taxes, car registration fees and business taxes. 


Respondents are asked whether they would be more or less likely to support Barry for her 2019 re-election with knowledge that she is a vocal supporter of this transit plan.


More: Q&amp;A: Nashville Mayor Megan Barry on transit, a soccer stadium and Cloud Hill halfway through her first term


After cruising through her first two years with sky-high approval ratings and few tests at the Metro Council, Mayor Megan Barry is now embarking on an eight-month period that could make or break her administration. (Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean)

Barry confirmed to The Tennessean last month that a sales tax increase would be part of her transit funding plan and said it would probably target four taxes in all. Each of the taxes mentioned in the poll are outlined in the recently passed Tennessee IMPROVE ACT, which gave Nashville and other municipalities a local option to pay for transit.


Barry hopes to hold a transit referendum during the May 1 local primary election. She would need approval from the Metro Council to add it on the ballot.


Sean Braisted, the mayor's press secretary, would not say whether the four taxes described in the poll will be included in the final transit proposal.


Barry is entering the second half of her first term with approval ratings above 70 percent, an unaffiliated poll taken this year by Vanderbilt University found. But multiple major projects have converged this fall, making for her most challenging stretch in office so far.


The poll tests favorablities for a new Major League Stadium, led by Nashville businessman John Ingram that would be funded with city assistance. It comes as Barry this week unveiled a public-private proposal for a $250 million MLS stadium at the city's fairgrounds to compete for an expansion team.


More: Mayor Barry unveils financing proposal for $250M Major League Soccer stadium in Nashville


"Construction would be paid for with mostly private funds and roughly 20 percent of the cost paid for by Metro-Nashville government," the poll says. "Do you favor or oppose?"



    The Nashville investor group bidding for a Major League Soccer expansion franchise in Music City unveiled preliminary designs Monday for a 30,000-seat stadium that would transform the aging Metro-owned Fairgrounds Nashville.
    Ayrika Whitney/USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee

Under Barry’s stadium financing plan, Metro would issue up to $225 million in revenue bonds for the stadium and an additional $25 million in general obligation bonds.


The ownership team, under a 30-year lease plan with the city, would pay the city $25 million in cash and $9 million a year to pay off Metro’s stadium debt. Sales tax revenue and dollars from a ticket tax is designed to make up the additional debt.


Pivoting from MLS, the poll dives into the controversial issue of redeveloping Greer Stadium with a mixed-use proposal called Cloud Hill — a plan backed by Barry that has been slammed by historic preservationists.


The poll tests support for the Cloud Hill project against the backdrop of alternative parks-only concept put forth by opponents. 


More: Dogged by criticism, Cloud Hill beefs up team for Greer Stadium project


"There's a redevelopment that's privately funded and it's called Cloud Hill," the poll says of the city-owned Greer Stadium site. "Some may say this project would create more green space and active park space and affordable housing for the community.


"Also, some say this stadium sits on historically significantly land and the city should develop this property back into a park as it was originally intended. Do you strongly favor, somewhat favor, oppose or strongly oppose this redevelopment?"



    Mayor Megan Barry's administration has picked the developer it wants to redevelop the old Greer Stadium, choosing a vision for the site that includes large pockets of park space, affordable housing and creative arts and music space. Video by Jessica Davis/The Tennessean
    Wochit

Other items tested in the poll are centered on the agenda of the Metro Council, multiple Nashville officeholders, and some of her campaign priorities from 2015 including affordable housing, public education and transit.


Question and issues in the poll are:


(Commentary added in parenthesis are from The Tennessean, not from the poll)


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 


 


 
