Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Buckle Up in Your Truck focus: More seat belt use in pickups

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    An small overview of Dickson County wrecks in recent years.
    Wochit / James Bendall

The Tennessee Highway Patrol worked with law enforcement Friday on Highway 70 in Dickson  to focus on more pickup truck drivers wearing seat belts with the Buckle Up in Your Truck campaign. The state message board also flashes that message. 
Pictured are: Dickson officer Mike Dunn, county Chief Deputy Jerone Holt, Capt. Donny Arnold, Doris Stiles (TDOT), THP Trooper Jon Officer, Sheriff Jeff Bledsoe, THP Trooper Wayne Tidwell and Officer David Cole.
(Photo: Chris Gadd/The Herald)

Tennessee sits in the middle nationally on seat belt use.


And, as seat belt usage continues to increase statewide — increase from 86 percent to nearly 89 percent in 2016 — that number drops significantly for pickup truck drivers, particularly in rural areas, say Tennessee Highway Patrol officials.


Recently released stats for 2018 show seat belt usage stayed about the same, with a slight half-percent decrease.


Lt. Jon Officer and other THP officials, particularly in the THP’s District 3, are hoping to change that statistic with the recently unveiled “Buckle Up in Your Truck” campaign.


“We’re trying to get that out there to the rural folks,” said Officer. “We have seen a lot of pickup truck drivers and passengers not wearing (seat belts).”


District 3 includes Dickson as well as Davidson and more counties to the west of Nashville, including Montgomery, Humphreys, Cheatham, Houston and Stewart counties. Officer’s area of focus is Dickson and Humphreys, which he describes as “mostly rural.”


The statistics are gathered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and measured using the organization’s National Occupant Protection Use Survey.


The percent of pickup truck drivers who use seat belts is nearly 82 percent, according to the NOPUS. Though the number isn’t as low as the 69 percent for pickup drivers and passengers 10 years earlier, Officer said he and his fellow troopers still see seat belts unused in pickups while working wrecks, issuing citations and more.


“THP is seeing an increase in seat belt usage except in one area, pickup truck usage,” Officer said. “We’re trying to put a little more emphasis on the pickup truck drivers at this point,” Officer said.


That emphasis includes Tennessee Department of Transportation message boards stationed Friday on Highway 70 in Dickson — and a board in Humphreys County — with the “Buckle Up in Your Truck” phrase displayed.


City of Dickson and Dickson County law enforcement officials joined Officer to show solidarity in the cause at the message board stationed on Highway 70 at the intersection with Dykeman Road.


“We have a multi-agency presence working together for education and enforcement in seat belt usage,” Officer said.


The Clarksville Police Department also recently stated it’s also joining in with THP on the campaign.


“If you come to Clarksville in your truck and caught not wearing a seat belt, citations will be issued,” said Lt. Philip Ashby with the Clarksville Police.



 
