Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Nashville's top prosecutor, the public defender and the Davidson County sheriff have been negotiating an overhaul of the program for months.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Nashville judges have agreed to expand of a program that allows suspects to get out of jail without paying bail.
(Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto)

Nashville judges on Wednesday agreed to pursue the expansion of a program that allows suspects to get out of jail without paying bail, but it was initially unclear when the change might play out.


The city's pretrial release program identifies "low-risk" suspects, who have a high likelihood of returning to court and avoiding arrest while they await trial. Those defendants are then allowed to leave jail without paying a cash bail.


Nashville's top prosecutor, the public defender and the Davidson County sheriff have been negotiating an overhaul of the program for months.


While disagreements remain, the parties generally agree fewer people charged with a lower-level misdemeanor crimes should have to pay cash to get out of jail before they face trial.


More: Inside the effort to change Nashville's cash bail system — and avoid a lawsuit


Opinion: Davidson County must reform unconstitutional bail practices


Opinion: Money bail criminalizes race and poverty


Nashville's General Sessions judges, who handle the city's misdemeanor cases, must sign off on an expansion to make it official. They signaled their support Wednesday, while making it clear the plan had not reached the finish line.


"At today’s General Sessions judges’ business meeting, the judges approved from a conceptual standpoint, modification of the existing pretrial release program," presiding General Sessions Judge Melissa Blackburn said in a statement.


But Blackburn sounded a note of caution in a subsequent statement Wednesday evening.


"The judges of the General Sessions bench are united in our commitment to the causes of restorative justice and bail reform," she wrote. "However, the proposed changes to misdemeanor bail that have been publicly discussed today have yet to be properly vetted and reviewed by all parties concerned."


The statement contradicted earlier tweets from Judge Lynda Jones that suggested a plan to eliminate cash bond for most misdemeanor suspects had been finalized.


Blackburn said District Attorney General Glenn Funk, Public Defender Dawn Deaner and Sheriff Daron Hall would be consulted before the judges' "final position" on the "new policy" was released.


It could take a few more months to develop policies surrounding the expansion and to roll out training.


Deaner said the judges' vote of support was a pivotal step for "reforms that we can all agree on."


“They’re smart reforms. they have proven successful in other places," she said.


Under the new system, a wider range of midemeanor defendants would become eligible for a screening that could get them out of jail without paying a cash bond.


Deaner said the expansion would result in a savings for the city and would eliminate wealth-based discrimination for people arrested on minor charges who are held in jail simply because they don't have money.


But she added her hope that more reforms would follow.


“I hope it’s just the first step because there’s still a lot of issues," she said. “We’re still using a wealth-based detention system for whole categories of offenses."


Critics say cash bail unfairly favors wealthy suspects who can afford to pay their way out of jail before trial. Poor people who cannot afford bail, on the other hand, must stay locked up.


Research shows poor defendants are more likely to plead guilty to secure a quick release from jail rather than wait behind bars to develop a robust defense. 


Work to overhaul and expand the pretrial release program started in 2016, when Nashville got state funding to develop a new tool to gauge the likelihood that defendants would return to court and avoid future arrests without paying a cash bail.


Hall, who oversees the program, said the new tool would be an effective way to allow more defendants to get out of jail before their trial.


Funk has endorsed the idea but said he wants to see cash bail remain for some offenses, including domestic violence.


Reach Adam Tamburin at 615-726-5986 and atamburin@tennessean.com. Follow him on Twitter @tamburintweets. 


 
