Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Last week, commissioners unanimously delayed the decision last week in order to wait for the complete input of data.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    An overview of the candidates who have launched a campaign for governor.
    Wochit

People are voting at the Williamson County Recreation Center in Franklin on election day Aug. 7, 2014.
(Photo: Shelley Mays / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

After a week-long delay, the Williamson County Election Commission unanimously certified the election results from the May 1 primary. 


"Voter data entries are completed," Williamson County Election Commission Administrator Chad Gray said. "We finished all the election day poll lists, and all the data is in from the election. We've had a number of candidates ask for voter data."


The five-member commission unanimously delayed the decision last week in order to wait for the complete input of data. A total of 14,847 residents cast votes in the election. That comprises of a 10 percent voter turnout in the primary. 


A week ago, election commissioners unanimously voted to wait on an any certification. 


More: Williamson commission delays certification of May primary results


Members decided to wait to certify the results until the complete list of the names of the voters who cast a ballot on primary day had been processed in the voter database from the primary day signature lists.


Gray said the Williamson County Republican Party had requested voter data about the primary. Gray added that Republican Party leaders have have inquired about those who may be Democratic voters based on the 2016 presidential primary.


Only candidates in the election can contest the primary, according to Tennessee Code Annotated 2-17-104. 


"The Williamson County Republican Party, according to TCA, is not allowed to contest election results — only a candidate running for the nomination can contest the results of that primary election," Tennessee GOP communications director Candice Dawkins said. "We have not received any properly filed contests regarding the Williamson County primary elections."


The same goes for the Democratic Party, where no contests have been filed. 


Candidates have five days to contest the results of the election, according to state law. 


Outgoing Rep. Charles Sargent said he wasn't sure if there would be any contest of election, but if there was a contest, it could only be by the number of votes, not who voted. The issue of closed primaries have come to the legislature, but it's never come to a floor vote in his 22 years, Sargent said. 


"If they won by five or 10 votes, they can contest a number, but not where it came from," Sargent said. 'If you look at my elections you could say Democrats and Independents crossed over.  I don't think we should close the county primaries. Because we will eliminate one third of the vote. We do need to alienate our voters. That excludes them from judge, mayor or sheriff. It's not different in Davidson County because sometimes there's no Republican primary." 


State executive committee woman Rebecca Burke said the issues the Republican Party were concerned with had been worked out with Gray during the week-long delay.


Rebecca Burke, of Franklin, is running for the District 61 House seat. (Photo: Submitted)

Burke affirmed she was there in her capacity as state executive committee woman for Williamson County, and not there as a Republican candidate for House District 61 — the office she's running for in the August primary for the open seat. 


She added that one Republican commission candidate might contest election. Out of respect to privacy, Burke said she wouldn't reveal which district or candidate. She said that candidate would have to produce evidence for a contested vote, and present that to the 67-member state committee. 


She said in the future, the state executive committee could continue to consider closed primaries for the party. Current state law has primaries open for voters of both parties.


She also said she feared there had been cases of crossover voting in the primary election. Party leaders analyzed the voter data and compared residents' voting history to the 2016 March presidential primary. If voters chose a Democrat in the 2016 primary, but voted this cycle in the Republican primary, Burke said they considered them crossover voters. Gray said that total came out to 923 crossovers voters participated in the May 1 Republican primary. 


"This came to my attention this election because the number was considerable," she said. "It was considerable in some districts. It could be as many as 1,800 votes. Their ideology is considerably liberal if they voted in the Democratic primary for Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders. That's not to be critical. It's just to say that's what it is. Their ideology is considerably liberal compared to the Republican side. Also the impetus to vote there wasn't from lack of Republicans in the presidential preference primary. If they were strongly motivated to go to the Democratic side, that tells us their ideology that follows closely on the heels of a clearly cut presidential primary."


She also added that offices — like the county mayor — should remain partisan races. 


Already, the Williamson County Republican Party has already called into question two Democratic candidates who early voted in the Republican primary. 


County Commission District 4 candidate Anne McGraw and House District 63 candidate Bill Peach. Election commission members voted 3-2 in late April to send the cases to District Attorney Kim Helper.


As of Monday, Helper said she received the referral of the cases last week. The information is under review, but no action has been taken at this time, Helper said. 


The Williamson County Election Commission is a five-member body that consists of both Republicans and Democrats. Members certify election results and appoint the election administrator, who handles local elections and voter registration. 


Reach Emily West at erwest@tennessean.com or 615-613-1380 and on Twitter at @emwest22.
