Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Tuesday is election day in Davidson County, and voters get to decide whether to raise four taxes — including the sales tax — to fund a $5.4 billion transit plan.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Early voting outside the Howard School building in downtown Nashville. Early voting concluded Thursday ahead of the local primary election and transit referendum vote on May 1.
(Photo: Joey Garrison/ Tennessean)Buy Photo

Tuesday is election day in Davidson County, and voters get to decide whether to raise four taxes — including the sales tax — to fund a $5.4 billion transit plan.


Follow here for the latest results on the transit vote.


More: Opponents hold big early lead in Nashville transit vote


Here's else you need to know.


Polls open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.


Tennessee has a photo ID law, so don't forget to bring identification with you when you head to the polls.


To find out your voting precinct, go to the maps.nashville.gov/pollingplacefinder.


Election results for the transit referendum after all precincts reported. (Photo: Ayrika L. Whitney/USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee)

What could turnout look like?


More than 59,000 people cast ballots during early voting for the May 1 election. Based on that, some observers predict turnout to reach perhaps 100,000. That would make it the highest referendum vote since Nashville approved an NFL stadium in 1996. 


By comparison, 38,804 people voted in the 2014 May local primary election.


► Read more: Nashville early voting surpasses 59,000 for transit referendum: 5 takeaways on high turnout, trends



    A look at the numbers in the Nashville transit plan
    

Both sides of the transit debate have aggressively courted voters on television and door-to-door. They have also reached out to African-American voters, who could prove key to the outcome of Tuesday's vote.


► Read more: Who has the edge in Nashville transit referendum as election arrives?


► Read more: Fight for black voters could swing Nashville transit referendum


In addition to the transit vote, a host of local county primaries are on the ballot. Democratic primaries for offices such as sheriff, court clerks and register of deeds. There are no Republican primaries on the ballot in Davidson County.


► Read more: Breaking down the races in the May 1 Nashville election


The highlights of the transit plan include 28 miles of light rail, rapid bus routes and an increase in service and frequency for the city's bus network. A downtown tunnel, transit centers and sidewalks are also included.


► Read more: Nashville transit plan: Everything you need to know


To pay for it, four taxes would go up. The most notable is an increase in the sales tax. A sales tax would be the largest contributor. If the transit initiative passes, the sales tax will increase from 9.25 percent to 9.75 percent in July and to 10.25 percent in 2023.


 
