Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Gilmore's vehicle drove underneath a tractor-trailer on I-24, according to troopers.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Several tips on what to do if you're involved in an auto accident.
    Wochit

Joseph Gilmore
(Photo: Davidson County Sheriff's Office)

Corrections &amp; clarifications: The wreck occurred in Davidson County. A previous version of this story listed the wrong county.


A Davidson County Sheriff's Office deputy died Tuesday morning, apparently from injuries sustained Monday in an off-duty car crash.


Joseph Gilmore was returning from the St. Louis area where he was visiting family, according to Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall.


The accident occurred on eastbound Interstate 24 in Robertson County, according to the Tennessee Highway Patrol.


According to a report from Tennessee Highway Patrol, which is investigating the fatal crash, Gilmore's 2013 Chevrolet Impala struck a tractor-trailer from behind and became lodged underneath the trailer.


Troopers don't suspect Gilmore or the tractor-trailer driver were impaired with drugs or alcohol at the time of the crash. The other driver isn't facing charges.


Though Hall announced that he believed Gilmore may have fallen asleep at the wheel, THP was unable to confirm whether investigators suspected the same.


"All indications are he may have fallen asleep (after) a holiday visit with his family," Hall said.


Shortly before the crash, Gilmore had spoken with a fellow officer and mentioned how tired he was, Hall said.


Gilmore was described as a "very good officer and good person," by Hall. He had been with the sheriff's department since approximately February according to the sheriff.


Gilmore planned to move on to the Metro Nashville Police Department, according to Hall.


Gilmore had a girlfriend who also is employed by the Davidson County Sheriff's Office, Hall said.


Gilmore died at TriStar Skyline Medical Center, Hall said.  


Reach Andy Humbles at ahumbles@tennessean.com or 615-726-5939 and on Twitter @AndyHumbles. Reach Natalie Allison at nallison@tennessean.com. Follow her on Twitter at @natalie_allison.
