Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Nashville Organized for Action and Hope, known as NOAH, sponsored the event, which one organizer said was "not your typical beauty pageant."

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Gavel
(Photo: File photo)

A progressive group pushed several judicial candidates to take stands on money bail, mental health initiatives and racial bias in the court system during a Tuesday evening forum.


Nashville Organized for Action and Hope, known as NOAH, sponsored the event, which one organizer said was "not your typical beauty pageant."


Ten candidates for three different judicial positions on the ballot during in the May 1 Democratic primary participated in the forum at Lee Chapel AME Church in North Nashville. They generally projected agreement that racial and economic bias existed in the criminal justice system and should be rooted out.


But Nashville attorney Kyle Mothershead, who co-chairs NOAH's criminal justice task force, pushed back after the event, saying some of the candidates — whom he would not name — backed a stance that would keep poor suspects in jail simply because they could not afford to post bail.


Mothershead did say he thought the event encouraged candidates to take more aggressive stances on a series of criminal justice reform efforts.


He said the group would continue to host forums like this one in the future.


"I'm proud of how the event went," Mothershead said. "We're giving voice to something that needs to be heard."


Here are the participants, and excerpts from their remarks.


Judge Angie Blackshear-Dalton: "Incarceration should be the last resort," she said. "We have to address the problem. We cannot incarcerate our way out."


Joy Smith Kimbrough: "You need judges, you need politicians that acknowledge there's a problem understand that and address it," she said. "This is one that can be resolved with the vote."


Ana Escobar participated through a surrogate who repeatedly stressed her experience with domestic violence cases. Escobar's surrogate also noted that when suspects are "black or brown ... we seem to care a lot less" about justice.


Sheryl Guinn, was skeptical of Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall's plan to divert some inmates at the new downtown jail to mental health treatment within the complex: "I am concerned about the treatment they would be receiving in jail."


Newton S. Holiday III identified similar "flaws in our current bailing system ... Innocent people go to jail sometimes because they can't afford to pay. ... The system is set up that way."


Judge Nick Leonardo supported the General Sessions judges' effort to shrink the use of money bail. He said he's seen poor suspects who "end up pleading guilty to a charge that maybe they didn't do. ... The system is definitely broken."


Judge Sam Coleman said Hall "has the right position in mind" for his approach to mental health, but he cautioned that money would be needed to support the effort: "These ideas are great on paper but the funding is what's important."


Joyce Grimes Safley submitted some written responses saying she supports lessening the use of cash bail and called Hall's mental health plan "admirable."


Frank Mondelli on bail reform: "People who are not committing violent crimes do not to be spending time in jail."


Tillman W. Payne: "The time for the status quo is over," he said, later mentioning the bias facing his son, a 15-year-old black boy. "Based on just his demographic someone might think that he might be a problem. But he's not, he's just a 15-year-old boy"


Reach Adam Tamburin at atamburin@tennessean.com and 615-726-5986. Follow him on Twitter @tamburintweets.


 
