Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Area baseball leader has developer, sports community on his side and desire to make this happen

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mayor Megan Barry's administration has picked the developer it wants to redevelop the old Greer Stadium, choosing a vision for the site that includes large pockets of park space, affordable housing and creative arts and music space. Video by Jessica Davis/The Tennessean
    Wochit

Park concepts suggested in alternative Greer proposal.
(Photo: Courtesy of Page | Duke Landscape Architect)

The debate over what to do with the Greer Stadium site is a convoluted mess right now, and there’s no telling when or how exactly it will be resolved.


But I do know this: Back in February when Chip Cruze, owner and operator of Nashville Baseball Academy, was trying to get his bid together for a sports complex and youth center on the site, he told me this: “Word on the street is there’s no chance, this is already a done deal between Metro and a group led by T Bone Burnett.”


I know this, too: Cruze still has the best idea I’ve heard, by far, for the use of this 21-acre, Metro-owned space. It’s the only one that serves at-risk youth, which isn’t very exciting for developers but should be exciting to our city leaders because it’s an opportunity to replace rhetoric with results. And for the record, this plan also includes green space, a baseball museum and a potentially large revenue stream.


“It’s a no brainer,” said Neil O’Donnell, a former NFL quarterback who has committed to run the football aspect of the project if it comes to fruition. “I’m fully in support of this and I think a lot of people would come to Nashville to play in tournaments if this happens.”


Cruze has a long list of allies in addition to O’Donnell, and a developer (Atlanta-based HGOR), and what appears to be legitimate hopes that the Cloud Hill plan — put together by Burnett, Bert Matthews and Tom Middleton and chosen by Mayor Megan Barry’s administration in May — won’t happen.


Chip Cruze is the owner and operator of the Nashville Baseball Academy. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Chip Cruze)

If not, an alternative plan proposed by Nashville architect Ben Page has received a lot of attention. It’s a good one. It would keep public land public and turn it into a massive park that would essentially become part of Fort Negley Park. It would include a reflection pool to honor the slaves who built the Civil War-era fort. It would be a welcome alternative to Cloud Hill’s housing, retail and work space for musicians and artists.


► More: Celebrated author has new cause: Stop Cloud Hill


But the Cruze plan also provides a service. It includes five fields, made of the FieldTurf that O’Donnell sells across the South (Franklin Road Academy, Brentwood Academy and Nolensville High are among his customers) and can be used for youth baseball, softball, football and soccer. It includes basketball courts, a 30,000-square-foot youth center, a Nashville Baseball &amp; Fort Negley History Museum, walking trails that would mix with Fort Negley’s and an amphitheater.


Supporters include Vanderbilt baseball coach Tim Corbin. Though he said he’s “naïve” to other plans and the city’s other needs, Corbin said of Cruze’s idea: “I like the thought process behind it for sure. It would be a good usage of the space and you’d have the ability to grab kids in that area.”


Vanderbilt head coach Tim Corbin heads back to the dugout before their game against Alabama at Hawkins Field Saturday, May 20, 2017 in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)

That also would require having enough “non-profit-minded people” involved to work with the kids, Corbin said, because the space alone is not enough. Among many other supporters, Davidson County sheriff Daron Hall said this “not only has tremendous benefits for the entire Nashville community, but for the at-risk population specifically.”


“How many more kids need to die?” Cruze said. “I hate to be so dramatic, but … our leaders speak up and say we have to do something about these issues. Well, here’s a chance.”


This would be a major boost to the Nashville chapter of Major League Baseball’s RBI program (Reviving Baseball in Inner Cities), and O’Donnell’s plan is to get the NFL’s Play60 program involved. O’Donnell threw to Titans coach Mike Mularkey when they played with the Pittsburgh Steelers in 1991, and he knows Under Armour founder Kevin Plank, a fellow Maryland alum. The potential is vast for partnerships.


► More: Alternative idea floated for Greer Stadium: City park


On the soccer front, a USL team is starting play in March and Nashville is pushing hard for an MLS team. O’Donnell has sold FieldTurf to similar projects in other states and said the revenue from tournaments and economic impact on the area could be enormous.


There’s no price tag yet, but for comparison’s sake, the Cal Ripken Experience in Pigeon Forge cost $22.5 million for six fields on 91 acres. Pigeon Forge reported $6.7 million in visitor spending in the first three months after it opened in 2016. Based on similar projects, O’Donnell said this one should be fully paid for within three to five years.


It’s an ambitious plan, one that sounds better and better as details emerge. Nashville’s leaders ought to listen.


Contact Joe Rexrode at jrexrode@tennessean.com and follow him on Twitter @joerexrode.


 


 


 
