Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Nashville businessman David Fox, who came in second in the 2015 mayor's race, says he's passing on a run for mayor this year, citing the financial strains and family stress of a bid and difficult odds to win a short campaign.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Nashville mayoral cadidate David Fox speaks to his supporters at an election watch party, explaining the major differences between himself and mayoral candidate Megan Barry on various community issues.
    Jae Lee / The Tennessean

David Fox
(Photo: The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Nashville businessman David Fox, who came in second in the 2015 mayoral election runoff, says he's passing on a run for mayor this year, citing the financial strains and family stress of a bid and difficult odds to win a short campaign. 


Fox announced his decision in a post on his Facebook page Thursday morning, becoming the latest to turn down a bid. 


"While I would like to run and would love to be mayor of Nashville because it’s an extraordinary platform from which to help people and to ensure that our city is in good shape, I have decided not to enter the race," Fox said. "Several factors persuade me not to run: the personal financial cost of a campaign, the difficult odds of winning in a very short campaign, and the stress a campaign puts on the family."


Fox's decision comes the day after Councilwoman Erica Gilmore announced plans to challenge Mayor David Briley in the Aug. 2 election, which was triggered when former Mayor Megan Barry resigned on March 6.


► More: Councilwoman Erica Gilmore launches run for Nashville mayor


► More: David Briley announces run for Nashville mayor in August election


Over the past two weeks, Nashville businessman and former mayoral candidate Bill Freeman, At-large Councilman John Cooper, Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall and businessman Stuart McWhorter have each declined runs. 


Fox, in his statement, called Briley a "good person with a great family," and said they became friends 14 years ago when their sons were born just hours apart at Baptist Hospital.


And yet he pointed to different philosophies between the two when it comes to spending.


"Any differences I have with David are only on policy issues," Fox said. "Still, I think it’s important that we have a mayor who recognizes we are overspending our way into trouble."


After initially staying out of the public eye after the 2015 election, Fox became a fierce critic of Barry's May 1 referendum tax proposal to pay for a $5.4 billion transit plan — a proposal now backed by Briley. 


Fox pointed to Metro government spending that is currently up 6 percent from last year versus inflation that is 1 percent population growth as well as dwindling city reserves.


"Good fiscal management should prompt us to be more disciplined in our spending, but I’m afraid the path we are on now will just lead to hikes in our property taxes," Fox said. 


►More: Ex-mayoral candidate David Fox lends hand to PAC fighting Mayor Barry's transit referendum


Fox went on to say he would "enthusiastically support" jeff obafemi carr — a community activist and consultant who is working for the anti-transit referendum campaign NoTax4Tracks — if he chooses to run. Carr has pulled qualifying papers but has not said whether he will launch a bid. 


"I've known Jeff for years and know him to be an excellent person who has dedicated his life to helping others, beginning with his student leadership at TSU decades ago," Fox said. "And Jeff is fiscally conservative enough to keep us out of financial trouble."


Fox, a former hedge fund operator, has continued to trade in the financial markets professionally after his 2015 mayoral run. Fox, who pulled support from many conservatives and Republican voters, lost to Barry by 10 percentage points in the runoff election after coming in second among seven candidates the month before. 


Reach Joey Garrison at jgarrison@tennessean.com or 615-259-8236 and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 
