Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

After multiple votes, the Davidson County Election Commission decided to play the mayoral race on the August ballot.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Attorney Jamie Hollin speaks at Friday's election commission meeting as attorney Jim Roberts, left, looks on.
(Photo: Joey Garrison / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Nashville's next mayoral election is officially set for the Aug. 2 ballot following action Friday by the Davidson County Election Commission, but the split decision came after two lawyers representing Nashville residents argued a special election should instead occur in May.


It sets up what could be a legal challenge seeking an expedited ruling to overturn the decision and force a sooner vote.


Along party lines, the GOP-majority election commission voted 3-2 to add the mayoral election to this year's August ballot, creating what would be a five-month sprint to decide the future of the mayor's office, currently held by David Briley. The former vice mayor replaced Mayor Megan Barry, whose resignation Tuesday prompted the new election.


The three Republican-appointed commissioners, led by chairman Jim DeLanis, voted for adding the election to the August ballot and the two outnumbered Democrats voted to add it to the May 1 ballot. 


Commissioner Tricia Herzfeld, one of the Democrats, made a motion to file a declaratory judgment in court asking that a judge to make the final call on an election date. But DeLanis said the commission should follow the advice of the Metro Department of Law, which recommended the August date.


"Should we disregard the advice of our lawyers, disregard the advice of the state election commission, I just don't think it would be wise," DeLanis said. He added that the law department has "in the past given us good advice and we've followed it." 


Jim DeLanis (Photo: The Tennessean)

"I just don't think this situation is any different. I don't think we should change a position that we've already taken and embark on a course that we've never taken before."


► Read more: David Briley announces run for Nashville mayor in August election


► More on the new mayor: Meet David Briley, the man who became Nashville mayor after Megan Barry's resignation


► Why the election is needed: Nashville Mayor Megan Barry resigns from office as part of guilty plea to felony theft charge


Herzfeld, an attorney who works at the Democratic-connected law firm Branstetter Stranch and Jennings, disagreed, saying "every lawyer I've talked to" believes May is the correct election date.


"I'm not trying to upset the apple cart here," she said. "I'm just trying to proceed cautiously here in a way that I think we can get an answer.


"The thing that appears to be clear to me is that this is going to court one way or another." 


Briley announced his candidacy for mayor Thursday. At-large Councilwoman Erica Gilmore, one of the city's top African-American leaders, has appointed a treasurer to run for mayor. Others including businessman Bill Freeman and At-large Councilman John Cooper are exploring runs. 


In recommending an August date, Metro attorneys pointed to a part of the Metro Charter that says that an election to replace a mayor must take place during the next general metropolitan election unless it is more than 12 months away.



Davidson County Election Commissioner Tricia Herzfeld
 (Photo: 
George Walker IV / THE TENNESSEAN
)

The city contends that the August election — which doesn't typically hold mayoral races, but does have Metro school board races, as well as elections for Metro officers such as register of deeds, sheriff and trustee, along with state party primaries — constitutes a Metro general election. Thus, they've argued for the Aug. 2 date.


"Both the August 2018 and the August 2019 general elections qualify as metropolitan general elections," said Metro attorney Nicki Eke, citing a 1983 Tennessee Supreme Court decision. "It established general metropolitan elections are not limited to the elections of every four years to elect a mayor."


The Tennessee Division of Election agreed with Metro's decision in an email this week.


But attorneys Jamie Hollin — representing Ludye Wallace, a former councilman who is now president of the local Nashville branch of the NAACP — and Jim Roberts, who spoke for himself, each took turns arguing Barry's exit should trigger a "special election.'


"We're filling a vacancy of not just any office, but the office of mayor that the charter treats uniquely over any other office in Metro or the county," Hollin said. "You don't need a law degree to figure it out. I bet a group of fourth-graders could figure it out."


The Davidson County Election Commission meets on Friday, March 9, 2018. (Photo: Joey Garrison / The Tennessean)

By state law, a "special election" must occur between 75 and 80 days of an officeholder's exit, a scenario that would set up an election between May 21 and May 25. That would occur three weeks after Nashville's May 1 election, which is typically considered a county primary election, but this year has a countywide vote on a referendum on funding a $5.4 billion transit plan.


Hollin highlighted a part in the charter that says "for the purpose of election of a mayor" there shall be "a general metropolitan election" every four years after the first Thursday in August 1971. The next such election is not until August 2019, meaning a "special election" would have to take place because it is more than 12 months away.


A taste of the legal case from @jrhollinpic.twitter.com/PZtCaUgzUe

He said the upcoming August election is not a metropolitan general election because it does not fall under the same four-year pattern for electing mayors.


Hollin also pointed to a Metro charter amendment, approved by Davidson County voters in 2007, that says a special election is required to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor or council whenever more than 12 months are left in an unexpired term. Barry's old term has more than 18 months remaining. 


"The point is this, there are two ways to elect a mayor in Davidson County: at the metropolitan general election, which is every four years," Hollin said. "The other way is through a 'special election.'"


Roberts, who also addressed the commission, indicated in a Thursday letter he would pursue litigation if the election commission chose August. 


Hollin also made clear he would likely sue Metro.


"I don't like to threaten litigation, but monitor the courthouse Monday," he said after Friday's vote.


Hollin has made a similar argument in court before, and lost. He was the attorney who, on behalf of a Nashville resident, sued the election commission in 2016 after the commission voted against setting a "special election" to replace Councilman Loniel Greene following his resignation. The election was instead held in August of that year.


Davidson County Circuit Court Judge Amanda McClendon threw out the case because she said the plaintiff lacked standing. However, she also agreed with Metro's interpretation of what is a general metropolitan election.


"A general metropolitan election is one in which Metro has an office on the ballot for general election and is not limited to those elections where the mayor, vice-mayor, thirty-five council representatives and five at-large representatives are elected," McClendon wrote in her 2016 ruling. 


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twittet @joeygarrison. 
