Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The money would go toward extra personnel and transportation Hall said would be necessary to secure inmates in private hospitals.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Nashville General Hospital has renovated its emergency room.
    Larry McCormack / The Tennessean

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall
(Photo: Tennessean)Buy Photo

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall said this month that his department would have to spend an extra $3.5 million annually if Nashville General Hospital at Meharry ended inpatient care, as Mayor Megan Barry has proposed.


The money would go toward extra personnel and transportation Hall said would be necessary to secure inmates in private hospitals across the city.


Nashville General is an attractive option for the sheriff's office because it has a locked, secured ward that is only used for inmates. In that environment, Hall said, one deputy could supervise up to seven inmates.


“If you take those same seven inmates and move them to Vanderbilt (University Medical Center) and St Thomas (hospitals) … then we’re going to have to put two officers with those inmates in individual rooms," Hall said.


The sheriff's office monitors five to seven inmates at Nashville General per day. Hall said his department did not currently have the staffing needed to accommodate shifting those inmates to private hospitals.


Hall discussed his concerns during a November meeting with Metro Council members.


► More: Nashville council demands more answers from Mayor Barry on hospital overhaul


But the sheriff said he had not talked with the mayor about the issue.


“We weren’t asked," he said. “No one had asked us and nor did I think had it been considered."


Barry's spokesman Sean Braisted said on Wednesday that "stakeholders will be convened to help develop the model of care and plans of implementation over the coming weeks and months."


Braisted added that no changes to the current model would be made during the current fiscal year.


Barry proposed phasing out inpatient care at Nashville General earlier this month, citing the institution's long-running financial problems. Critics have blasted the surprise announcement of the plan — council members and hospital authority board members said they had not been briefed. 


Reach Adam Tamburin at 615-726-5986 and atamburin@tennessean.com. Follow him on Twitter @tamburintweets.
