Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall says he plans to run for reelection next year as he seeks a fifth term.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Country singer Wynonna Judd is one of dozens of country stars arrested for DUI since the CJC opened in 1982. But she’s believed to be the only one who serenaded her fellow arrestees in the CJC holding area after getting booked, Sheriff Daron Hall sai
    

Daron Hall
(Photo: George Walker IV / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall says he plans to run for re-election next year as he seeks a fifth term in the office that oversees Nashville's jails. 


Hall, first elected in 2002, said he plans to pick up papers at the Davidson County Election Commission next week to make another run as a Democrat for the seat. Nashville's local primary is in May. 


His reelection bid, which had been widely speculated, comes as Metro is overseeing the reconstruction of the city's downtown jail, known as the Criminal Justice Center, and as Hall has increasingly discussed reforms for inmates with mental illness. 


More: Sheriff: No plans to change detention practices if Nashville immigration bill passes


"I think that with the criminal justice reforms, the political changes, and major jail construction all going on all at the same, I can think of no more critical time, at least in the world of criminal justice, in this job," Hall said. 


"We need someone who will be independent enough, but also be willing to listen to the people and think through what's best for the populations that we've served, and I hope that the people feel like I'm that person." 


Hall, who oversees an office of 900 employees and an $80 million budget, said his top priority today is the same as 15 years ago: reduce reasons people are in jail. Since taking office, Hall said Nashville has decreased jail beds by 30 percent.


He credited programs he's pushed regarding job placement, addictions, and mental health. In recent years, he said the number of inmates with mental illness has escalated to 40 percent, leading to a goal of his to "decriminalize mental illness" The new downtown jail will have a behavior care center aimed at the issue.


"There's plenty of work to do, but I hope that's what the people see," Hall said. "I tell people all the time: The police arrest the person and we're trying to arrest the problem."


But Hall, a moderate Democrat who turned down a run for mayor in 2015, has some critics, particularly on the left. He's faced pushback from immigrant advocates, most recently for opposing a Metro ordinance that sought to that sought to restrict the city's cooperation with federal immigration officials to change detention practices. The bill eventually died. 


"I think my job is to balance between the public's safety and trying to help those who are the most vulnerable," he said. "Sometimes that balance doesn't always settle perfectly with everybody, but that's not my job. I'm not trying to make everybody happy." 


Hall last year butted heads with Mayor Megan Barry over decision-making on the reconstruction of the Criminal Justice Center. He called it a "philosophical dispute" between the two offices and its roles.


Hall currently has a warchest of $151,799 for his campaign, according to the last round of financial disclosures submitted in June. Last month, his campaign conducted a telephone phone poll of Nashvillians that gauged public opinion on sheriff's office issues. 


He said he expects to face an opponent next year, but no other candidates have announced bids so far. 


If Hall wins the Democratic Primary in May, he would compete in the general election in August. Hall won his reelection easily in  2014, beating K. D."Kenny" Hardy by a margin of 80 percent to 19 percent. 


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.
