Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A message from a grateful son to his departed dad about the changes in Nashville over the decades.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Father’s Day is a well-known tradition celebrated by many, but when did the actual holiday begin? Buzz60's Sam Berman has the full story.
    Buzz60

Metro Council member Sherman Hunt, center, talks with U.S. Rep. Richard Fulton, left, during Hunt's run for Davidson County sheriff in 1964.
(Photo: Frank Empson / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Dear Dad,


We haven’t talked in a long while.


Honestly, Father’s Day still comes a little too close to Memorial Day for me. Three weekends ago when I was out at National Cemetery, standing among the white stones on the south side of Madison, it seemed to me we have a lot to catch up on this year.


Especially this year. So much is happening in our world. I wonder what you would make of all this.


You always had a clear fix on things, or so I thought. As far as I was concerned, you could fix anything and knew everything — having come of age as you did in the hard times of Depression, then off to a frightening war for other people’s freedom far away.


You learned about life and loss at an early age. Too many of your chums from East High School didn’t come back from World War II.


You came back, but in later years your mom told me stories of what it was like on your return — not unlike what many veterans knew then and know now. How, after the fighting is done, the demons sometimes come back with you.


► Read More: When Nashville's way-finders lose their way | Hunt


As they did on that day downtown when you and your pal, another vet, were walking down Fifth Avenue near the Arcade. Suddenly a panhandler on the sidewalk shook his can of coins, and in a flash you two hit the deck — instinctively certain it was more enemy gunfire.


Life went on. College on the GI Bill. Marriage and fatherhood, then Korea and back.


As happened with many veterans, you got into politics. Working inside the eastside machine, you took a seat on the City Council and spoke out for city-county consolidation. The Metro Charter referendum finally passed, in 1962.


That was the year our family friend, Richard Fulton, went to Congress, overcoming (with the crusading of this newspaper) the ballot-stuffing fraud in the old Second Ward.


Fulton followed Beverly Briley as mayor in 1975, and the city continued to change.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Looking back, I wonder what might surprise you most about how our hometown has evolved to the present day.


Might it be that Fulton, ever handsome, has silver hair now? Or that we have another “Mayor Briley,” grandson of Briley the First?


Speaking of generations, it would please you to know you are a great-grandfather now, as I’m a grandfather thrice.


Would it alarm you to know that downtown Nashville has become a theme park?


► Read More: Donald Trump blew in, blew up, and smeared Phil Bredesen, a good man | Opinion


Would it please you to know that we have NFL football?


The first Super Bowl, in 1967, was your last. This year was Super Bowl LII. In 2000 our Titans came within one arm’s length (literally) of winning Super Bowl XXXIV.


Would it amaze you to know we have NHL hockey, too? (I’m not making this up. Somehow the ice stays frozen at a cool place called Bridgestone Arena.)


Pro baseball is still Triple-A in Nashville, and that’s still just fine. The stadium on the north side is new. Yet what happens there continues to be the stuff a child’s dreams are made of — as it was back in the magical time on those evenings you took me inside Sulphur Dell.


Keel Hunt (Photo: Submitted)

Would it disappoint you to know we still struggle in Nashville with issues that are very old: poverty and housing, hunger and health, and how to repair our schools and save our children?


Those remain thickets of discord even now, but our journey through them is peopled, as in your day, by folks who think hard and humanely about them. The difference now: More people are at the table, and ought to be.


What is sure to save us, in fact, is the blessing of a public spirit, a shared sense of the common good, and stout hearts of the type you and Fulton knew. We still have all that, in abundance.


On Father’s Day 2018, nearly 51 years since you’ve been gone, my personal memories are yet vivid, vital and strong. And so, at its core, is your city.


With much love,


Keel


Keel Hunt is a columnist for the USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee. Reach him at Keel@TSGNashville.com.


 
