Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Former conservative radio talk show host Ralph Bristol says he is running for mayor to represent opponents of Nashville's transit referendum plan.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mayor Megan Barry pleaded guilty to felony theft or property over $10,000 in criminal court this morning. She agreed to reimburse the city, and serve three years probation.
    Kyleah Dunn/ USA Today Network - Tennessee

Ralph Bristol
(Photo: Submitted)

With opponents of Nashville's transit referendum lacking a candidate in the current mayoral field, retired conservative radio talk show host Ralph Bristol says he's stepping up and running for Nashville mayor.


Bristol, former host of Nashville's Morning News on Supertalk 99.7 WTN, announced on Facebook Monday morning that he will run in the August election that was triggered following the resignation of former Mayor Megan Barry last month. He confirmed his intentions to The Tennessean. 


RALPH BRISTOL: Nashville mayoral candidate defends racial profiling in front of largely black audience


"I was hoping that a much better known, more traditional candidate who opposes the transit tax would run," Bristol said, singling out Bill Freeman, David Fox and At-large Councilman John Cooper, who each opposes the transit referendum but declined on mayoral bids.


"I think someone who has at least some name recognition, some ability to attract some attention, needs to represent that side of the argument in the mayor's race. Since no one else that I thought was reputedly qualified would step forward to do it, and I had the opportunity and the time to do so, I decided that I would."


Bristol, 68, is known as a hard-line conservative who is aligned politically with tea party politics. In January, he departed 99.7 FM, citing an "editorial difference of opinions" with the radio network's management. He is currently retired.


He'll be challenged to compete on the fundraising side of the campaign. But he said he won't need to raise a lot of money.


"Even a moderately financed candidate because of the transit tax and the need to have more open government has a chance of winning against Mayor Briley and the government that is seated now," Bristol said. "I don't even intend to raise a lot of money. I don't intend to conduct a traditional campaign. I'm going to conduct it bright and early on social media. I'm going to produce a lot of videos and get my supporters, friends and fans to spread those until the message grows."


Bristol, who resides in Donelson, has never run for public office. Earlier this year, he was exploring a Republican challenge against state Sen. Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville, before ultimately passing.


Bristol could face an uphill race given that Nashville has historically elected Democrats to the nonpartisan mayor's office. Despite Davidson County's leanings, another conservative activist is also weighing a bid. Former Vanderbilt University Professor Carol Swain told The Tennessee Star she plans to pick up qualifying papers to run on Monday and will make a decision this week.


Candidates have until Thursday to qualify to run.


"My two main issues are the transit issue and open government," Bristol said. "I think the city needs to open up its government and allow the public to view it much more closely. As they say, you don't necessarily want to watch the sausage being made. Well, I think we should watch the sausage being made. And I'm going to let the public watch the sausage being made."


Briley, the former vice mayor, announced his candidacy just after taking over the mayor's office after Barry's exit. At-large Councilwoman Erica Gilmore is also running for mayor. Freeman, Cooper, Fox and Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall have each passed on runs in recent days.


Nashville NAACP President Ludye Wallace has qualified to run for mayor, while former Councilman Roy Dale and activist and transit referendum opponents jeff obafemi carr have both picked up qualify papers.


NASHVILLE ELECTIONS: Councilwoman Erica Gilmore launches run for Nashville mayor


NASHVILLE MAYOR'S RACE: David Fox says he won't run for mayor of Nashville in August election


NASHVILLE POLITICS: 2 more names join Nashville mayoral race discussion; another says he won't run


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 


 
