Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Saint Thomas Health expects to begin construction this fall. The facility could open as soon as 2020.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Saint Thomas Health plans to build a new hospital dedicated to mental health in Metro Central.
    Brett M Kelman, The Tennessean

Tim Adams, President and CEO of St. Thomas Health, stands outside the St. Thomas Health Services Corporate Office building on Tuesday, May 8, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn. St. Thomas is opening a new facility to treat behavioral health patients.
(Photo: Mark Zaleski/ For the Tennessean)Buy Photo

Saint Thomas Health is planning a new 76-bed behavioral health treatment center in Nashville's Metro Center area, relieving crowding at Davidson County emergency rooms where patients with mental disorders often wait more than a day for psychiatric treatment.


The Nashville hospital chain expects to begin building the $32 million facility on an empty 5-acre lot at 300 Great Circle Road this fall. It could open in early 2020.


Officials say it can't come soon enough.


“There are people in our ERs right now that need a bed,” Saint Thomas CEO Tim Adams told The Tennessean this week. “Many times, they get left in the ER for hours and sometimes days, unfortunately, because of our inability to find a place for them. So we are really just meeting a community need.”


MORE: What happens when Nashville police respond to calls about mental illness


MORE: Mental health crises in Nashville grow, prompting plans for a new 'psychiatric ER'


The plan for the new hospital has been submitted to the state government, which now must verify that the facility is necessary before approving construction. As proposed, the hospital would offer 40 beds for adult psychiatric treatment and 36 beds for geriatric patients. Saint Thomas also plans to close 24 geriatric beds at its existing Saint Thomas West facility, leaving Nashville with a net gain of 52 beds dedicated to mental health care.


Saint Thomas Health plans to build a 76-bed mental health hospital in Nashville. This hospital is expected to be similar in design to this rendering of a related facility being built in Chattanooga. (Photo: Provided by Saint Thomas Health)

Adams said state approval is expected.


“There is a huge crisis going on nationally and in Middle Tennessee,” Adams said, adding later: “It would be hard to argue that there is not a need in the community.”


The new hospital has been proposed at a time when Nashville’s need for mental health treatment has likely never been greater. As the city grows at a booming pace, experts say options for mental health treatment have fallen behind, pushing treatment out of reach for many low-income and uninsured residents. Without more specialized facilities, most mental health patients end up mixed in with the physically sick and injured at hospital emergency rooms, waiting to be transferred to somewhere with more appropriate psychiatric services.


MORE: Mental health crises grows, prompting plans for a new 'psychiatric ER'


RELATED: Need drug treatment in Tennessee? Then 'cash money talks'


This wait averages about 25 hours statewide, according to 2017 study by Tennessee's mental health department. And wait times are not much better in Davidson County, which has been designated a “mental health professional shortage area” for low-income residents by the federal government for the past four years.


“Nashville is not unlike a lot of large cities that are growing,” said Amanda Bracht, a senior official with the Mental Health Cooperative, a treatment network that is unaffiliated with the new hospital. “Over the last few years, the number of psychiatric beds in the Middle Tennessee region has simply not been able to keep up with the demand for those services.”


Bracht said the mental health shortage is also widely viewed as a root cause of Tennessee’s opioid crisis, with many addictions beginning after the undiagnosed or the untreated turn to drugs to self-medicate. In other cases, patients are prescribed an opiate for a legitimate ailment, but turn to abuse when they are unable to find the corresponding psychiatric treatment.


“It has a snowball effect,” Bracht said. “What starts as a legitimate prescription turns into to something that is masking their need for mental health treatment.”


MORE: Tennessee governor unveils $30M plan to combat opioid crisis


Maybe nowhere is that more obvious than in county jails.


“Nashville may be the ‘it’ city, but we sure don’t do this very well.”


Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall, a vocal advocate for increasing mental health services, has said repeatedly that about one third of the inmates in Nashville jails are eventually diagnosed with some sort of mental illness. Hall added Wednesday that the shortage of treatment options is so severe that some families — even families that can afford medical services — will call the police on their mentally-ill loved ones because a jail stay will at least provide a safe space and a psychiatric assessment. Inmates may get help, but the price is a criminal record.


“It is a terrible solution,” Hall said. “Nashville may be the ‘it’ city, but we sure don’t do this very well.”


Fortunately, at least some new options are on the horizon. The sheriff’s department is currently building a 64-bed behavioral care center to serve as an alternative to jail for mentally ill residents who must be taken into custody. A separate 20-bed facility, sometimes referred to as a "psychiatric emergency room," is also under construction at the Mental Health Cooperative campus in Metro Center. And now, less than a half a mile from that campus, Saint Thomas has planned its new mental health hospital.


“The stars are aligning,” Hall said when told about the new hospital. “When you get all three of these things up and running, honestly, maybe we can make a dent."


If built, the new hospital will become the tenth Saint Thomas facility in Middle Tennessee, but the first dedicated wholly to mental health. The hospital has been planned through a partnership with Acadia, a massive behavioral health company headquartered in Franklin, and would be similar in design and organization to another Acadia facility currently under construction in Chattanooga.


Tim Adams, President and CEO of St. Thomas Health, and Amber Sims, Chief Strategy Officer, talk about the opening of a new facility to treat behavioral health patients on Tuesday, May 8, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn., at the St. Thomas Health Services Corporate Office building.  (Photo: Mark Zaleski/ For the Tennessean)

Like other Saint Thomas facilities, the new hospital will accept nearly all insurances and Medicaid. Amber Sims, the company’s chief strategy officer, said the hospital will also offer charity care to low-income and uninsured residents, who are often last in line for mental health treatment.


“Our responsibility as Saint Thomas Health is to care for those who are poor and vulnerable,” Sims said. “And, in particular, we view this set of patients as very vulnerable. Therefore we see this as our obligation to the community to provide this resource.”


Brett Kelman is the health care reporter for The Tennessean. He can be reached at 615-259-8287 or at bmkelman@gannett.com.
