Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The city's pretrial release program identifies "low-risk" suspects, who have a high likelihood of returning to court and avoiding arrest.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


File image
(Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto)

After nearly two years of work, $350,000 in grant funding and pressure from an advocacy group, city officials have adopted new procedures that will let more inmates get out of jail without paying a money bail.


The city's pretrial release program, run by the Davidson County Sheriff's Office, identifies "low-risk" suspects, who have a high likelihood of returning to court and avoiding arrest while they await trial. Those defendants are then allowed to leave jail without paying a cash bail.


This week, the city started using new, broader guidelines that will ultimately let more people qualify for that program. The work was supported by a state grant, and involved negotiations between the sheriff, prosecutors, public defenders and judges.


More: Inside the effort to change Nashville's cash bail system — and avoid a lawsuit


Sheriff Daron Hall praised the new procedures, saying they were guided by external and internal research that showed money bail didn't increase the likelihood that people would show up for their court dates. Instead, he said, money bail made it more likely poor people would be stuck in jail longer than rich people with the same charge.


“There has never been any proof that someone’s ability to pay is a predictor they are more likely to show up for court,” Hall said in a statement. “There is research, however, that shows people who remain in jail are more likely to be found guilty and serve more time. That means the system is putting a greater burden on financially disadvantaged individuals.”


Moving forward, judges and commissioners will use a tool that measures who is likely to return for a court date and who is likely to commit a crime before their court appearance, Hall's statement said. Based on the results, an inmate might be released without money bail.


Officials have been working toward the expansion since 2016, but efforts intensified after the Civil Rights Corps, a powerful criminal justice nonprofit, threatened to sue the city if progress wasn't made soon.


Reach Adam Tamburin at atamburin@tennessean.com and 615-726-5986. Follow him on Twitter @tamburintweets.
