Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Gov. Matt Bevin has plenty of nice things to say about Tennessee, but believes the state can take a cue from Kentucky on criminal justice reform.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Kentucky Gov. Matt Bevin started the commonwealth's pension reform effort last year.
    

President Donald Trump, right, and Kentucky Gov. Matt Bevin, left, talk Jan. 11, 2018, during a roundtable in the Roosevelt Room of the White House in Washington. The next day, the state announced that it received a waiver from the Trump administration that will allow it to require many of its Medcaid recipients to work.
(Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

Gov. Matt Bevin has plenty of complimentary things to say about the Volunteer State.


But when it comes to criminal justice reform, the Kentucky governor, a Republican, believes Tennessee can take a cue from their northern neighbor, which has passed legislation aimed at lowering recidivism and removing regulatory barriers to felons re-entering the workforce after prison.


To a room full of mostly conservatives Wednesday evening, including a couple dozen lawmakers, Bevin addressed politicians in office, calling on them to commit to pushing similar reforms in Tennessee even though the legislation is “not going to be perfect.”


“The most powerful way to get re-elected is to do the right thing,” Bevin said. “Do it with conviction.”


More: Tennessee Senate committees 'looking into' state safekeeping laws, says senate leader's spokesman


More: Special Report: Alone and afraid, Tennesseans not convicted of a crime spend months in solitary


Bevin spoke at a criminal justice reform forum hosted by Men of Valor, a Nashville faith-based organization offering prison ministry and mentoring to men currently or formerly incarcerated.


He suggested that Republicans could be the party that successfully spearhead criminal justice reform, an issue that, in many cases, has received bipartisan support in recent years but needs “bold leadership” to be implemented, Bevin said.


“Many liberals have long espoused the idea of doing something like this, but have done very little to anything on this front,” he said, noting that legislators don’t have to develop a comprehensive plan on the issue before moving forward with reform.


“You don’t have to do this overnight,” he said. “You really don’t. These are the kinds of things you can do in a piecemeal fashion.”


Bevin cited steps like forming a state council on the issue, such as the Criminal Justice Policy Assessment Council he created after taking office, or governments resolving to “ban the box,” leaving off criminal history questions on forms and applications.


Since Bevin took office, the state’s legislature passed a bill making it easier for felons to obtain occupational licenses and gain work experience while in prison, while also reducing probation and parole times for some offenders and keeping defendants from being jailed for inability to pay court costs.


He said he has made a point to issue pardons since not long after taking office, and urged Gov. Bill Haslam, with whom he met earlier in the day, to use his position to pursue changes to Tennessee's criminal justice system.


"Hold him to account on this too," Bevin told the room. "Call him to be part of this solution. Challenge him not to just be encouraging and supportive of you, but to step up."


Following Bevin's remarks was a panel discussion hosted by Charles Koch Institute fellow Vikrant Reddy. Panelists included Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall, Verna Wyatt, co-founder of Tennessee Voices for Victims, Anthony Charles, aftercare and re-entry manager for Men of Valor, and James Amundsen, deputy director of Americans for Prosperity - Tennessee.


Reach Natalie Allison at nallison@tennessean.com. Follow her on Twitter at @natalie_allison.
