Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The work has been simmering for a more than a year, but it boiled over in recent months after a powerful criminal justice nonprofit threatened to sue if progress wasn't made soon.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Musicians, politicians, actors, and writers discuss how they feel about America's prison system. They also discuss what can be done to help reverse the rate of re-incarceration.
    USA TODAY

Nashville leaders may change the bail system that keeps some criminal defendants in jail if they can't afford to pay their way out.
(Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto)

Under pressure from a high-profile national advocacy group, city leaders may change the bail system that keeps some criminal defendants in jail if they can't afford to pay their way out.


Officials want to expand programs that allow defendants to get out of jail cash-free and are also considering reforms to the way cash bail is set — reforms that theoretically would lead to fewer poor people waiting for a trial behind bars.


The work simmered for a more than a year, but boiled over in recent months after Civil Rights Corps, a powerful criminal justice nonprofit, threatened to sue if progress wasn't made soon. Representatives from Metro legal, the district attorney's office, the sheriff's office and the public defender's office have met to discuss significant changes that could go into effect in the early months of 2018.


► More: CoreCivic investigating allegations of negligent deaths at private prison


But the coalition is still negotiating how broad the expansion of cash-free releases should be. Some disagreements remain. And a slate of Nashville judges will have to approve the plan before any changes are final.


Work started in 2016 after Nashville got state grant funding to research the city's pretrial release program. Under the program, which is led through the Davidson County Sheriff's Office, some defendants are allowed to be released from jail without paying a cash bail. 


The funding led to the development of a new tool to determine if defendants were likely to appear in court and avoid additional arrests while they await trial, regardless of their ability to pay a cash bail. Key stakeholders have met to debate the factors that should go into determining people's eligibility for the program.


► Opinion: Davidson County must reform unconstitutional bail practices


The goal, Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall said, was to overhaul the longstanding program and grow it. He said the new tool would be an effective way to allow more defendants to get out of jail before their trial.


“Our goal should be for Nashville to make sure that people that are staying in jail awaiting trial do one of two things: Pose a serious risk to flee, to not appear in court, or a serious risk to our community,” Hall said. “Unfortunately there are a lot of poor people and people who pose very little risk to the community who stay in jails across the country because they can’t afford it.”


Civil Rights Corps, the nonprofit advocacy group, injected energy into the effort in a June letter to Metro legal that amounted to a legal warning shot.


In the letter, the group slammed Nashville's bail system as biased against the poor and pressed the city to fast-track broad changes in order to avoid "costly constitutional litigation in the federal courts."


The threat of legal action carried heft because Civil Rights Corps has sued other cities over what it considers unfair bail practices — and it has logged high-profile wins. A judge ruling on the group's lawsuit in Houston ordered the county to stop keeping people in jail on misdemeanor charges simply because they couldn't afford a money bail.


► More: Lawmakers reauthorize prison department amid ongoing criticism


Nashville Public Defender Dawn Deaner said the letter put a needed spotlight on the debate at a pivotal time.


“The letter has added some urgency to the issue and a level of seriousness to the issue,” she said. “It got people’s attention.”


In a response sent in September, Metro legal director Jon Cooper said the Nashville government was committed to growing the number of people in the pretrial release program and the number of people who are released without a money bond.


Cooper also said more work would be done to consider a defendant's ability to pay before a bond was set. And he noted related efforts that are underway, like the construction of a new mental health unit where some arrestees could be routed out of the criminal justice system to get treatment.


There have been disagreements about the scope of the expansion of pretrial release.


Deaner said she wants to see “a system in Nashville where nobody is kept in a cage pretrial because they don’t have the money to pay bail.”


In an interview, Davidson County District Attorney General Glenn Funk said he supports expanding pretrial release for defendants accused of non-violent crimes and crimes that don't have an individual victim. He said he saw merits to cash bail for violent charges like domestic assault.


“All of this is really a balancing issue,” he said.


“I think we have taken some significant steps toward trying to reach a consensus that would eliminate any unnecessary incarceration. But at the same time I don’t believe we should go to a system where cash bail is eliminated."


► From USA TODAY:  Policing the USA


Deaner rejected Funk's stance that cash bail decreases the likelihood that a defendant would skip a court hearing or get re-arrested. But both Deaner and Funk were optimistic that their negotiations would be productive.


Deaner expected the group to finalize a recommendation for Davidson County's general sessions judges in January.


If the judges approve of the plan, it could go into effect by March.


“In the end, whatever this group recommends to the judges is going to represent compromise," Deaner said. “We are trying to make progress and that’s what compromise represents."


Reach Adam Tamburin at 615-726-5986 and atamburin@tennessean.com. Follow him on Twitter @tamburintweets.


 
