Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Nashville Republican leaders are working to defeat the transit referendum, but they face internal strife.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Two groups leading the charge for and against the transit plan, Transit for Nashville and NoTax4Tracks, debate over the transit plan
    Tennessean

The Republican Party
(Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto)

Republican voters headed to the polls in Davidson County on May 1 will encounter a jarring fact. 


There are simply no Republicans to vote for in the county primary.


The Democratic ballot boasts 29 candidates for all the county offices. The Republicans didn’t manage one candidate for any office, and there are some big prizes up for grabs, including county sheriff, a slate of judgeships and court clerks. The number of Republican candidates is typically small, but there are usually a few.


I wondered what the Davidson County Republican Party was up to in the absence of candidates and reached out to Chairman Melissa Smithson to ask what the party’s strategy was for the primary.


“Historically, Republicans do not do well in countywide races across the county and we are working on changing that,” Smithson said, “but we are heavily involved in stopping former Mayor Barry's transit plan and have focused our efforts against the transit plan. We are gearing up for what seems to be a highly contested mayoral race.”


The Davidson County Republican Party's image, dwarfed in the best of times by its more numerous Democratic adversaries, has labored even more in the last year. The party elected in February 2017 a new chair, Tres Wittum, a former state chair of the College Republicans and a policy aide to Sen. Bo Watson of Chattanooga.


► Read More: Hubbard: Johnny Horton deserves to be inducted in Country Music Hall of Fame


To be transparent, I briefly attended the same college with Wittum and we were active together in a campus political organization during that time.


Wittum was challenged at the party convention on the grounds that he had not voted in prior county GOP primaries, even though he was registered to vote in Davidson County.


He survived the initial challenge, but was eventually declared ineligible by the state Republican executive committee.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Wittum had been challenged for the chairmanship in an earlier race, but the state party chairman at the time, Chris Devaney, granted Wittum a waiver, citing his extensive history of party activism in the state. Devaney later wrote a letter in support of Wittum’s 2017 bid.


“I am VERY disappointed to see no progress has been made in our party and that our state party over ruled our elections, in the name of what is good for our (county) party despite what we elected by ballot,” Wittum said in an email. “I find the (state party) administration and (state executive committee) members who voted to oust our elected leadership team responsible.”


► Read More: Opinion | Nashville's transit plan won't fix traffic congestion, but that's not the point


A statement from the state party called the decision “clear cut,” citing Wittum’s inactivity on the county level. “There is no shortage of opportunities for individuals to get involved and we encourage everyone including Mr. Wittum to attend."


Sen. Steve Dickerson, R-Nashville (Photo: Submitted)

So, what has the party been up to, aside from intra-party spats over Republican bona fides?


“We have sent out emails on several of the countywide candidates that have requested we send out information on their behalf to our Republican base,” Smithson said, “and we are pleased to see how many Republicans have voted early this election.”


The mayoral race and next year’s Metro Council elections that Smithson appears to want to focus on are nonpartisan, though known conservatives are running in the May 24 mayoral race. The party’s efforts against the transit referendum seem mostly confined to social media posts.


The party in the home county of Republicans House Speaker Beth Harwell and state Sen. Steve Dickerson should be better than this.


House Speaker Beth Harwell (Photo: Submitted)

The DCRP may never be the majority party in the county, but you can’t win races for which no candidates were run, and while Wittum’s detractors may be correct, the fight clearly has not invigorated the DCRP at all, and resulted in the excommunication of surely one of the most qualified party chairmen Davidson County has seen.


Those who call themselves Republicans in Davidson County, and even conservative-leaning Democrats and independents, should be disturbed that the party’s own leadership seems willing to surrender the county offices without even token opposition.


For now, the best choice Davidson County Republicans will have is to vote with the Democrats.


Alex Hubbard is a columnist for the USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee. Email him at dhubbard@tennessean.com. 


 
