Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Tennessean editorial board is meeting with mayoral candidates and will host a forum on May 2. Plus, a recap of endorsements for the May 1 election.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The Tennessean Editorial Board endorses the Nashville transit plan after weighing the arguments, sponsoring a debate and meeting with multiple groups.
    

The Davidson County primary is Tuesday, and the special mayoral election is May 24.
(Photo: Jae S. Lee / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Last Monday The Tennessean Editorial Board started meeting with candidates for Metro Nashville mayor running in the May 24 special election.


The resignation of former Mayor Megan Barry on March 6 led to the scenario where there are now 13 people vying to replace her and fill out the term until the next election in August 2019.


The candidates include longtime elected officials, an academic, a former conservative radio host, and ordinary citizens who say they have something to offer. 


Among them is Mayor David Briley, who as the elected vice mayor assumed the post in the interim.


At the end of every interview to date, our editorial board members — comprising Editor Michael A. Anastasi, Executive Editor Maria De Varenne and me — have thanked each candidate, regardless of political experience, because stepping up in the service of the public takes selflessness, dedication and commitment.


Read More: Nashville mayor's race: 13 candidates qualify as deadline passes


That is why we are going through this interview process with the goal of offering a recommendation to voters before the election.


The most important thing, though, is to ensure citizens are informed, and that is why we are hosting with WSMV News 4 a mayoral forum from 5:15 to 7:15 p.m. Wednesday at the Nashville Public Library's downtown branch on Sixth Avenue and Church Street.


We will be dividing candidates into three groups to allow them time to answer questions to the best of their ability. WSMV news anchor Chris Miller and I will moderate, and while we have questions in mind, we are certainly accepting your suggestions.


You can get tickets at forum.tennessean.com or watch live on Tennessean.com or WSMV.com.


And, of course, the day before is the May 1 Davidson County primary election. 


That is your last chance to vote on the Nashville transit plan and, if you take the Democratic ballot, to vote on 12 local offices from judges to sheriff and from several clerk posts to register of deeds.


Below, please find the editorial board's endorsements, but again, we recommend most of all to go into the precinct with open eyes. Last Sunday, we ran an extensive explanation for why we made these recommendations, and you can read those at tennessean.com/opinion.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Nashville transit plan: Vote yes


Read More: Editorial | Nashville transit plan a bold step forward


What we said last week:


"(T)o build a city that is positioned to grow and thrive while addressing a widening and accelerating gap between rich and poor, the transit plan provides the tools for prosperity. The costs will only get greater the longer we wait.


"This is not just about transportation. This is about creating opportunity for all, and making a massive investment in the future of the city for an incredible public good.


"This plan is a thoughtful road map toward an ambitious network that will spur other counties to follow suit."


Candidates:


Read More: Editorial | Tennessean Editorial Board endorsement for May 1 Nashville election


Unopposed races:


We endorse all four candidates.


Contested races:


On Tuesday, voters must vote at their assigned precinct. Check your voter registration card or contact the Davidson County Election Commission at 615-862-8800 or vote.questions@nashville.com.


David Plazas is the director of opinion and engagement for the USA TODAY NETWORK – Tennessee and opinion and engagement editor for The Tennessean. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.


 
