Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A majority of Metro Council members are urging Nashville's law department to support an expedited review by the Tennessee Supreme Court of an appeal challenging the election date for the city's next mayoral election currently set for Aug. 2.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mayor Megan Barry pleaded guilty to felony theft or property over $10,000 in criminal court this morning. She agreed to reimburse the city, and serve three years probation.
    Kyleah Dunn/ USA Today Network - Tennessee

A majority of Metro Council members are urging Nashville's law department to support an expedited review by the Tennessee Supreme Court of an appeal challenging the election date for the city's next mayoral election currently set for Aug. 2.
(Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

A majority of Metro Council members are urging Metro Nashville Department of Law to support an expedited review by the Tennessee Supreme Court of an appeal challenging the election date for the city's next mayoral election currently set for Aug. 2. 


In a letter Tuesday night addressed to Metro Law Director Jon Cooper, 21 council members say they want the legal department of Mayor David Briley's administration to support the lawsuit being taken up immediately by the high court.


Council members point to cost concerns if the election is forced in May instead of August, which they say would have "wide-ranging implications for all our departments."


"We take no position on the merits of the case but want the Supreme Court to grant the request for expedited review," the council members' letter reads. "It is of paramount important to have this legal question resolved as quickly as possible, and with absolute certainty.


"Should the Supreme Court's verdict force a special election, a delayed decision may result in Metro being impelled to incur the added expense and inconvenience of a second election in May, whereas a swift determination may allow such an election to be held concurrently with the already-scheduled May 1 election." 


More: Judge rules to keep Nashville mayoral election in August


More: Plaintiff in Nashville mayoral election case appeals to Tennessee Supreme Court in hopes for May vote


More: Lawsuit: Nashville mayoral election must be in May, not August


The letter comes after the Supreme Court on Monday ordered Metro attorneys to respond by Wednesday to the plaintiff's emergency motion for the Supreme Court to assume jurisdiction in the case. 


Plaintiff Luyde Wallace, head of the local chapter of the NAACP, a former councilman and a qualified candidate, sued the Davidson County Election Commission earlier this month, arguing a special election should be triggered in May. His attorneys have taken the case to the state's high court after Davidson County Chancellor Claudia Bonnyman dismissed the suit last week. 


In a sign that the Supreme Court might take up the case, the court has asked Metro to provide a timeline of all dates necessary to adjudicate the case, including deadlines for mailing of absentee and military ballots, voter registration, and early voting. 


Typically, an appeal would be made to the Tennessee Court of Appeals, but Wallace's attorneys, Jamie Hollin and Daniel Horwitz, say the case qualifies as "a matter of unusual public importance."


The election is required following the exit of former Mayor Megan Barry, who resigned on March 6 as party of a guilty plea of felony theft related to her nearly two-year affair with her former police bodyguard. 


The Metro Charter says an election to fill a vacancy in the mayor's office must take place during the next general metropolitan election unless it is more than 12 months away.


The city has argued that this year's August election — which has Davidson County court clerk, sheriff and register of deeds races but doesn't historically have a race for mayor  — is a type of general metropolitan election, and thus the mayoral election should take place then. 


Attorneys for Wallace have argued that this year's August election is not a general metropolitan election and that the next one is not until August 2019, which by state law they say means a special election is required between 75 or 80 days following Barry's exit. That would put the election date between May 20 and May 24.


Under state law, if another election occurs prior to those dates, the special election could take place then. Metro's local primary election is on May 1. 


Nashville Mayor David Briley, the former vice mayor who replaced Barry, has announced he will run for the mayor in August. But several other potential candidates have not revealed their intentions. Briley's mayoral term, the vacated term of Barry, expires in August 2019, when another mayoral election will be held.


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennesesan.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison. 


 
