Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Ben Freeland has been the main catalyst in Antioch's rebirth after the mall closed, community leaders say

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Meet Antioch businessman Ben Freeland and his family through the years
    Brad Schmitt/The Tennessean

Ben Freeland, the owner of Freeland Chevrolet and other nearby properties, has been influential in the revitalization of the Antioch area.
(Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

South Nashville community leaders decided if Antioch doesn't look like garbage, they won't be treated like garbage.


The place to start, community leaders decided — Let’s clean up some of these trashed, overgrown, abandoned properties.


More than 100 people showed one day eight years ago to clean up, including a new guy to the area, Ben Freeland. He'd just bought an old car dealership with a bad reputation, Bill Heard Chevrolet.


Freeland helped organize the event, and the millionaire and his two sons jumped into the middle of the mess, sawing and raking and cleaning.


► More:   Ben Freeland buys Antioch's Chrysler Dodge Jeep Ram site for $6.75M


► More:  Business to donate $15,000 monthly


“He was all in,” said Judi Petty, 70, a business/community activist who has worked with Freeland since the Florida businessman moved here 10 years ago.


"One hundred percent in.”


Freeland has been all in on Antioch ever since.


Though he blanches at the recognition, several community and business leaders say Freeland is the catalyst to explosive growth in the 37013 ZIP code after Hickory Hollow Mall died in 2008.


Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall has been connected to Antioch businessman Ben Freeland for years. Freeland sits on Hall's advisory board on dealing with inmates with mental illness. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

“I don’t think we could’ve achieved the success we’ve had without having someone like him advocating for this area,” said Metro Councilwoman Jacobia Dowell, who represents the area.


“I don’t think the development would’ve happened without him,” Petty said. “He has been extremely instrumental in bringing the community together.”


Sheriff Daron Hall, who grew up in Antioch, said of Freeland: "I can think of no one more important to its success."


Freeland’s first set of wheels was a Big Wheel he got at 6 years old. The boy was so excited about his ride that he pedaled it about a mile down a four-lane highway to show it to some friends.


Ben Freeland got a Big Wheel when he was 6. (Photo: Submitted)

A neighbor called his parents to let them know to pick up their fearless son.


A year after that, Freeland, not quite 8 years old, launched his first business venture, Ben’s Pickles.


“I liked pickles so I thought everyone likes pickles,” he said, laughing.


The boy would buy jars, rip off the labels and replace them with Ben’s Pickles labels, load them into a wagon and sell them door to door in their rural community outside Fort Myers, Fla.


Ben Freeland, back right, around age 15, on his brother's farm with high school friends Joe Travis and Scott Decamp. The three friends are still in touch (Photo: Submitted)

He saved every penny, stashing cash into holes in closet walls or wherever he thought his older brothers couldn’t find it. (Freeland would sometimes lend his brothers money — and charge interest.)


School always was easy for Freeland — until his parents divorced when he was in seventh grade.


“He was a very angry 12-year-old,” Freeland’s older sister, Susan Rice, said. “It was a really difficult time. My parents had been married 20 years.”


Freeland’s independent streak grew. Out in the country, years before he got a driver’s license, Freeland learned to drive, on automatic and manual transmission vehicles. He opened a checking account with $700 in eighth grade, the first step to buying his first car.


In between football and basketball games and practices, Freeland kept creating small ways to make money.


The night before he turned 16, Freeland slept in his clothes so he could be first in line at the motor vehicle department to get his license.


Ben Freeland at 16 bought his first car ever, a 1970 Mustang, for $500. It had rusted floorboards. (Photo: Submitted)

He bought an old maroon Mustang with rusted-out floors for $500.


“You could see the ground through the floorboards,” he said, smiling. “It was just an old piece of crap, but it ran. It was fun.”


Freeland often was the only one of his friends with wheels, so he drove on their road trips — and charged his friends $1 each for the brownies his mom packed.


He went to the University of Florida, then Florida State to study marketing before his dad asked him to take over one of his Nissan dealerships.


And Freeland never looked back.


By the mid-2000s, Freeland was married with three children, and his business empire included dealerships, online auto sales and online car financing. He started to look for a more central location from which to move cars across the country, and that’s how Freeland ended up in Nashville.


Ben Freeland with his father, George, in the early 1990s at the opening of a new Freeland Honda dealership in Fort Myers, Fla. (Photo: Submitted)

The Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce was instrumental in that decision, meeting him at the airport for his first visit and taking him all around town to look at properties.


A couple of years later, while driving around Nashville, Freeland saw the old Bill Heard dealership and the for-sale signs out front. He pulled into a parking lot across the street and made the deal to buy it on the phone.


Freeland later called the Better Business Bureau and said he bought the old Bill Heard property.


“Oh my God, that’s scorched earth!” the BBB chief said.


Freeland squinted his eyes because he’d never heard that expression before. But he knew it wasn’t good.


Ben Freeland and his father, George, with a 1950 Studebaker Champion that his Grandpa Freeland sold new (Photo: Submitted)

So Freeland asked strangers about the Antioch area. What he heard stunned him.


Never go over there, one said. Gangs and crime.


You’re going to get robbed.


That place is dead.


You’re going to hate it over there.


“I’m like, ‘What’s going on?’ ” Freeland said.


Even more confusing was chamber figures showed most of Davidson County’s growth was in Antioch.


And Antioch residents had higher-than-average educations.


And crime was lower than most places in Nashville.


And the location, just off Interstate 24, was an awesome draw for potential customers.


Antioch didn’t have unusual problems; it had a perception problem. So Freeland doubled down, invested in more property and set about to change Antioch’s image.


He joined with business leaders to form the Crossings Nashville Action Partnership, organized and inspired community activists, jumped into the Chamber of Commerce, started recruiting businesses to 37013, and started to clean up messes, literally and figuratively — even if it meant picking up trash himself.


Metro Councilwoman Jacobia Dowell (Photo: Tennessean)

“We thought, ‘Either this guy is crazy or smarter than all of us. We need to be looking at what he’s doing,’ ” Dowell said.


“Everyone else is saying, ‘It’s in decline, it’s horrible, it’s bad.’ You have this person saying, 'I moved my whole family and kit and caboodle to Antioch, I bought this dealership in a time of decline, and I saw something people who lived in the community didn’t see themselves,' ” she said.


“What he did was he helped bring some power, some leverage. He brought that voice. He has millions to invest and lose, so he’s speaking in a way to add credibility to it.”


Since Freeland arrived, several big employers have moved into Antioch, the Global Market and Ford Ice Center have opened, abandoned parcels have been cleaned up.


An Ikea store is set to open in 2020. And most road medians have shrubs and flowers growing in them.


Freeland has had a hand in most of that.


Ben Freeland has been all in on Antioch ever since he moved here from Florida 10 years ago. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)

"Ben Freeland walks the walk, and he walks it when no one’s looking," Hall said. "No secret about it — I think he’s an integral part of where Antioch’s heading."


Freeland downplays his role.


“I just peeled the cover off something and it was there. I happened to be local enough that I could see it,” he said. “They were no-brainer deals, but some were blinded by perception.


“And perception is powerful. I think we’ve turned that corner.”


Reach Brad Schmitt at brad@tennessean.com or 615-259-8384 and on Twitter @bradschmitt.


 
