Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall says he won't run for mayor of Nashville in the August election and is instead putting his support behind Mayor David Briley.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall
(Photo: Tennessean)Buy Photo

Davidson County Sheriff Daron Hall says he won't run for mayor of Nashville in the August election and is instead putting his support behind Mayor David Briley.


Hall, who had been mulling a bid and met with Briley at the mayor's office Monday, said Nashville needs continuity right now, not a change in leadership, following the resignation of former Mayor Megan Barry on March 6.


He also claimed to already be on a better page with Briley than Barry, who he butted heads with regularly over the ongoing reconstruction of the downtown jail.


"I've had a better relationship with the current mayor over the past two and a half weeks than I did with the previous mayor over two and a half years," Hall said.


"He's really good for this time," he added. "There's some issues that are going to be complicated, but we need some stability. I'm encouraging everybody to support Mayor Briley."


►More: Nashville Sheriff Daron Hall to run for re-election in 2018


►More: Bill Freeman says he won't run for mayor of Nashville this year


►More: David Briley announces run for Nashville mayor in August election


Hall, who is running for a fifth term as sheriff in the May 1 Democratic Primary election, recently commissioned a phone poll that tested the upcoming mayor's race as well as his popularity.


His decision comes after Nashville businessman and 2015 mayoral candidate Bill Freeman also declined to run on Wednesday. Investor Stuart McWhorter has said he won't run as well. Both are also backing Briley. 


Several possible candidates have given pause to the idea of running this year in August, only to have to run again in August 2019 when the mayoral term expires.


There's also lingering questions about this year's election date. The Tennessee Supreme Court is taking up an appeal of a lower court's decision to dismiss a lawsuit that argued Nashville's mayoral election date should actually be in May 1. Oral arguments are set for April 9.


The Nashville Business Coalition, a group that is aligned with the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce, has endorsed Briley and urged other candidates to not get in the race. They've warned about the possibility of four mayors in 18 months — when including Briley and Barry — in a call for stability in Metro.


Potential other contenders include businessman David Fox, who like Freeman also lost to Barry in the 2015 mayor's race, At-large Councilwoman Erica Gilmore, At-large Councilman John Cooper, and state Rep. Harold Love Jr., D-Nashville.


Meanwhile, former Councilman Roy Dale and jeff obafemi carr, a spiritual activist who is working for a politivcal action committee fighting Nashville's May 1 transit referendum, have both picked up qualifying papers.


Candidates have until April 5 to qualify to run.


Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236, jgarrison@tennessean.com and on Twitter @joeygarrison.


 


 
