
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

David Weekley Homes


A new three-bedroom home that David Weekley has ready to deliver in Midtown.

David Weekley Homes


The view from a new three-bedroom home that David Weekley has ready to deliver in Midtown.

David Weekley Homes


The kitchen in a home that David Weekley has ready to deliver in the new-urban Midtown neighborhood in Denver.

David Weekley Homes


A Metro Collection three-bedroom home that David Weekley has ready to deliver in Midtown.

Mark Samuelson


The Clear Creek Trail as it passes the new-urban, master-planned Midtown neighborhood in Denver.




Midtown — the new-urban master-planned neighborhood five miles from downtown Denver — was already attracting buyers out of Highlands and nearby areas when David Weekley Homes got hold of some larger, better-situated homesites in Midtown that make the comparison sharper still.

“Once we had a second kid, we were feeling cramped,” says Kathryn Roman, who lives in a remodeled bungalow in Denver’s Sunnyside neighborhood, near Highlands. The typical migration pattern for growing Highlands families, she says, is west to Arvada or Golden; but instead she, husband James and their two tots drove three miles north to Midtown, after hearing about it from their local network. They toured a large resale there (it sold overnight for less than their Sunnyside house would fetch); and then discovered David Weekley’s model you can tour today, and saw the views.

Now the Romans are reaching a little further for a new four-bedroom home that’ll finish out at 3,900 square feet, 1,800 square feet more than their bungalow has. “It will have three bedrooms on the same floor; that’s hard to find (in Sunnyside),” she adds. They’re getting a day-lit walkout lower level with finished space and a deck overhead that creates outdoor living space adjoining the entertaining areas. The deck overlooks the Clear Creek Trail corridor; and there’ll be a guest bedroom for when Kathryn’s parents visit from Atlanta (they had to stay in an Airbnb on their last trip).

Paulette Mills, who along with Zuzana Balzerova will show you around, says the Romans fit a pattern that’s made David Weekley a quick seller in Midtown — many buyers coming from Highlands, most all with work ties to downtown. “These are Midtown’s largest lots,” she adds, showing the views from her “Topaz” three-bedroom show home, which has a wide-open family area, loft/play area on the bedroom level and the option of the finished basement. Like others in the series, it has a front-load two-car garage — the only new homes in Midtown to offer that — and has a panorama from downtown to the mountains.

The front-load garage and the views over the trail corridor played big in the Romans’ decision, says Kathryn, adding that David Weekley’s lots had more elbow room than she sees in some new-urban areas where neighbors are up close. “We wanted relief from having people right on top of you,” she adds. “Once we saw what we could afford, we never looked back.”

If you like Midtown’s looks, you’ll find two routes in — both providing special incentives now from David Weekley. The first are some ready-to-move “Showcase Homes” — all backing to open space and each with a walkout or garden-level. One is a “Chartreuse” with three bedrooms, 2-1/2 baths, a walkout basement and a view; ready now at $634,328. Close by Dec. 15 and David Weekley will include a $5,000 gift card to Best Buy to handle incidentals.

Or, you can pick a lot overlooking the trail and open space from four that David Weekley has left, and match that to one of these plans, from just under $600,000. David Weekley will provide you a $15,000 credit to spend at its design center as part of your project.

You’ll hear about Midtown’s K-8 school that starts construction in 2018 (K-through-2 opens first); and about Bruz Brewery and Backstage Coffee, both walkable within Midtown, beside a community garden and kids’ splash park.

And you’ll see how close the Clear Creek Trail is, already in heavy use by residents, and RTD’s G Line Rail to Union Station (five blocks, in a test phase). To reach David Weekley, take I-25 north from downtown, past I-70, three miles to I-76, head west on 76 to Pecos and then north to West 67th; turn east a block, then south.
