
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Seth McConnell, The Denver Post


Students dance as they warm up during a Spotlight Kids Theater rehearsal at Henderson Community Church on Sept. 13, 2017, in Henderson. Spotlight Kids Theater features a no cut policy, which allows the directors to meet kids where they are and build them up from there and help them deal what's holding them back from shyness to anxiety to a a physical disability.

Seth McConnell, The Denver Post


Lillian Crandall points to her cheek as she sings a song during a Spotlight Kids Theater rehearsal at Henderson Community Church on Sept. 13, 2017, in Henderson. Spotlight Kids Theater features a no cut policy, which allows the directors to meet kids where they are and build them up from there and help them deal what's holding them back from shyness to anxiety to a a physical disability.

Seth McConnell, The Denver Post


A student reads from her script during a Spotlight Kids Theater rehearsal at Henderson Community Church on Sept. 13, 2017, in Henderson. Spotlight Kids Theater features a no cut policy, which allows the directors to meet kids where they are and build them up from there and help them deal what's holding them back from shyness to anxiety to a a physical disability.

Seth McConnell, The Denver Post


Students read along in their scripts during a Spotlight Kids Theater rehearsal at Henderson Community Church on Sept. 13, 2017, in Henderson. Spotlight Kids Theater features a no cut policy, which allows the directors to meet kids where they are and build them up from there and help them deal what's holding them back from shyness to anxiety to a a physical disability.

Seth McConnell, The Denver Post


Lucy Heap reads from her script during a Spotlight Kids Theater rehearsal at Henderson Community Church on Sept. 13, 2017, in Henderson. Spotlight Kids Theater features a no cut policy, which allows the directors to meet kids where they are and build them up from there and help them deal what's holding them back from shyness to anxiety to a a physical disability.

Seth McConnell, The Denver Post


Charlie Cook clutches a shaker waiting for his cue to make noise during a Spotlight Kids Theater rehearsal at Henderson Community Church on Sept. 13, 2017, in Henderson. Spotlight Kids Theater features a no cut policy, which allows the directors to meet kids where they are and build them up from there and help them deal what's holding them back from shyness to anxiety to a a physical disability.

Seth McConnell, The Denver Post


Lillian Crandall clutches a shaker as she waits for her cue to make noise during a Spotlight Kids Theater rehearsal at Henderson Community Church on Sept. 13, 2017, in Henderson. Spotlight Kids Theater features a no cut policy, which allows the directors to meet kids where they are and build them up from there and help them deal what's holding them back from shyness to anxiety to a a physical disability.




Everybody’s got talent at Spotlight Kids Theatre.

The nonprofit theater serves youths ages 3-20, in Brighton, Commerce City and other north metro Denver cities, with an especially compassionate lens.

Founded by local music teacher Chris Churches, Spotlight Kids Theatre never cuts a child who registers for a production. Kids arrive with whatever skills and confidence they possess, and build from there.

“That can look really different from kid, to kid, to kid,” Churches said.

Some youths are shy and work on their self-confidence. Others are identified on the autism spectrum or struggle with depression or anxiety. All have a place at Spotlight.

A cultural phenomenon created the ripples, which inspired Churches to create the group. She started seeing an influx in “American Idol generation” kids about 10 years ago, when the reality show was at the peak of its popularity.

“Everybody was singing. Everybody was wanting lessons,” she said.

Instead of trying to fit all the aspiring Kelly Clarksons into her piano and voice lessons, Churches formed a choir in 2007. The Sounds of Joy choir got its start in her living room.

The four-part harmony choir soon outgrew her home and moved from church, to church. One day, choir members began showcasing other talents — telling jokes, reciting monologues, even rapping — between songs. Churches paired the ample talent with her own ideas and, in 2009, wrote her first play, “Silly Songs,” with collaborator and friend Jen Trostel.


“We found out that we write really well together,” Churches said. “We would drink wine and write back and forth.”

Writing the first few plays and musicals was trial and error as the two figured out what it meant to be playwrights. They gained confidence as positive response greeted those early productions.

“Now when we write we’re, like, really official: ‘Let’s talk character development, the arc of the story,’” Churches said. “But back then we were like, ‘What should she say now?’”

Churches and Trostel have now written nearly 20 plays together, each one taking about six months to create. No matter how many youths participate in Spotlight and whatever their talents, the writing fits the team.

The women now focus on creating an outlet for each child’s talents and needs, which prompted a change in Spotlight’s mission. They put their work on hold for about a year in 2012 to turn Spotlight Kids Theatre into a registered nonprofit.

Spotlight now runs two seasons a year, and presents two plays and musicals each season: a 45-minute “baby play” for kids ages 3-7 and a full, two-hour musical showcasing older members.

This holiday season’s productions, already in rehearsals Wednesday nights at Henderson Community Church, will include as many as 75 youths from Brighton, Commerce City and other north metro Denver communities..

Behind the adorable smiles of the youngest cast members lie pint-sized challenges. Churches describes this group’s rehearsals as “directing cats.” It’s a fight against their short attention spans during the hour of warm-ups, line reading and singing.

The group of 15 runs through the first few pages of dialogue and a song — not bad for 60 minutes of work. There’s still time for silliness, like when a few flop down and pretend to make snow angels on the carpet while a Christmas song plays.

That bounty of personality is why Izzy Iannettoni, 15, said she loves to help with the youngest production members. She is one of 10 volunteer teachers.

“They’re all very uncomplex people — they’re just out there,” Iannettoni said of the 3- to 7-year-olds.

She has made friends and become less reserved in the three to four years she’s been a part of Spotlight. Everyone’s kindness and openness made her feel safe enough to try something new, she said.

“There are so many people out there who are just willing to accept you for who you are. You just have to find that place,” she said.

Jayde Cummings, 13, echoes that sentiment. She’s been with Spotlight since she was in elementary school and says the experience helped her break out of her shell.

“The atmosphere here makes everybody more open,” Cummings said.

The atmosphere is intentional, Churches said. Beyond ensuring that every child has a part in every production, the Spotlight team has zero tolerance for bullying or other negative behavior. Youths must sign a code of ethics before they start rehearsals. Churches said she grew up as a theater kid and remembers how hurtful people could be.

“There’s a reason it’s called drama,” she said.

She compares putting on four shows a year of children’s theater to repeatedly climbing Mount Everest but says the confidence kids gain with each production makes the effort worth it.

“This insurmountable feat of this random group of children of all ages, children of all talent levels, all volunteers — somehow we all work together and have a show at the end,” Churches said.