
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		



Nikola Jokic had struggled with his shot all night. But when the Nuggets needed an insurance bucket in the waning seconds, he was in prime position for the game-sealing tip-in.

It was a fitting end to the Nuggets’ fourth down-to-the-wire victory in a row to inch closer to a coveted playoff spot with three games to play. On a night in which Denver’s typically high-powered offense turned “ugly,” the Nuggets locked down on the opposite end of the floor and again made clutch fourth-quarter plays to top division rival Minnesota 100-96 in front of a raucous crowd at the Pepsi Center.

“You’re not always going to have a pretty game and make all your shots and get out and run or run your offense cleanly,” coach Michael Malone said. “You have to find ways to win these types of games.

“How do you do that? You rebound the ball. You get key stops. And you come up with big plays on the offensive end. That’s why we were able to pull this one out.”

Boxscore: Nuggets 100, Timberwolves 96 



Denver, which played its 10th consecutive game without second-leading scorer Gary Harris, and Minnesota now have the same record at 44-35 — but the Timberwolves hold the tiebreaker because of their 2-1 series lead with one game remaining in Minneapolis on April 11. Both teams are a half-game back of seventh-place New Orleans (44-34) and one game behind sixth-place Oklahoma City and fifth-place San Antonio (both 45-34). Denver next plays Saturday afternoon at the 10th-place Clippers, who are now two games behind of the Nuggets after losing to Utah on Thursday.

The Nuggets survived a night in which they shot 39.3 percent from the floor, their seventh-lowest total this season and second-lowest in a win. But they turned it on during a mini 8-0 run late in the fourth quarter, after Nemanja Bejlica hit a 3-pointer to give the Timberwolves a 93-90 lead with 2:48 to play.


Will Barton immediately answered with a driving layup to cut that deficit to one point. Then with the shot clock winding down, Jamal Murray got Minnesota star Karl-Anthony Towns (26 points, 13 rebounds, four assists) in the air to commit his sixth foul, sending him to the bench and Murray to the line to sink the go-ahead free throws. Wilson Chandler and Paul Millsap added two apiece at the line to extend that advantage to 98-93 with 34.1 seconds left. Then after Taj Gibson (17 points, 14 rebounds) converted an old-fashioned 3-point play on Minnesota’s ensuing possession, Jokic snagged the put-back on a missed Barton jumper to give Denver a two-possession edge with 4.3 seconds left.

“If (an opponent has) a five-point lead in the last 2 1/2 minutes, there’s plenty of time to play,” Jokic said of his team’s brewing confidence. “In those types of (situations), we just have experience and we believe in each other.”

Jokic nearly recorded his ninth triple-double of the season (16 points, 14 rebounds, nine assists) but shot an uncharacteristically poor 6-of-20 from the floor. Murray led the Nuggets with 22 points, while Barton finished with 14 points, six rebounds and six assists. Reserve guard Devin Harris provided a huge burst off the bench with a season-high 20 points in 20 minutes, including three 3-pointers in about 90 seconds at the end of the third quarter to ignite the crowed and give Denver a 79-72 lead entering the final period.

A Denver defense that has struggled all season tightened up in the second half. The Nuggets held a Minnesota offense that ranks in the top 10 in the NBA in efficiency to 39.5 percent shooting. Denver outrebounded the Timberwolves 24-20, including 8-4 on the offensive end. That helped the Nuggets limit Minnesota to four second-chance points after intermission, after surrendering nine in the first half. At the end, the Nuggets had held an opponent below 100 points for the first time since Dallas scored 89 on Jan. 27.

The Nuggets have been immersed in six playoff atmospheres in a row, following back-to-back losses in Philadelphia and Toronto with overtime wins at Oklahoma City and against Milwaukee before two more victories against Indiana and the Timberwolves. They have matched their longest winning streak of the season at its most crucial time.

Denver next heads to Los Angeles with the chance to deliver a Saturday matinee knockout blow to the Clippers. After that, the Nuggets finish out the regular season at home against Portland on Monday and at Minnesota on Wednesday.

And the Nuggets enter these last three games with proof they can grind out wins when the offense goes clunky.

“We’re not folding,” Barton said. “Good play. Bad play. Guys just come together and we stand in it together. There’s just a lot of togetherness right now, and I love it.”