
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Steve Lebsock, minutes before he was expelled from the Colorado House of Representatives on Friday afternoon, changed his party affiliation from Democrat to Republican, according to state elections officials, setting up a scenario under which his newly vacated seat could fall into GOP hands.

Lebsock’s departing shot at his party won’t change the balance of power in the House, however. With Lebsock gone, Democrats currently hold 36 seats and the Republicans have 28.

The Colorado secretary of state’s office said Stephen James Lebsock, of Thornton, became a Republican at 3:17 p.m. Friday — roughly around the same time he took to the House floor to declare, amid tears, “I know the vote count right now.”

“It’s been the honor of my life to serve the people of Colorado, and I was willing to fight this year for the people of Colorado,” he then said. “Members, please remember that we should always strive to do the right thing.”

He was then expelled by a 52-9 vote. Lebsock, who was serving his third term in the state House, remains a candidate for state treasurer.

State law says a vacancy committee should be made up of the party of the departing elected official depending on what that official’s registration was at the time they left office.

The Colorado Republican Party said Friday night that Republicans have “the right to fill the vacancy.”

“Because Rep. Lebsock was a Democrat when he committed his misdeeds, our vacancy committee could decline to fill his seat,” said Daniel Cole, a party spokesman. “If the vacancy committee doesn’t act within 30 days, Gov. (John) Hickenlooper gets to fill the vacancy.”

Our HD 34 Vacancy Committee has the right to fill the vacancy. Whether it chooses to do so is another question. If it declines to act within 30 days, the gov gets to fill the vacancy. Because Lebsock was a Dem when he committed his misdeeds, the VC could decline to fill his seat.


— The Colorado GOP (@cologop) March 3, 2018



House Minority Leader Patrick Neville, R-Castle Rock, said he had no indication that Lebsock was going to change parties until moments before the vote.

“He dropped off a piece of paper at my desk and pointed to the party affiliation moments before the vote,” Neville said. “Didn’t see that one coming.”

As for Lebsock’s new party affiliation, “the Republicans can have him,” said Colorado Democratic Party spokesman Eric Walker. “As far as the seat, we’re looking into it. Either way, we’re confident the district will be represented by a Democrat by the time the next session begins.”

AAron Ontiveroz, The Denver Post


State Representative Steve Lebsock prepares to address issues of retaliation against his accusers before a rare vote to expel him as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in Nov. was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women Ñ and two others who havenÕt come forward publicly Ñ filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible.

AAron Ontiveroz, The Denver Post


State Representative Steve Lebsock addresses issues of retaliation against his accusers before a rare vote to expel him as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in Nov. was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women - and two others who haven't come forward publicly - filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible.

AAron Ontiveroz, The Denver Post


Representatives and people in the gallery stand at the request of State Rep. Leslie Herod, D-Denver, to show the number of people who have faced or have been witness to sexual harassment before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. 

AAron Ontiveroz, The Denver Post


Representatives and people in the gallery stand at the request of State Rep. Leslie Herod, D-Denver, to show the number of people who have faced or have been witness to sexual harassment before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in Nov. was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women - and two others who haven't come forward publicly - filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible.

AAron Ontiveroz, The Denver Post


State Representative Steve Lebsock leaves the floor after addressing issues of retaliation against his accusers before a rare vote to expel him as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in Nov. was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women Ñ and two others who havenÕt come forward publicly Ñ filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible.

AAron Ontiveroz, The Denver Post


Rep. Alec Garnett stands before fellow representatives to reveal that he has been wearing a bullet proof vest to the legislative session for fear of retaliation before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment and retaliatory action against his detractors and accusers at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in Nov. was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women - and two others who haven't come forward publicly - filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible.




DENVER, CO - MARCH 2: Rep. Chris Hansen leaves the podium after delivering an emotional testimony about the sexual assault of his wife and how that affected his upcoming vote before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in November was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women Ñ and two others who havenÕt come forward publicly Ñ filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible. (Photo by AAron Ontiveroz/The Denver Post)




DENVER, CO - MARCH 2: Rep. Chris Hansen sits at his desk after delivering an emotional testimony about the sexual assault of his wife and how that affected his upcoming vote before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in November was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women Ñ and two others who havenÕt come forward publicly Ñ filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible. (Photo by AAron Ontiveroz/The Denver Post)




DENVER, CO - MARCH 2: Rep. Chris Hansen hugs Rep. Faith Winter after delivering an emotional testimony about the sexual assault of his wife and how that affected his upcoming vote before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in November was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women Ñ and two others who havenÕt come forward publicly Ñ filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible. (Photo by AAron Ontiveroz/The Denver Post)




DENVER, CO - FEBRUARY 2: Rep. Tracy Kraft-Tharp listens to testimony before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in November was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women Ñ and two others who havenÕt come forward publicly Ñ filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible. (Photo by AAron Ontiveroz/The Denver Post)




DENVER, CO - FEBRUARY 2: Rep. Steve Lebsock talks in a back room to Rep. Jonathan Singer before a rare vote to expel State Representative Steve Lebsock as he faces accusations of sexual harassment at the Colorado State Capitol on Friday, March 2, 2018. Lebsock, of Thornton, in November was publicly accused by state Rep. Faith Winter, D-Westminster, and two other women of sexual harassment. The three women Ñ and two others who havenÕt come forward publicly Ñ filed a series of formal complaints that an independent investigator this week determined were credible. (Photo by AAron Ontiveroz/The Denver Post)


