

Early in the opening-night performance of  the Denver Center’s “A Christmas Carol,” lights began to strobe and an alarm went off. It then went on and on and on, as did those blasted lights. Ghosts? Probably not. Although Ebenezer Scrooge had just been railing against the holly and the folly of Christmas — giving poor ol’ clerk Bob Cratchit an earful — when the fire alarm sounded. To their credit, the ushers kept the audience calm, seated and relatively patient.

Theater folk like to say no two performances are alike. Pretty sure they’d be right in this case. When the all-clear came, Scrooge &amp; Co. (no, not the Scrooge &amp; Marley’s counting house) actor Sam Gregory and his impeccable cast-mates returned to the redemption at hand.

“Bah … humbug!,” offered Gregory to applause.

“At last,” Brian Vaughn’s Cratchit chimed in to laughs.

Yes, ’tis the period before Christmas and all through the town holiday tales and homilies abound. (I’ll spare you the rest.) Everywhere, cities are flooded with stories — on stage, on screens small and big —  that speak directly to a freshly tweaked take on the seasonal.

Some like to have their fruitcake and eat it, too,: to ply their snark and end with impossible-to-repress goodwill. To wit: The sketch (happily sketchy?) comedy “Santa’s Big Red Sack,” now in the midst of its ninth run at the Avenue Theatre (through Dec. 24).

After more than 20 years on various stages, “The SantaLand Diaries” can hardly be considered — no matter how tart its tongue — counter-programming. David Sedaris’ essay about a stint as a Macy’s elf, adapted for the stage by Joe Mantello, has become its own pilgrimage for some. Currently, there’s a production at the Jones Theatre, courtesy the Denver Center (through Dec. 24), and another holding forth at TheatreWorks in Colorado Springs (through Dec. 23). Each features impressive local fellas — Michael Bouchard and Sammie Joe Kinnett, respectively — as Crumpet, the rather bitter display elf.

The canonization of “SantaLand” may prove — like the many R-rated holiday flicks, from “Christmas Vacation” to “Bad Santa” to “A Bad Moms Christmas” — the old saw about the intimate relationship between cynicism and tarnished  hope. The naughtiest tales tend to hide their hearts of tinsel, their hankerings for more authentic emotions, in raw and barbed gags. Could there be humanistic gems of hope in their lumps of coal?

We each likely have our ritual delights as well as our bah-humbugs — which brings me back to “A Christmas Carol.”

I tend to like my sentimentalism straight, no chaser. After a real-time viewing of “Rudolph The Red-Nosed Reindeer” last Tuesday, I spent the weekend with two Scrooges. It wasn’t penance but pleasure that lead me to the Stage Theatre, where Gregory is diving into his second year portraying the “squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old sinner!,” as his creator, Charles Dickens, introduced him in the 1843 novella. And Gregory is doing quite well making Scrooge his own after the wonderful  Philip Pleasants’ nine-season run as the miserable miser transformed. Gregory’s a younger man, which gives the physical comedy a different zest. Kids are likely to be charmed by the playfulness, and adults might be happy to know that Scrooge’s contributions to his community may go on for decades.

The Denver Center’s version, adapted by Richard Hellesen with music by David de Berry, is a gift. It’s not simply the ace production values that make it a tradition — although Kevin Copenhaver’s costumes, Vicki Smith’s scenic design as well as the contributions of the entire creative team make it a visual treat. The production is also as opulent as the bounties the Ghost of Christmas Present arrives with to Scrooge’s bed chambers.

De Berry’s use of traditional carols intermixed with his score makes for a far lovelier outing than the 1994 musical by Alan Menken, Lynn Ahrens and Mike Ockrent.

It’s a fine match for the music in Dickens’ writing. The closer a production hews to Dickens’ words, the more wondrous it often is. An equally favorite version: comedian Jonathan Winter’s reading of the tale, edited for performance purposes. Dickens’ insights about the compassionate possibilities of the season endure. He presents tales of Christian charity, wealth and avarice that even now give listeners much to chew on (especially now, one might nudge).

Certainly it’s fair to wonder — especially more than a century later — why so much grace is expended on someone so seemingly underserving  as Ebenezer Scrooge. One of the wonderful things — that drives some folks batty — is the way Frank Capra’s holiday staple “It’s a Wonderful Life” is neither obsessed with the redemption of Mr. Potter nor invested in his comeuppance. The usurious developer just isn’t the point: Try as we might, we cannot always transform the heels, though we may reassert a majority of the decent.

At Miners Alley Playhouse

From the very start, you know you’re in for something humble and homey from Miners Alley Playhouse‘s production of  “A Christmas Carol” (through Dec. 23). The set occupying the 90-seat theater features a living room with a fireplace, a couple of arm chairs. There’s even a framed poster for a production of “The Cherry Orchard.” We are definitely in Christmas present-tense. Friends gather near and listen to  actor Jim Hunt read the final pages of “A Child’s Christmas in Wales.”

Then one of the guests (Meredith Young) requests that they do their yearly ritual: the acting out of Dickens’ tale. After some resistance — especially on the part of Hunt — out come the props. The six actors set about giving us a zippy, still resonant, “Christmas Carol” with some charming bickering and fourth-wall-ignoring asides tossed in for good measure. It is absurd and often sweet. Actor-playwright Josh Hartwell makes an argument of sorts here: There is something irresistible, necessary, sacramental about “A Christmas Carol.” Certainly for audiences: There was a full house. And for actors: Try as they might, they can’t help plunging into the story of ghosts, of family, of transformation.

This play within a play has laughs, woefully silly ones, side-splitting ones. After arguing about which of them will play Jacob Marley’s ghost, Jason Maxwell and Hartwell decide on a conjoined specter. Later, Maxwell’s high-pitched screech while voicing Bob Cratchit’s oldest child, Martha, is something a voice coach would surely caution against.

It’s tempting to say — to paraphrase Scrooge — that there’s definitely more gravy than gravitas to this production. And yet, the lessons hold fast. Lisa DeCaro’s Christmas Present is sly and magnanimous but can be appropriately stern. Young’s Christmas Past is a trickster imp. Hunt’s Scrooge isn’t as jaw-dropping a performance as his recent depiction of Zeus (a role that gets a wink in Hartwell’s script). What impresses more is the character that Hunt plays (a version of himself?) at the start and finish of the night: the tender reader, the generous reciter.

This “Christmas Carol” began with nostalgic praise of Thomas’ short story and ends with Hunt reaching for another volume of holiday consideration, this time Truman Capote’s “A Christmas Memory.” Like Hunt’s character, I, too, went to a bookshelf, reaching for a tale that has inspired — or endured — many versions, finding solace but also a demand to do better in the source. “May it haunt their houses pleasantly,” Dickens wrote in his preface. It does.

Whether you wish to be happily haunted or cheekily taunted or some quite other state — there’s likely a show for that.

Some other seasonal opportunities:

“Elf the Musical” at the Buell, Dec. 13-17 (denvercenter.org).

“The Miracle at  Tepeyac,” Su Teatro, Dec. 7- 23 (suteatro.org).

“A Rocky Mountain Christmas” at  Breckenridge Backstage Theatre, Dec. 14-29 (backstagetheatre.org).

“Resolutions” at the Edge, through Dec. 31 (theedgetheater.com)

What to do, where to be and what to see, from 



Your email address, so we can reply:

An edition of The Denver Post.
					All contents Copyright © 2018 The Denver Post or other copyright holders. All rights reserved.
					This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed for any commercial purpose.