
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Ringo H.W. Chiu, The Associated Press


Denver Nuggets center Nikola Jokic, center, of Serbia, under pressured by Los Angeles Lakers forwards Brandon Ingram, left, and Julius Randle during the first half of an NBA basketball game, Sunday, Nov. 19, 2017, in Los Angeles.

Ringo H.W. Chiu, The Associated Press


Denver Nuggets guard Will Barton, right, looks to pass the ball against Los Angeles Lakers center Brook Lopez during the first half of an NBA basketball game Sunday, Nov. 19, 2017, in Los Angeles.

Ringo H.W. Chiu, The Associated Press


Denver Nuggets guard Gary Harris, left, goes up for a basket under pressured by Los Angeles Lakers center Brook Lopez during the first half of an NBA basketball game, Sunday, Nov. 19, 2017, in Los Angeles.

Ringo H.W. Chiu, The Associated Press


Los Angeles Lakers guard Jordan Clarkson, center, goes up for a basket under pressured by Denver Nuggets guard Will Barton, right, during the first half of an NBA basketball game, Sunday, Nov. 19, 2017, in Los Angeles.

Ringo H.W. Chiu, The Associated Press


Denver Nuggets forward Wilson Chandler, left, dribbles as Los Angeles Lakers guard Lonzo Ball defends during the first half of an NBA basketball game, Sunday, Nov. 19, 2017, in Los Angeles.

Ringo H.W. Chiu, The Associated Press


Denver Nuggets forward Paul Millsap, right, goes up for a layup as Los Angeles Lakers forward Brandon Ingram defends during the first half of an NBA basketball game, Sunday, Nov. 19, 2017, in Los Angeles.

Ringo H.W. Chiu, The Associated Press


Los Angeles Lakers center Brook Lopez, center, drives against Denver Nuggets center Nikola Jokic, right, of Serbia during the first half of an NBA basketball game, Sunday, Nov. 19, 2017, in Los Angeles.




LOS ANGELES — Nikola Jokic took issue with Rodney Mott’s officiating, after getting bumped in the back on an attempted tip-in with no foul called. Then an enraged Michael Malone charged the Staples Center court to spew some choice words in Mott’s direction as his assistants attempted to hold him back.

Seconds later, the Nuggets head coach and their star center walked to Denver’s locker room to watch the rest of the contest on television. The back-to-back double-technical fouls issued to Malone and Jokic late in the second quarter encapsulated the way the Nuggets unraveled in a disastrous 127-109 loss at the Los Angeles Lakers on Sunday.

“In that second quarter, things kind of went awry,” Malone said, “with the turnovers, the lead going to 20 and then Nikola and I getting tossed.”

The defeat extended Denver’s road woes so far this season, dropping it to 2-5 away from the Pepsi Center. The Nuggets are 9-7 overall heading into Monday’s contest at Sacramento on the second night of a back-to-back.

But the night had already turned into a Lakers rout long before Malone’s and Jokic’s emotions reached an apex.



The Lakers (7-10) outscored the Nuggets 38-22 in the second quarter, including a decisive 18-2 run capped by a Julius Randle finger roll to push the Lakers’ lead to 20 points in the period’s first five minutes. Though the Nuggets knew limiting the NBA’s best inside-scoring team would be their biggest key, Los Angeles rolled up 70 points in the paint. The league’s worst 3-point shooting team entering Sunday (28.7 percent) also became effective from long range, going 7-of-18 in the first half and 12-of-32 overall while cruising to victory.

Rookie point guard Lonzo Ball, who earlier this month became the youngest NBA player to record a triple-double, recorded another with 11 points, 16 rebounds and 11 assists. Randle scored a game-high 24 points and added seven rebounds off the bench and Brook Lopez added 21 points.

Denver, meanwhile, committed 21 turnovers, including nine in the second quarter alone thanks to a disruptive Lakers second unit spearheaded by Corey Brewer’s four steals. The Nuggets’ leaky defense allowed the Lakers to shoot 53 percent, their second-highest mark of the season. That made it difficult for Denver, which totaled just seven first-half assists, create the free-flowing ball movement and transition opportunities that make the Nuggets a top-10 offense in the NBA.


“When we get out and run, that’s how we get a lot of our assists,” said guard Gary Harris, who led Denver with 20 points. “When you’re taking it out of the basket every time, it kind of takes away from how we want to play.”

Malone acknowledged he “deserved” his ejection, but believes Jokic “did nothing to warrant” him following his coach into the locker room. Malone deadpanned they spent the second half watching the American Music Awards, which were taking place at the Microsoft Theater across the street. Jokic apologized for his behavior after the game, expressing regret that he “left my teammates, my players, alone there.” Paul Millsap also left the game with a left wrist injury, leaving the Nuggets without their starting frontcourt in the second half and Malone still awaiting X-ray results as of late Sunday.

The good news for the Nuggets is they can immediately flush this outing in Los Angeles, as they face the Kings in Sacramento Monday night. The bad news is Denver is currently 0-2 on the second night of a back-to-back set, and neither of those required a plane flight or new hotel stay in between games. Even worse, the Nuggets are still searching for “the same type of poise and aggressiveness” that they possess at home when they play on the road.

Because Sunday left Nuggets assistant Wes Unseld barking orders from the sideline during the second half, while Malone and Jokic were in the locker room.

The game had already unraveled earlier in the second quarter, the coach said. But those boiling emotions that turned to ejections encapsulated the Nuggets’ disastrous night at Staples Center.