
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

As protesters shouted down Mayor Michael Hancock’s Cabinet in the Community event on gentrification and displacement Saturday morning, Stapleton resident Tina Lin stroked her young daughter’s hair in the audience.

Lin was attending the event, held quarterly for the past seven years, with her family for the first time after reading about it on Facebook and wanting to get involved. Hancock, along with four panelists representing housing experts and stakeholders across the community, briefly talked about the negative impacts of gentrification and the city’s efforts to mitigate displacement like a $36 million investment toward affordable housing efforts.

The space at Exdo Event Center was a combination of city staff and related civic programs manning booths, unaffiliated community members, and protesters who listened and occasionally shouted from the back of the room as police and security milled about — a microcosm of a community during divisive times.

Throughout the event, protesters outside and inside the building chanted about  recent sexual harassment allegations against the mayor, calling on him to resign.

VIDEO: Mayor Hancock began speaking and was immediately interrupted by protestor who shouted, chanted for him to resign. Protestor was escorted outside. A tense, awkward scene. Hancock is speaking again now. pic.twitter.com/nzAf7KgQQT

— Elizabeth Hernandez (@ehernandez) March 24, 2018



Sometimes Hancock responded, assuring the crowd he heard their concerns. Other times, a different panelist took the microphone to share their roles in addressing gentrification. During a planned Q&amp;A, protesters stood in front of the panel with tape over their mouths, which they said represented Hancock’s silencing of women.

The Q&amp;A was cancelled when protesters didn’t back down. Audience members were encouraged to approach panelists one-on-one afterward if they wanted to talk further.


Lin and her family watched the tension play out from their seats.

“It was a teaching moment,” Lin said. “I’m not for either side here. I’m all for speaking your mind, and it’s OK to be angry, but this didn’t allow for conversation. I was OK with the tension and with the kids seeing that. Unfortunately, that’s just the climate we’re in.”

One protester, Flavio Rael —  born in Denver and currently living in the southwest corner of the city —  said he showed up to critique what the city was doing to its poor citizens.

“All the poor people are trying to survive, and what happens? They’re pushed out,” Rael said. While Rael’s beef with the mayor stemmed from his anger about the city’s response to gentrification, he thought maybe the text message scandal unfolding around Hancock would hold the mayor accountable.

Rael was referring to Hancock’s text message interactions with Detective Leslie Branch-Wise, who was on his security detail during his first year in office. Branch-Wise spoke out in an interview with Denver7 about several suggestive text messages she received from Hancock in 2012.

Branch-Wise provided images of texts sent by Hancock. In one, he asked her about pole dancing and, in another, he complimented her clothing and hair style, concluding: “You make it hard on a brotha to keep it correct every day.”

Denver City Council members’ joint statement opposing further investigation into Mayor Michael Hancock’s text message scandal has drawn quick scorn from critics who accused the council of failing to hold the mayor accountable.

“Maybe he’ll finally see some consequences for what he does,” Rael said. “He’s not a king.”

Amber Miller, the mayor’s spokeswoman, said disruption from protesters won’t stop Hancock from continuing to hold Cabinet in the Community sessions.

“There is always a group that uses this as a platform for protest,” Miller said. “This is not uncommon. Nothing will stop us from doing this. There are a lot of folks here who come to learn and interact and break down any perceived barriers between the city and the community. That is why the mayor does this job.”