
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

When it comes to real estate brokers, boutique real estate firm Madison &amp; Company Properties believes quality trumps quantity, said April Ivey, the Denver-based firm’s operations manager.

A broker who wants to work at Madison has to have a proven track record and demonstrated belief that collaboration and a focus on details is the key to success. “We don’t typically bring on new brokers,” Ivey said.

The firm, which has 156 employees in six offices in the metro area and was founded in 2008, ranked No. 1 among midsized employers in The Denver Post’s Top Workplaces 2018 survey. It’s Madison’s fifth consecutive year named to the Top Workplaces ranking.

To qualify for a job at Madison a broker must have produced at least $2.5 million in sales, or completed eight transactions in the previous 12 months.

Those who hold managing partner status are in charge of their individual offices and must remain accessible and attentive to the needs of fellow brokers and other staff.

“The leadership in each office is phenomenal, the people who run them want to help their offices,” Ivey said.

The company garnered special recognition for its managers, based on how employees answered the question: How does your manager help you learn and grow? “They reach out and check in with us and if we have any concerns they are responsive immediately to any situation, no matter how small,” one responded.

General comments from employees suggest a high degree of cooperation within the offices.

“It’s what makes me get up each day so I can experience something new and fun,” one commented. “The support we have for one another is amazing and that makes it easy to be around everyone and thrive in what we do for our careers.”


“My ideas are supported and new ideas are fostered and provided to me by others I work with,” said another. “We all share information, experiences and new things to try to keep our businesses strong.”

Completing the top five workplaces with 150 to 499 employees:

Enterprise software provider Gusto promises to make customers’ payroll, benefits and human resources operations easy. Employees say this 7-year-old firm, which is making its first appearance on the annual Top Workplaces list, creates a working environment that makes it easy for them to help the small businesses that use its products.

Gusto, which has 247 employees in downtown Denver, part of a 509-member national workforce, encourages them to remove their shoes and work in slippers or socks at the office.

The relaxed workplace policies are an effort to assure that workers feel free to be themselves and interact with their colleagues in a unique and collaborative way.

Employees receive a round-trip ticket to travel anywhere in the world when they reach their first-year anniversary on the job.

“Coming to work doesn’t feel like work,” one surveyed employee said. “I love knowing that my daily work makes it easier for so many people in the essentials — getting health care, paying rent, and saving for their futures.”

This is the fifth year that PorchLight, which has 203 Colorado employees in four metro Denver locations, has made the Top Workplaces list.

The firm, founded and owned by Amy and Carol Bayer, has grown from a two-woman team to a metro-area real estate powerhouse.

Employees praise a culture that fosters teamwork, encourages strong relationships with customers and provides flexibility and good training.

“I absolutely love the sense of community,” one wrote. “From veteran agents to new licensees, everyone embraces each other with support. It is a place of encouragement and sharing. The drive to keep and hold to a professional standard and perform to the highest level of services is unparalleled in the industry.”

“Most everyone is encouraging and motivating,” another said. “They practice what they preach and focus on sustainable growth and service. I work at an LGBT and woman-owned company. I believe in our CEO and her vision. Their values align with my own.”

Part-time and inexperienced real estate agents won’t find a home at 8z Real Estate.

The company’s manifesto says in part: “Buyers and sellers deserve the help of great Realtors for one of life’s biggest decisions. Great Realtors put their clients’ interests before their own. Clients before commissions.”

The Boulder company, which employs 178 people at 16 locations in Colorado, hires only experienced, full-time agents under the theory that selling real estate is not a hobby for part-timers and amateurs.

Employees say 8z operates in a way that allows them to concentrate on their jobs.

“All I have to do is sell real estate,” one wrote. “Everything else is done for me. I also love that I can be autonomous or fully engaged. My team leader allows me to be me and do things the way that works best for me.”

Founded in 2010, 8z has made the Top Workplaces list in each of the past four years.

“8z is progressive in the marketplace and always at the forefront of new technologies that may aid in strengthening its agents position and a competitive market,” said another employee.

Last summer, electrical contractor Weifield moved its corporate headquarters from Denver to Centennial to make room for a growing employee base.

Over the next two years, Weifield, which presently employs 375 in Colorado, plans to bring its employee headcount above 500.

This is the seventh consecutive year the company has appeared on the Top Workplaces list.

Weifield rolled out the first round of an employee ownership plan in 2017. “Weifield ownership invites a subgroup of employees each round to become owners,” said Jill Farrand of Weifield’s marketing department.

Future rounds are planned for 2018 and every other year moving forward.

To find and keep top talent, Weifield provides highly competitive compensation, a paid four-year apprenticeship program, field safety and other training.

“Everyone is part of a company that is growing and expanding and we work hard together to make that happen, but also have fun together to foster a positive team environment,” one employee commented.

The Denver Post needs your support.Subscribe now for just 99 cents for the first month.