

There are plenty of superstitions tied to New Year’s Eve and the proper way to welcome in the next 12 months, but they all have one common thread: Everyone wants to start the new year off on the right foot.

To some, that might mean getting in the first chuckle of 2018 at the crack of midnight. Others, like me, figure they’re going to spill food on their only suit at some point during the year, so they might as well get it over with a fancy black-tie NYE party.

No matter what next year may hold, we’ve rounded up 25 ways for you to see this one off (and squeeze in some fun before your 2018 resolutions kick in).

The Denver Improv

Returning favorite Cocoa Brown, who also headlined 2016’s New Year’s Eve show at this Northfield Stapleton venue, will take over Denver’s Improv Dec. 29-31, with 7:30 and 10 p.m. shows on Dec. 31. The Virginia native and proud single mother, who has worked jobs as disparate as advertising associate for Ringling Bros. and sketch-comedy writer, has carved out a fan base with appearances on Tyler Perry’s “For Better or Worse” (OWN Network) and BET shows such as “Comic View” and “Showtime at the Apollo,” among many others. Her 10 p.m. show includes party favors, “an Improv souvenir” and a champagne toast at midnight. The Denver Improv, 8246 E. 49th Ave. #1400. $20-$55. denver.improv.com.

Comedy Works

There hasn’t been much to celebrate in this divisive year — unless you’re a Donald Trump fan. To that end, Trump-loving comic and former radio DJ Steve “Mudflap” McGrew, who has riled the local comedy scene with his unapologetic red-state politics (or harassment, as some have charged), will headline the flagship Comedy Works location at downtown Denver’s Larimer Square. His New Year’s Eve shows include a 6 p.m. all-ages (rated PG-13) show, as well as 8 and 10 p.m. 21-and-up sets. The 10 p.m. “extravaganza” show will include party favors, a midnight champagne toast and a countdown with the comics. Comedy Works South will also feature national headliner Dan Cummins with shows at 5 p.m. (all-ages), 7:30 p.m. and 10 p.m. at the club in Greenwood Village — with the same late-show perks. Comedy Works on Larimer Square, 1226 15th St.; Comedy Works South, 5345 Landmark Place. Tickets: $27-$57. comedyworks.com.

On the Spot 

With thousands flocking downtown to catch the fireworks (free along the 16th Street Mall at 9 p.m. and midnight), this improv show capitalizes on increased foot traffic with performances at noon, 7 and 10 p.m. — timed so you won’t miss the colorful displays. For the uninitiated, think “Whose Line Is It Anyway,” except with hats, noisemakers, glow-sticks and more for the audience. And all shows are family-friendly, so bring the kids to any one of them. Bovine Metropolis; 527 Champa St. Dec. 31. Tickets: $25-$40. bovinemetropolis.com.

— John Wenzel

The Preservery

If your 2017 resolution was to eat at The Preservery, there’s still time! And even if it wasn’t, there’s still time! The Preservery will offer its normal menu plus some specials (read: no expensive prix fixe), and it’s giving out a free glass of champagne with the meal. Stop in before 9 p.m. to avoid loud music, or seek it out with a late-night reservation. 3040 Blake St., Denver, 303-298-6821; thepreservery.com

The Thirsty Lion

Here’s something worth toasting: The Thirsty Lion is cooking up a special New Year’s Eve menu without jacking up prices. Dinner options include a lamb burger ($15.95), smoked pork ramen ($13.95) and coffee-crusted beef short rib ($24.95). The salted caramel Moroccan coffee, loaded with rum, Kahlua, Bailey’s Irish cream and Buttershots, is also a deal at $8. With no closing time, you can sip and savor all night long. Union Station and Cherry Creek locations; thirstyliongastropub.com

Edge

There should be some good eating at Edge Restaurant inside the Four Seasons Hotel Denver. A three-course menu is available from 5-7 p.m. for $89/person, but the bigger party starts at 8 p.m., with a four-course, $170/person feast and a post-dinner masquerade party. Dinner choices include prime beef tenderloin, togarashi-crusted ahi tuna and a celebration-worthy chocolate and espresso flourless cake. 1111 14th St., Denver, 303-389-3050; fourseasons.com/denver

Trestles Coastal Cuising

This Castle Pines restaurant has only been open for a couple months, but it’s already making a splash. For New Year’s Eve, the seafood restaurant is pulling out all the stops — and by “stops” I mean champagne-poached lobster tail and salmon with crab beurre blanc. The restaurant closes at 10 p.m., so this is best for a pre-party stop or for early revelers. 880 W. Happy Canyon Road, Castle Pines, 303-663-3622; trestlescastlerock.com

Citizen Rail

More is definitely more at Citizen Rail. Oysters? Of course. Marrow meat pie with truffle gravy? What — do you think they’d give you non-truffle gravy? Veal cheek and a lobster tail? Wouldn’t want the cheek to get lonely. A new Lexus SUV at the stroke of midnight? Well, let’s not get greedy. 1899 16th St., Denver, 303-323-0017; $95. citizenrail.com

Beast + Bottle

If eating a dinner inspired by recently deceased rock stars doesn’t scream “Auld Lang Syne,” then I don’t know what does. Beast + Bottle’s Lost Rock Legends Dinner will feature five courses that pay tribute to the rock gods we lost in 2017, like Tom Petty and Chris Cornell. Take the “Black Hole Sun,” its first course, which comes with charcoal bread, egg, chili oil and black truffle. “American Girl” and “Mary Jane” drink pairings cost extra. 719 E. 17th Ave., Denver, 303-623-3223; $85. beastandbottle.com

Tamayo

Lamb + mezcal mole = New Year’s Eve magic at Tamayo. The three-course meal, which also offers choices like butternut squash lobster soup and banana empanadas with cinnamon ice cream, comes with a complimentary champagne toast. 1400 Larimer St., Denver, 720-946-1433; $65. richardsandoval.com/Tamayo

Early celebrations

Beginning the new year with cranky, sleep-deprived children who stayed up too late the night before isn’t the fresh start I’m looking for. Parents of young kids will want to check out Mici Handcrafted Italian’s early New Year’s Eve party, complete with a countdown at 6:59 p.m. and sparkling cider toast. Bonus: kid’s menu entrees are just $4. Various locations; miciitalian.com

Annette is making New Year’s Eve brunch a thing. The restaurant, fittingly one of the very best to open in 2017, is hosting a Scandinavian brunch from 10 a.m. until 3 p.m. Say hej då to the year with Norwegian potato crepes, house-cured lox and a full-on Swedish smorgasbord. Perfect for those who want to eat well and tuck in early, or for those partying all day long. 2501 Dallas St., Aurora, 720-710-9975; $30. annettescratchtotable.com

In the mountains

Vail has a number of great New Year’s Eve traditions, including a children’s parade, a torchlight ski descent down the mountain, fireworks and a lavish buffet at Larkspur. Eat your weight in lobster, foie gras, caviar and pretty much any other decadent food you can think of. 458 Vail Valley Dr., Vail, 970-754-8050; $225 per person 5 p.m., $295 per person 8 p.m. larkspurvail.com

Extravagant ingredients are great and all (and they’ll be on the menu at Cloverdale, too), but fine dining is about more than that. Cloverdale in Steamboat Springs turns dinner into an experience, and for New Year’s Eve, that experience will be nine courses long. There’s still time to have your best dinner of the year, and this may just be it. 207 Ninth St., Steamboat Springs, 970-875-3179; $155. cloverdalerestaurant.com

— Allyson Reedy

Resolution Run 5K

This will be the 33rd installment of a New Year’s Eve tradition in Washington Park, benefiting Volunteers of America Colorado. Be forewarned, though: Only the top 100 racers are timed, and the race begins at 3 p.m. Registration: $35 for adults, $25 for kids. www.resolution5k.com

— John Wenzel

Zoo Year’s Eve

New Year’s Eve is the last day for Zoo Lights at the Denver Zoo. Celebrate Zoo Year’s Eve, from 5:30 to 9 p.m., with a DJ, face painting, a magician and a princess meet and greet. Plus, the zoo will ring in the new year — but at 9 p.m., so you can still get the kids home in time for you to do your own New Year celebrating. Denver Zoo; 2300 Steele St. Dec. 31. $10  for children 3-11 (2 and under free), $15 for adults and $12 for 65 and older. 5:30-9 p.m.; denverzoo.org

Noon Year’s Eve

The Children’s Museum of Denver at Marsico Campus will once again hold its Noon Year’s Eve party. Look for ball drops and countdowns on the hour starting at 10 a.m., bubble-wrap “fireworks,” art projects, music, special characters and more.

Children’s Museum of Denver, 2121 Children’s Museum Dr. $13 for people who are 1 or older than 60; $15 for ages 2 to 59; free for children under 1. 9 a.m.-4 p.m.; mychildsmuseum.org

— Barbara Ellis

New Year’s Eve on the Rocks

UPDATE: This show has moved locations, citing weather. When Migos hits the stage for its headlining spot at New Year’s Eve on the Rocks, the rain drops on their drop-tops (that’s a reference to the group’s single “Bad and Boujee,” one of the year’s biggest hits. Come on, people!) might very well be snowflakes. The Dec. 31 show is the first in Red Rocks history to fall on New Year’s Eve, making it subject to inclement weather that could hit the high-altitude venue…or not. Assuming all goes to plan, it’ll be an epic night of hip-hop, showcasing 10 acts (Post Malone and Young Thug are filling in the second and third slots) over the course of six-plus hours. Red Rocks Amphitheatre; 5:30 p.m. $175-$350. Tickets available via axs.com. Info: redrocksonline.com

Decadence

If you’re just coming around to the deafening world of electronic dance music (EDM), don’t even consider skipping town for New Year’s Eve. Denver is one of the genre’s de facto capitals, a magnet for world-renowned DJs, particularly on party holidays. Decadence — which is advertising itself as “City Beyond Tomorrow” this year in honor of its space-age light shows and love for “The Matrix”-style raving — then, is Denver’s de facto New Year’s Eve bass bacchanalia. Per usual, this year’s festival brings a formidable conglomerate of DJs to the Colorado Convention Center in downtown Denver, enlisting Bassnectar, French indie-electro duo Justice, Zedd, the ever-buzzy ODESZA and about a dozen other producers for two nights of dance music and mesmerizing lights. Colorado Convention Center. Dec. 30 and 31. 6:30 p.m. $129-$339. Ticket available via axs.com Info: decadencenye.com/co

My Morning Jacket

Few live bands today pack the wallop of My Morning Jacket, arena rock’s roaring lion from Louisville, Ky. Led by bearded troubadour Jim James, the five-piece’s Southern-rock roots have gnarled and twisted in unexpected directions, diverting workingman power ballads of their early albums into heavy metal and swirling psych spirituals that coalesced on its last two albums. Three marquee bands will join MMJ for its three-night run up to New Year’s Eve at the FirstBank Center: The Revolution, Prince’s band (Dec. 29); Tune Yards (Dec. 30); and Karl Denson’s Tiny Universe (Dec. 31). Super fans can shell out extra for a VIP package that comes bundled with free food, a champagne toast and a signed, show-specific poster among other amenities. First Bank Center. Dec. 29-31. $50.95-$168. Tickets and more info: altitudetickets.com

— Dylan Owens

54thirty

Start 2018 off on a high note — literally. 54thirty, the new rooftop bar of the Le Méridien hotel, is the city’s highest open-air bar, making it a great spot for watching the 16th Street Mall fireworks displays at 9 p.m. and midnight (from 20 floors above the street!). The bar will be open from 7 p.m. to 1 a.m., and is first-come, first-served. 54thirty will offer a limited bar menu with three specialty cocktails and desserts for order. There’s a $10 cover, except for guests of the hotel, who get in for free. 1475 California St., 54thirty.com 

White Rose Gala

The Ellie Caulkins Opera House will transform into the Gatsby mansion on New Year’s Eve with the annual White Rose Gala. The Roaring ’20s-themed event will feature flappers, performers and dancing to transport you back in time as you ring in the new year at one of Denver’s most popular events.
Ellie Caulkins Opera House; 1101 13th St. Limited general admission tickets, $79. newyearspartydenver.com

Resolution 2017

You’ll find plenty to do at this two-floor takeover of The Curtis in downtown Denver for Resolution. The open-bar event features multiple rooms with DJ dance parties, aerial dancers, balloons, laser light displays and a vantage point on the city’s fireworks displays. Dress to impress, because everyone else will. The Curtis Hotel. 1405 Curtis St.; $99-$149, and prices increase closer to the event, which tends to sell out. resolutiondenver.com

Denver NYE Black Tie Party

Have a fancy tie that you’d like to get mussed up with champagne foam? Look no further than the Denver New Year’s Eve Black Tie Party. Hosted inside the Sheraton Downtown’s plaza, the event will span three rooms filled with lights and festive decorations. Bring your best dancing shoes: DJs will spin the hits and bands will rock while fellow revelers spin the roulette wheel. A giant confetti blast and champagne toast will greet the new year at midnight, if you can tear yourself away from the open bar (there’s one in every room of the event). Sheraton Denver Downtown; 1550 Court Place; $94-$99. newyearsevenight.com

City New Year’s Eve

New Year’s Eve at the McNichols Civic Center Building will feature three floors of entertainment, including DJs and bands, light shows and more craft cocktails than you can shake your 2018 glasses at. Tickets start at $49. If you plan on drinking, add $49 to that for open bar privileges.  144 W. Colfax Ave. 9pm-2am. citynye.com 

— Sara Grant

Note: An earlier version of this article listed incorrect prices for the Noon Year’s Eve event at the Children’s Museum. We also stated that the NYE party at 54thirty is free; it is free for hotel guests, but there is a $10 cover for the public.

What to do, where to be and what to see, from 



Your email address, so we can reply:

An edition of The Denver Post.
					All contents Copyright © 2018 The Denver Post or other copyright holders. All rights reserved.
					This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed for any commercial purpose.