
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

DALLAS — Michael Malone thinks he has finally figured out his players’ long-term strategy. The Nuggets’ poor road play through the first two-thirds of the season was all a giant setup for Denver to start ripping off victories away from home down the stretch.

“Now we’re a team that is just on fire on the road,” Malone said following Monday’s practice.

Malone is joking, of course. But Denver has started to solve one of its biggest season-long issues. The Nuggets (35-28) have won four consecutive road games — most recently taking down the Cavaliers in impressive fashion on the second night of a back-to-back — for the first time since December 2013. And they have a prime chance to extend that streak to five games, with a visit to the lowly Mavericks on tap Tuesday to finish out a three-game trip.

“There’s a great belief in our locker room,” Malone said. “I love the chemistry. I love the vibe and I love the fact that we’re doing it as one, collectively. That’s the most important thing about our team right now.”

A five-game road winning streak would tie for the second-longest in franchise history, last accomplished when the Nuggets won six in a row in March of 2013. It’s been quite the turnaround, given Denver started 7-19 on the road and had not clinched a victory away from the Pepsi Center in 2018 before a Feb. 10 win at Phoenix sparked its current run.

Malone and players point to a few reasons for the improved play. The schedule has been more favorable, as five of the Nuggets’ six road games from Dec. 27 through January came on the second night of a back-to-back (the sixth was against defending champion Golden State). Denver has gotten off to stronger starts, leading all four games during this winning streak after the first quarter by an average of six points. The Nuggets have compiled 27.5 assists over those contests, more than their season average of 24.7 per game that ranked fourth in the NBA entering Monday’s action. And Malone has noticed a confidence brewing inside a team that has won 12 of its last 17 games to keep hold on the eighth spot in a tight Western Conference playoff race.

“I don’t think our guys ever go on the road and are intimidated,” Malone said.

Added sixth man Will Barton: “Now we’re jumping out or keeping the game close. Then we can make our push.”

The road surge is coming at a perfect time. Not only are the Nuggets attempting to keep pace with their fellow postseason contenders during the final 19 games of the regular season, but they are in the early stages of a difficult March in which they will play 11 of their 15 games on the road.


One of Denver’s worst road losses of the entire season came at Dallas in December. But a win Tuesday would propel the Nuggets to their longest winning streak away from home in five years.

“We’ve got to try to close (this trip) out against Dallas,” leading scorer Gary Harris said.