
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Breckenridge Grand Vacations employees work in visually stunning surroundings but face sky-high housing costs.

So it may be a bit surprising that the Summit County-based company took first place among large companies in The Denver Post’s Top Workplaces 2018 survey.

“Its hard to have a happy work force when there are so many challenges to living up here,” said Ginny Vietti, BGV’s vice president of marketing.

Vietti credits a robust training program for managers, a corporate culture that provides a high degree of autonomy and benefits that include three paid days off each year that workers can use to do volunteer work for charity organizations.

The company, which develops, sells and manages fractional ownership resorts in Breckenridge, has 540 employees spread over four resorts and one hotel in the ski town.

“I am making a difference in the community and at work,” one BGV employee who participated in the Top Workplaces survey commented. “I am given the flexibility and support to do my job without being micro-managed. I am supported in the decisions that I make. If I need help, there is always an abundance of people offering to assist.”

The company allows those who work directly with customers to make important decisions. For example, “They come to the manager and say ‘I intend to give (someone) a room upgrade and this is why, and this is how much it will cost,’ ” said Vietti.

Among popular benefits is an annual wellness fair during which employees and their families can receive a blood draw that screens for high cholesterol and other problems. Employees who get blood drawn receive $50.

The company received special recognition for appreciation, based on this question: What makes you feel appreciated at this company? “My managers are always quick to point out when I’ve done a good job at something or taken initiative, even when it’s something small. They constantly encourage us to feel empowered and make decisions that will create GRAND vacations,” one employee responded.


Completing the top five workplaces with 500 or more employees:

At Edward Jones’ branch offices, administrators, financial advisers and home office associates eventually can opt into the limited partnership and hold an ownership stake that grants them a share in firm revenue.

The St. Louis-based financial advisory firm has a Colorado employee headcount of 761 spread across 338 locations.

Financial advisors are pleased with the autonomy the Fortune 500 company grants and praise a supportive environment, training opportunities and oversight needed to reach their goals.

“I am in charge of my destiny here, I have lots of flexibility to run my branch as long as it’s ethical and legal,” one said.

Edward Jones devotes 24 percent of net profits annually $171 million in 2016 to profit sharing for associates employed six months or more who work at least 20 hours weekly.

“As a limited partner, I take great pride in coming to work every day,” one commented.

Benefits include paid parental leave, bonus potential and generous financial benefits.

Branch associates enjoy flexible schedules that include compressed workweek options, telecommuting, job sharing, voluntary unpaid leave and sick leave to care for ill family members.

Some of those surveyed commented on a culture that features high ethical standards. “There is no company I’ve ever been associated with who truly has as much integrity from the top of the organization down,” one said.

USAA which offers integrated financial services — retirement, insurance, investments and banking — to armed service members, veterans and their families, is on the Top Workplaces list for the fourth time this year.

The San Antonio, Texas-based company employs 1,889 of its 32,000-member national work force at its campus in Colorado Springs.

Employees give the company high marks for good pay, top-shelf benefits and for laser-like focus on its military customers.

USAA’s Zero Day PT provides employees with a 3-hour experience that simulates taking part in the military’s first day of basic training.

The experience bolsters the company’s slogan, “we know what it means to serve.”

“I love that there is a sharply defined mission and USAA is very focused on why we exist,” one commented.

“Great work, smart people, rock solid company that I don’t have to worry about financially,” said another.

This is the second year that Pinnacol, which was formed in 1915 and provides workers’ compensation coverage for Colorado companies, has made the Top Workplaces list.

A quasi-public authority, Pinnacol serves 56,000 Colorado businesses.

Pinnacol employees surveyed praise a positive work environment, flexible scheduling and work-at-home options as well as a suite of benefits that include on-site wellness and fitness classes. The company also provides up to $5,250 per year for graduate and undergraduate classes.

“I am provided with the proper tools and education needed to perform my duties efficiently and accurately, which makes me feel successful,” one wrote. “I am so grateful for the flexibility to work from home and keep a healthy work/life balance.”

“I have opportunities to learn while working with a wide variety of talented, professional coworkers who care deeply about what we do,” said another.

Progressive employs 1,837 of its 33,000-member workforce in Colorado.

The Mayfield Village, Ohio-based company provides employees with onsite health clinics, farmers markets, fitness centers and fitness programming/special events for those on larger campuses like the one in Colorado Springs.

Survey respondents gave the company credit for offering opportunities to grow, a collegial staff, flexible scheduling and effective web-based and in-classroom training.

“I am encouraged to be the best version of myself and rewarded for it,” said one. “When Progressive has a new way and more efficient way to do things that creates a better customer experience and helps Progressive towards the goal of becoming the number one insurance company, they spend time and testing to find what works best and then Progressive trains the associates.”

The company encourages diversity of thought and inclusion through employee referral programs. “I get to see first hand how much Progressive values finding great people to work here — the commitment to the employees is real and strong,” one employee wrote.

The Denver Post needs your support.
Subscribe now for just 99 cents for the first month.