
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Law enforcement agencies across the Front Range are looking for more women to wear their uniforms and badges and bring much-needed diversity to the ranks.

To find them, 19 federal, state and local agencies are hosting a “Recruiting Women into Law Enforcement” event Thursday at Regis University. Participating agencies will include the FBI, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Colorado Bureau of Investigation, the Denver Police Department and the Arapahoe County Sheriff’s Office. The event will be held from 6 to 8 p.m. Wednesday in Room 315 of Claver Hall on the Regis campus, 3333 Regis Boulevard.

“We all want our law enforcement agencies to reflect our communities,” said Calvin Shivers, special agent in charge of the FBI’s Denver field office. “Everyone brings a different perspective to the job.

There are 13,500 sworn law enforcement officers in the state of Colorado, said Annie Skinner, a spokeswoman for the state Attorney General’s Office. But the Peace Officer Standards and Training division, which falls under the attorney general’s oversight, doesn’t keep statistics on how many of those officers are women, she said.

The FBI’s Denver field office has 38 special agents and about a fourth of them are women, Shivers said. Nationally, about 20 percent of the FBI’s agents are women, he said.

“We could always do better,” he said.

At the Denver Police Department, 13 percent of the department’s 1,498 officers are women, said Sonny Jackson, a department spokesman.

Besides having recruiters on hand, there will be a panel discussion with female law enforcement officers who will answer questions about being wives and mothers while working their way up the rank. Women who have worked their way to high-ranking positions within their agencies will be on hand.

“We want to show women can certainly rise to any rank they want in a department,” Shivers said.


Amy Sanders, an FBI agent in Denver, will be one of the speakers at Wednesday’s event. She first learned about jobs in the FBI as an accounting major at Texas A&amp;M University but still chose to join a corporate accounting firm after graduation.

After three years in corporate America, Sanders decided to apply to the FBI. She said she feeds off the various tasks she might be called to during a week of work — testifying before a grand jury, conducting surveillance, making arrests and using the analytical skills she developed as an accountant.

“I like that you aren’t necessarily going to be behind a desk all day,” she said.

Reader support helps bring you quality local journalism like this. Please consider becoming a subscriber.
Your first month is only 99 cents.