
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

Karon White worked as a dietitian at a nursing home in south Florida before she lost her job. With encouragement from her niece, she moved to Denver in January in hopes of finding employment. She found a job at Elitches, but contracted pneumonia and couldn’t work. Soon, she became homeless.

Elle Masson and Nicole Lewk have known each other since high school. They were living together, and both were working, but Masson, who said she struggles with mental health issues, had a tough time holding down a job. Lewk struggled to make enough to support them both. The pair say a variety of reasons left them homeless.

“It just sort of got to the point where eventually there was nothing left for us. We didn’t really have anywhere else to go,” Masson said.

The three women are roommates at The Delores Project, a shelter for homeless, single women and transgender individuals that was created 17 years ago. A new shelter will be included in the Arroyo Village affordable-housing complex, a project in West Colfax that broke ground in August and is expected to open its doors in early 2019.

Arroyo Village will include 95 units of affordable housing for individuals and families and 35 units of ultra low-income housing for people who have experienced homelessness. The shelter itself, projected to open next summer, will be home to 52 women and transgender individuals.

The project is part of a collaborative effort between The Delores Project and Rocky Mountain Communities, an affordable-housing developer, and is funded through the federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit program, which pays for services and some construction.

There are 1,023 homeless women and transgender people in Denver, according to a 2017 point-in-time survey from the Metro Denver Homeless Initiative. Point-in-time surveys involve a count of sheltered and unsheltered homeless people on a single night in January.

“The thing that this new shelter gives us is space to build our supportive services so that people can participate in programs and resources that are going to help guide them to stability and help them find a place of their own to live,” said Terrell Curtis, executive director of The Delores Project.

One of those supportive programs is Steps to Stability, where White, Mason and Lewk are receiving assistance. It focuses on improving homeless people’s lives by working on their physical health, behavioral health, income and housing situation. The Delores Project develops individualized plans to help people work toward self-defined goals. People must apply for the program, and those who are accepted receive a permanent spot in the shelter.


“You kind of really got to show that you are right for the program, and that you’ll be able to do the steps and get active on your feet and do what needs to be done. I personally do not want to spend the rest of my life in a shelter. I want an apartment,” White said.

The new shelter will feature conference rooms that can hold up to 20 people for programs like Steps to Stability. It’ll also have two large dorm rooms, a bathroom with showers, a kitchen, a library and a dining room where guests can eat indoors or outdoors.

The current shelter resembles a college dormitory with individual rooms with bunk beds and closets. It’s more appealing than other Denver homeless shelters, say White, Masson and Lewk. However, the new shelter will be better equipped to not only house people but to help them become self-sufficient.

“This is my safe place,” White said of The Delores Project. “Nobody can touch me no matter what. I honestly don’t know what I would do if I didn’t have this place.”