
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

KANSAS CITY, Mo. — In another cramped visiting locker room coated in the stench of another loss, Broncos cornerback Chris Harris voiced frustration with the tough spots that have been presented to the Denver defense. 



“There’s high tension, man,” Harris said following the Broncos’ 29-19 loss, a game in which Denver turned the ball over five times. “We’re not winning. We’re not taking care of the football. We’re giving the games away.” 


The Broncos were dropped in an early hole for the third straight game. Chiefs cornerback Marcus Peters returned a fumble 45 yards for a touchdown on Denver’s second drive, and the Broncos were down 14-0 after a Chiefs touchdown drive later in the first quarter. 



But that was the only touchdown the defense surrendered against one of the top offenses in the league. The Broncos limited the Chiefs to five field goals after that, most of which followed Denver turnovers. 



 



“It’s hard,” Harris said. “We spotted them seven points again. We do things where they get on the board first and they’re scoring on defense. … It’s hard to win when you don’t score, when you don’t outscore the other team. We’ve got to score.” 




Frustration with continued giveaways — only the Browns have committed more turnovers than the Broncos’ 17 — echoed throughout the locker room, on both sides of the ball. Denver scored two touchdowns, breaking a stretch of seven quarters without one, and outgained the high-powered Chiefs in total yards, 364-276. 
Related Articles


July 10, 2018


			
	
				
			NFLPA files grievance challenging league’s new national anthem policy		

			
	


July 9, 2018


			
	
				
			Denver Broncos unveil banner for football stadium’s temporary name		

			
	


July 9, 2018


			
	
				
			Broncos single-game tickets go on sale July 25		

			
	


July 9, 2018


			
	
				
			The Denver Broncos mascot’s $23 million Silverthorne ranch is for sale		

			
	


July 8, 2018


			
	
				
			NFL Summer Series: Ranking top cornerback duos after offseason changes		

			
	





Yet, any momentum the Broncos created was consistently thwarted by turnovers. 



“I think it’s at one of the highest of all season,” wide receiver Demaryius Thomas said when asked to gauge the offense’s level of frustration. “At one point in the game we had four turnovers and it was a one possession game. The frustration is really high because we were in the game the whole time, with the turnovers. We have to keep pushing because the season is far from over.” 


Broncos coach Vance Joseph said late Monday that he would evaluate the quarterback position, citing the offense’s turnovers as the reason for being open to a change. Those turnovers have continued to put the Broncos defense in untenable positions during a three-game losing streak that has threatened to derail the season. 



“It’s a tough situation when you hold a team like that to that many field goals,” Broncos linebacker Shane Ray said. “But it would be selfish for us (as a defense) to say, ‘What else can we do?’ We’ve just got to keep fighting and keep going, even when the situation isn’t looking good for us.” 


