

For more than 40 years, the Campus Lounge, a grubby sports bar with a hockey theme, sticky floors and cheap shots that summoned drunken debauchery, occupied a prominent corner on South University Boulevard in the Bonnie Brae neighborhood.

Last year, longtime owner Jim Wiste sold the institution to Daniel Landes, owner of City, O’ City, Make, Believe Bakery and founder (and former owner) of WaterCourse Foods, and in October of this year, Landes unveiled Campus Lounge 2.0. After three visits to the renovated restaurant and watering hole, here’s our take on the good, the bad and the ugly.


Vibe: What? WHAT? If you try to speak in a normal voice at the Campus Lounge, I can almost guarantee that you won’t be heard. You will need to shout, yell or screech. And it helps if you’re a lip-reader or know sign language. It helps, too, if you’re very, very friendly with your dining companion, because in order to have an actual conversation, it’s all but necessary to position your nostrils within inches of each other. Even then, if you complain to your date that it’s too loud, it’s unlikely she’ll hear you. And so it goes at this cacophonic watering hole and restaurant from Daniel Landes, founder of City, O’City, the Make, Believe Bakery and Watercourse Foods, which he sold in 2015.

Landes, whose restaurants have always marched to a funky beat, took over the decades-old, bad-decisions-happen-here Bonnie Brae saloon in 2016, and in late October of this year, he unleashed version 2.0, re-illuminating the nostalgic neon sign and renovating the low-ceilinged space.

While the facelift is certainly an improvement over its predecessor, it feels oddly aimless. The white walls, despite being stamped with conversation-piece art, evoke sterility; the black stools — in the bar and fronting the chef’s counter — tip forward without much effort; and the garish yellow lighting, which I imagine was intended to cast an ambient glow, is flat-out atrocious. To sum it up: It mimics a badly decorated rec room. The upside: The vinyl booths, hued mustard, are comfortable, and the horseshoe-shaped bar hums with a happy buzz. For your amusement, there’s a photo booth, an eclectic CD-stocked jukebox, a pinball machine and an old-school Pac-Man arcade game. Thrills.

Hits: Landes made a name for himself at Watercourse and City, O’ City by proving that a vegan and/or vegetarian lifestyle wasn’t just a hippy fad, that tofu, grains, meat substitutes and vegetables in their four seasons deserve permanent starring roles.

So it’s no surprise that a starter of scarlet beets and still-crunchy rainbow carrots ($10), underscored with drifts of verdant pesto and pooled in a yogurt sauce tinged yellow from turmeric, sings a harmonious tune. Deviled eggs ($6), pickled in beet juice, creamed with whole-grain mustard and specked with flutters of crisped potato chips and feathery microgreens, are pleasurably satisfying, and the pasta Bolognese ($18), a big portion of sturdy noodles that hold their own against a slightly creamy, lively seasoned sauce meaty with lamb, pork and beef, is illustrative of what chef Chris Medved, formerly of Steuben’s and Ace Eat Serve, is capable of when he’s in his comfort zone.

Misses: Here’s the problem: The melting pot menu tries to offer up something for every mood and persuasion, which isn’t necessarily a signal of an identity crisis, but when there’s a marked lack of focus and too many dishes are misconceived or prepared with a scrappy hand, you feel like you’ve been hijacked. A plate of Brussels sprouts ($7) yields whole blobs that are far too big to pop into your mouth, and someone in the kitchen failed to trim the stems. Duck meatballs ($10) are too dense, and while they’re billed as “Thai-style,” it’s only the sweet chile sauce on the side that makes them so. The dull-flavored pork loin ($23), deathly pale and anemic, is further insulted by a sidekick of inedible risotto cooked by someone who was seemingly sleepwalking. And the Bananas Foster ($7)? Only if you want a super-aggressive rum rush.

Drinks: The beer scroll is a bit thin, but the choices — most notably the excellent Call to Arms oats and hose oatmeal porter and 4 Noses bareback raspberry blonde — are solid, plus all of the beers are available by the glass and pitcher, and the prices ($6-$7 for a pint and $22-$26 for a pitcher) are fair. Wines by the glass (all of which are on tap) include The Crusher petite syrah and the Pratsch grüner vetliner — and the bartenders don’t skimp on the pours. But bottles start at $30, which is a bit steep when you’re in the company of vinyl, wood paneling and arcade games.

I am, however, a defender of the cocktail compendium, especially the Campus martini ($12), an unfussy, first-rate drink of Leopold Bros. Navy Strength gin, salted dry vermouth and a triple-olive garnish. The cocktails aren’t cheap, but they’re done right.

Service: Attentive, quick, friendly and accommodating.

Bottom Line: Campus Lounge wants to be a neighborhood hangout, and while there’s potential, it needs to step up its game, especially when it comes to the menu, a disoriented cluster that’s bereft of purpose and, all too often, haphazardly executed. The crushing decibel level needs to be addressed sooner rather than later, as does the lighting, and the main dining room, despite its retro vibe, feels sparse. Go during off hours for a martini, the carrots and beets and the pasta Bolognese.

Price: Bar snacks ($4-$20); Salads ($12-$14); Large plates ($14-$30); Desserts ($3-$10)

Fun Fact:  Prior to college, chef Medved admits that he didn’t know how to boil water, much less cook. Nonetheless, he started working at a restaurant in Winter Park, and during his first week as a prep cook, he sliced every finger on both hands. Still, he says, “I fell in love with the craft, the lifestyle and the camaraderie. I knew that I had found my home in the kitchen.”

701 S. University Blvd., 720-535-7021; campusloungedenver.com
Hours: Lunch and dinner daily; kitchen open until 11 p.m. nightly
Reservations: Accepted
Parking: Free street parking and lot parking at New Denver Church, located on the southeast corner of Bonnie Brae Boulevard and University Boulevard

Star Rating Guide: Ratings range from zero to four stars. Zero is poor. One star, satisfactory. Two stars, good. Three stars, very good. Four stars, excellent.

* (one star)

What to do, where to be and what to see, from 



Your email address, so we can reply:

An edition of The Denver Post.
					All contents Copyright © 2018 The Denver Post or other copyright holders. All rights reserved.
					This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed for any commercial purpose.