

Holiday decorations in some public spaces can be more ho-hum than ho-ho-ho fun, but that is not the case when it comes to the Governor’s Residence at Boettcher Mansion this season. The theme this year is holiday cultural classics that are performed around Colorado each year, so rooms are inspired by such shows as “Polar Express,” Charles Dickens’ “A Christmas Carol,” and “The Nutcracker.”

For the fifth consecutive year, interior designers have decorated six rooms in the Capitol Hill mansion, and the teams came up with whimsical and clever approaches to their assignments. The most fun space is the Palm Room, which David Rote and several other designers transformed into the Land of Sweets from Tchaikovsky’s famous ballet, “The Nutcracker.”

Rote topped a massive Christmas tree with a version of Mother Ginger, who in the ballet conceals eight gingerbread children in her skirts. The urns that typically hold potted plants in the room now display giant pink lollipops and cupcakes. White columns are wrapped with thick scarlet ribbon to look like candy canes. Decorating the tree and elsewhere in the room are 60 pairs of bedazzled toe shoes donated by the Boulder Ballet. “It’s kind of like ‘Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory’ meets Katy Perry’s ‘California Gurls,’ ” Rote says of his space.

From the home’s entrance all the way to the Palm Room, the central grand hallway features a variety of representations of festivals of light. There are simple Scandinavian-inspired window candle arrangements, a contemporary twig menorah, and Asian lanterns, among other displays. “We are showing what light means to various cultures,” said Kelli Walden of Select Interiors.

Fans of nostalgia will want to linger in the Governor’s Room, where Trish Bonney has created a cozy “Polar Express” space with a toy train, tree with retro multicolored lights and a gift-laden sleigh.

Also looking back is the Dickens-motif Grand Drawing Room. Stephen Kohlbeck took the lead in the space with a “Christmas Carol” motif, including mannequins dressed in late 19th century clothing, a tree with such traditional decorations as dried orange slices, strings of popcorn and cranberries, and candles for lighting. Visitors will also spy Tiny Tim’s crutch near the fireplace.

For the state dining room, Cathrin Crampton of Mosaic Interiors chose one of the residence’s ornate multicolored china patterns as the scheme for her decorations. She made swags and garlands incorporating greens, fruits and cones that she treated to metallic paint. Botanical illustrations by Laurie Tennent decorate panels high on one wall. Menus from restaurants classic and new are on display.

MORE: 7 holiday-decorated Colorado spots worth the drive

Colorado’s music traditions and choral groups that perform around the state inspired Leslie Kazmierczak of Level10 Interiors to incorporate sheet music into various items used to decorate the tree and tabletops in the room. Instruments are in one corner, lacking just a few musicians to bring them to life.

“Every year we explore how Colorado celebrates the holidays and find new ways to appreciate them,” says Nicole Bopp, executive director of the Governor’s Residence Preservation Fund.

2017 Holiday Ornaments 

This year’s collectible holiday ornament inspired by an object in the Governor’s Residence at the Boettcher Mansion is the “Wishing Well.” The decoration, the ninth in a series, is made of brass that is hand-finished in 24-karat gold. For sale online or during tours of the mansion, the ornaments are $30 and come packaged in a gift box. Proceeds from the sale benefit the Governor’s Residence Preservation Fund, a non-profit organization dedicated to preserving the historic Governor’s Residence. coloradoshome.org/gifts

Free public tours of the Governor‘s Residence at Boettcher Mansion, 400 E. 8th Ave. in Denver, will be Thursday through Sunday, Dec. 7-10, and Dec. 14-17 from 10 a.m. until 2 p.m. More information at coloradoshome.org 

You may not be planning to transform your home into a theatrical stage set with holiday trimmings like several of the designers used at the Governor’s Mansion this year, but you can still benefit from their decorating expertise. We asked them to share some ideas on how to outfit your home without going broke or crazy. Some of their ideas:

Trish Bonney of TAB Interior Design, Highlands Ranch

Often, less is so much more. If you overwhelm a space with decorations, it gets cluttered. For example, your first impression is your entry and framing your door simply with garland embellished with ribbon is plenty to make a gorgeous impact.

Check out local holiday bazaars, thrift stores or flea markets.  Not only can you haggle prices, but you also may find items that are unique.

Get crafty and create your own decorations.  In addition to saving money, if you do this with family and friends, you are creating amazing memories that will last a lifetime. That’s a huge part of what the holidays are all about.

Leslie Kazmierczak, owner, Level10 Interiors, Denver

Start early.  As most people lament these days, Christmas items start appearing in stores as early as September, but this is great news for crafters and decorators.  Often these items go on sale for 50 percent off far before the holidays and give people plenty of time to get everything
together.

Make your own. There are many easy projects out there, from ornaments to table décor to gifts. Join Pinterest and start crafting.

Look for inexpensive or even free items. A church donated sheet music to me and I was able to craft many ornaments from this. Paint and embellish and old picture frame, and add a treasured holiday photo to adorn a table top.

Don’t be afraid of color. There is no need to stick with the standard red, green and gold if they don’t float your boat.

Stephen Kohlbeck, Allied ASID

My design preference when decorating for the holidays is keeping things pared down.  This allows each object to shine on its own, rather than floating in a sea of clutter.

A lot of people love to shop sales at the end of the season.  Start to develop a scheme, so that you are focused on buying just those few perfect finds.

Plan ahead. My mom decorated her tree with small glow-in-the-dark angels.  One year, my brother spent months finding them on eBay and other online sites, and sent them to me.  A couple years ago, we decided to put several hundred of them on the tree.  It was hilarious to see all of these angels glowing.

Add thrifty touches of fun to your rooms.  I just purchased a couple packages of small bells from the craft store. I’ll attach them to garland near where people walk.  It will offer a surprise when someone brushes up against them, adding a playful jingle. All for about $3.

Kelli Walden of Select Interiors, Lafayette

The holidays are time to create a little magic. Almost anything can say “holiday.” Tuck a sprig of greenery on a tray, replace white candlesticks with red or gold, fill a glass jar with candy canes, plant amaryllis or paper whites, tie a bow on a door handle, amass citrus in a bowl.

Editing is critical to good design. Make a plan that is personal to you and stick to it. Write it down and stay focused.  Create a theme for your home and carry that thread throughout. What is evocative to you?  A winter cardinal, a snowy owl, a child’s sled, ice skates, plaid ribbon, holly? Then as you find things throughout the year that may not even be specifically “for Christmas,” purchase those items that fit your style. Store them and label so they are easily accessible when the time comes. I take photos every year of my décor so I can replicate what works without reinventing the wheel.  You can tweak the theme year after year by injecting a different color or adding a new element.

Find room for vignettes. Break up your space into manageable parts. On a mantel, behind a sink, on an outdoor table, the top of a piano. Small moments can be beautiful.

What to do, where to be and what to see, from 



Your email address, so we can reply:

An edition of The Denver Post.
					All contents Copyright © 2018 The Denver Post or other copyright holders. All rights reserved.
					This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed for any commercial purpose.