
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

The Denver Sheriff Department is convening a 35-person working committee to explore how to bring in-person inmate visitation back to the city’s jails at the request of the independent monitor.

Jail division chief Elias Diggins on Wednesday told the city council safety committee that the group will begin meeting on Dec. 7 with the focus of bringing back in-person visitation for some inmates at the Van Cise-Simonet Detention Center downtown and the Denver County Jail.

The sheriff’s department replaced in-person visitation with video visitation in 2005 following incidents involving domestic violence and contraband. The department is currently trying to gain approval for a $1.4 million contract to update the video visitation equipment, sparking independent monitor Nick Mitchell to raise concerns.

“The reasons to encourage in-person visitation — particularly between parents and children — are powerful,” Mitchell wrote in his semi-annual report, which was released in October. “So before any contract is finalized, we need to talk about whether depriving kids of in-person visits with their parents is consistent with our values as a city.”

In-person visits better maintain family and community bonds, which help inmates succeed once they are released from jail, Mitchell wrote in the report, which assessed jail performance during the first six months of 2017.

Diggins told the council that jails across the country have trended toward adding in-person visitation. Denver inmates are allowed in-person visits only in bereavement cases.

The working group will evaluate how segments of the jail population, namely those with good behavior, low classifications and mothers, can have access to in-person visits, Diggins said. The main focus would be on inmates who are in jail for long periods, such as a month or two years, instead of those who are there for a couple of days or weeks.

There are fiscal and physical constraints, though, Diggins said. The Denver County Jail only has a small area that could be reconfigured for visits. Renovations would be required at the downtown jail because when it was constructed in 2010, it was built only for video visitation, he said. The change also would require more staff.

The working group consists of sheriff’s department personnel from a variety of ranks, and outside parties, including community groups, council members and the independent monitor. The group will take tours of the jails to evaluate the situation, Diggins said.


City council president Albus Brooks said his office has received requests from families trying to see jail inmates. He said he was worried about the psychological effect of not seeing loved ones face-to-face.

“It seems like that’s tough for the community to not have that contact,” Brooks said.

Diggins advocated for a multifaceted approach that includes both in-person and video visitation. The safety committee voted Wednesday to move the request for the video system upgrades on for full city council consideration.

If approved, the city would enter a 4½-year contract with Securus Technologies that would install and maintain video visitation at the downtown detention center and the county jail.

Sheriff officials said current technology — which includes different systems for the two lockups — is outdated and typically fails five or six times a month. People wanting to talk to loved ones in the jail must be physically at the facility.

Annually, there are more than 30,000 social visits and more than 17,000 professional visits at both jails. The visits are free.

With the updated technology, the systems at both facilities would be synced, meaning families would be able to go to either jail and have a free call with an inmate. People willing to pay a fee could make video calls from their homes using a system similar to Skype.

The sheriff’s department did not give a price estimate for the at-home video calls. However, the 2015 Prison Policy Initiative study reported that Securus charged rates ranging from 50 cents to $1.50 per minute with a typical rate of $1 per minute. At the time, the Douglas County Sheriff’s Office charged 33 cents per minute through its vendor, Telmate.

The new system would have added features, including giving inmates access to a law library and a grievance module that lets inmates type and immediately submit grievances instead of handwriting them and placing them in a box.