Sunny. High near 95F. Winds SSE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low 74F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:52 pm

The calendar turn to 2018 offers new opportunities for those willing to seize them. Today we offer our New Year’s wishes for those in position to shape how the year unfolds:

» President Donald Trump: A foreign policy that meets our national security challenges without war and trade policies that strengthen key relationships, not disrupt them.

» Sen. Deb Fischer: A strong infrastructure bill and continued behind-the-scenes work building consensus to advance her ideas.

» Sen. Chuck Grassley: Vigor to keep holding administrations of every political party accountable and verve to once again value bipartisan input on judicial appointments.

» Gov. Pete Ricketts: An improved state revenue picture. Sound, cooperative solutions with the Legislature to the state’s budget woes. Stronger relationships with lawmakers.

» Nebraska Legislature: Responsible agreement to plug the state’s budget shortfall and a legislative session that includes an informative, worthwhile debate on tax policy.

» State Corrections Director Scott Frakes: Progress toward hiring and retaining prison employees, particularly in Tecumseh and at the Nebraska State Penitentiary in Lincoln.

» Nebraska Health and Human Services CEO Courtney Phillips: Answers for what is driving the increase in the number of state wards into the state foster care system and more families accepting help from HHS to avoid out-of-home placements.

» HHS Medicaid Director Rocky Thompson: Easing the burdens on rural hospitals and behavioral health providers from Heritage Health, the state’s managed care system for Medicaid patients.

» Nebraska Accountability and Disclosure Commission’s Frank Daley: Legislative teeth to help collect unpaid campaign-related fines from people trying to avoid paying them.

» Omaha Mayor Jean Stothert: Improved bond ratings for the city. Positive public input on riverfront revival plans. Continued economic growth. Fewer political distractions.

» Douglas County Board: A change of heart on approving a second set of raises for board members following recent approval of a 34 percent two-year raise.

» Sarpy County leaders: A constructive, mutually acceptable resolution of the annexation dispute over the future 192nd Street interchange along Interstate 80.

» Residents of Sidney, Nebraska: New opportunities to help the community move forward as the company that purchased Cabela’s continues to make its intentions known.

» Midlands farmers and ranchers: Uplift in agricultural prices.

» Residents of Pine Ridge Indian Reservation: Local, state and federal buy-in for their best ideas to address root causes of alcoholism on the reservation.

» NU President Hank Bounds: Enough state funding to continue strengthening academic programs, research efforts, statewide outreach and educating students.

» UNL Chancellor Ronnie Green: Continued achievement in academic programs. Greater progress in boosting graduation rates. Fruitful dialogue that bridges ideological gaps.

» UNO and UNMC Chancellor Dr. Jeffrey Gold: At UNMC, continued success in academic and research commercialization. At UNO, progress in helping first-generation college students and improving graduation rates.

» UNK Chancellor Doug Kristensen: Additional progress in focusing on first-year students’ needs, classroom instruction and building connections to rural Nebraska.

» Creighton President Rev. Daniel Hendrickson: Increasing momentum from the campus’ eastward march as the new School of Dentistry opens, spurring local outreach.

» Nebraska football coach Scott Frost: Rest and recovery after a whirlwind run at Central Florida. Then, restoring the culture that made Nebraska football uniquely unifying.

» Nebraska volleyball coach John Cook: Revel. Recruit. Repeat.

» Creighton basketball coach Greg McDermott: A deep NCAA tournament run.

» UNO athletic director Trev Alberts: Firmer financial footing that allows a young Division I athletic department to reach for success.

» Omaha Public Schools Board: A great hire to replace retiring Superintendent Mark Evans, flanked with public support to rekindle OPS’ march toward better test results.

» Midlanders: A peaceful year where the politics that divide us no longer dominate discourse and give way to the understanding that we are all in this together.




The proposal would give income tax credits to Nebraskans equal to 50 percent of the school property taxes they pay. The credits would amount to about $1.1 billion annually statewide.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Commenting is limited to Omaha World-Herald subscribers. To sign up, click here.

If you're already a subscriber and need to activate your access or log in, click here.