

The Elgin Police Department released video of the fatal shooting of Decynthia Clements by Elgin police on March 12, 2018. Clements' family members spoke with the media on March 22 following the release.

More than 350 people crowded into Elgin’s Bethesda Church of God in Christ on Saturday morning for Decynthia Clements’ funeral, 12 days after the Elgin woman was shot and killed by an Elgin police officer.


The funeral came just two days after Elgin police Chief Jeff Swoboda released body and squad camera video of the shooting along Interstate 90.


Clements, 34, was shot by Elgin Lt. Chris Jensen as the woman came out of her burning car. Police had negotiated with Clements for more than an hour before she was shot, according to police.


While the circumstances of Clements’ death were mentioned by some of those speaking at the funeral, the message offered by the Rev. Carl Clements — the woman’s uncle and a pastor in Beloit, Wis. — was one of Christian love and salvation.


Some who spoke at the service talked of judgment, but others of love and for peace for Clements’ family and loved ones.


In a prayer, the Rev. Cedric Simmons of Bethesda asked for blessings not only for the family, but for the city and its leaders “to make the right decisions going forward.”


The Rev. Walter Blalark — a longtime critic of the Elgin Police Department and former city employee — made the most pointed comments.


He did not know Clements, Blarlark said, other than “the 18-minute video that we saw,” but that he was told she always was concerned for her nieces and nephews.

“We cannot let the memory of Decynthia die on I-90 and 25,” Blalark said. “We must protest this. This injustice shall not go unpunished. I am not talking about hate, I am talking about justice … or it might be my child next.”


Demetrius Smith, a cousin of Clements’, said after the funeral that Decynthia’s death had brought the family closer together.


“We intend to do great in her memory,” Smith said, “getting more involved with local elections and volunteering more in the community in her honor."


Elgin’s African-American community and other allies have protested at Elgin’s Police Department daily since the shooting — the first officer-involved shooting death in the city since 1999.


The Illinois State Police are investigating, and any results of that investigation are expected to take several months, Swoboda has said.


Walker is a freelance reporter.


RELATED


'Disturbing' video shows Elgin woman move toward cops with knife before she's fatally shot »


Elgin police had Taser, rubber bullets ready before fatally shooting woman »


Elgin mayor expresses sorrow over police shooting, calls for patience »


Elgin residents rally outside police headquarters, demand to know why Decynthia Clements was killed »