Elgin and the Fox Valley are dealing with a first wintry bout of very cold weather and signs that flu season is underway have prompted visitor restrictions at some area hospitals.


"This is the time of year when we expect to see an increase in flu activity," Kane County Health Department spokesperson Tom Schlueter said.


Advocate Health Care has put visitor restrictions in place in an effort to limit transmission of influenza at all its acute care sites, including Sherman Hospital in Elgin.


"Advocate has been closely monitoring influenza activity and have seen an increase in cases across the region," spokesperson Christine Vicik said. "With very few exceptions, visitors age 17 and younger are restricted during this severe flu season."


The hospitals are only allowing two visitors into any patient room at a time. And people who have flu-like symptoms such as fever, cough, sore throat, runny or stuffy nose, body aches, headache, chills and fatigue are to refrain from visiting patients.


Presence Health spokesperson Mary Bromet noted that all Presence hospitals, including Saint Joseph in Elgin, have restrictions in place that are similar to those at Sherman.


Like Advocate, Presence is not allowing anyone under 18 to visit patients or patient care areas, and patients may have no more than two visitors at a time.


Folks could be spreading more than a cup of cheer to family and friends at festive get-togethers this month.

Early indications bode for a bad flu season, and medical professionals are advising people to get their annual flu shot to prevent the spread of the virus.

"It's always a concern ahead of...

Schlueter said that reports of influenza-like illness across Kane are where they normally are for the season, with the usual peak reached sometime in January or February.

According to the department's most recent weekly influenza surveillance survey (for the week of Dec. 10 - 16), the emergency rooms at five hospitals in Kane County reported 3.4 percent of visits were for influenza-like illness.


The five reporting hospitals were Advocate Sherman and Presence Saint Joseph in Elgin, Presence Mercy Medical Center and Rush Copley Medical Center in Aurora and Northwestern Medicine Delnor Hospital in Geneva, Schlueter said. Influenza-like-illness is defined as have a fever of 100 degrees or more, with cough or sore throat without other known causes.


The report notes that six labs reported 114 of 635 specimens tested for influenza came back positive that week. Five cases of influenza-related Intensive Care Unit admissions were reported to the health department, and there were three outbreaks of influenza reported at long-term care or assisted living facilities in Kane County. Schlueter said an outbreak means two or more cases of a disease at the same location. He did not have the names of the facilities where the outbreaks occurred.


If you’re wondering just how bad this year’s flu season will be, the University of Chicago has a prediction for you — worse than average, but better than last year’s major siege of the achy sniffles.

And they’ve known that since this summer.

In a paper released Wednesday and published in the journal...

It is hard to get precise numbers of influenza-like illness because many people with symptoms won't seek medical care but will "ride it out at home," Schlueter said. Influenza also is not a reportable disease to the health department, he said.


With flu season underway, Schlueter reminded people to "cover their coughs, wash their hands and stay home when feeling sick." He also urged anyone who has not done so yet to get a flu shot.


"Not all vaccines are perfect," Schlueter said. Still, if not preventing getting the disease, a shot may lessen flu symptoms, he added.


Northwestern Medicine spokesperson Kimberly Waterman said Central DuPage Hospital in Winfield and Delnor in Geneva are seeing an increasing number of flu cases but it is not considered widespread at this time. So the hospitals have no additional restrictions for visitors.


"We are reminding people to get flu shots," Waterman said.


Tuesday also saw daytime high temperatures in the single digits and windchill factors expected to dip well below zero, according to the National Weather Service, while daytime high temperatures are not expected to reach higher than the teens through early next week.


With such frigid weather, Elgin Police Cmdr. Al Young said people seeking shelter can warm up in the lobby of police headquarters in downtown Elgin. Police also work with the Vineyard Church of Elgin in the downtown as well as the PADS of Elgin and the Wayside Center, which share the same building not far from Elgin Community College to get those who are homeless the services they need.


Wayside residential assistant Ralph Bargehr said he expects the facility will be busy this week and was preparing to serve about 40 lunches, dinners and breakfasts. With harsh weather, the Center works with PADS to keep its doors open 24 hours a day, Bargehr said.


mdanahey@tribpub.com