Let’s face it. Elgin voting Councilman (John) Prigge off the council last year was a big, big mistake. He may have only been one person, but this council is way out of control. At least Prigge would have taken on the dirty councilmen and councilwomen we are stuck with now. I would never buy a house in Elgin again just because of this mayor and city council.


President Trump said Make America Great Again, meaning don’t make America go forward but go backward, when America was doing bad things to black people, especially black males. Second, he is telling police it is OK to rough up black people. I am telling you when the police ask you to do something, no matter if you think they are wrong, comply. The president has sent out these subliminal messages, so it is open season on the black male. You can get justice later in the right way. Take heed.


All you Trump haters must not be thinking right. It is sure better than the previous eight years with (former President Barack) Obama, who did nothing. This president is out doing stuff. He doesn’t have to use a teleprompter. Things have never been better. Everyone is working. The stock market is up. Banks are doing good. Retail is doing good. Wake up, everybody.


I read about the Elgin firefighters complaining again. Now in order to get more firefighters, we have to raise property taxes, according to them. How many of these Elgin firefighters live in Elgin? I see a photo of a firefighter who lives in Hampshire. Hampshire’s fire department is a very small fire department. Can Hampshire afford to hire full-time men? No.  So why are these guys wanting all this big money? If they don’t live in Elgin, the tax increase for firefighters doesn’t affect them. They get their big money and go back to their little towns, where they have part-time or volunteer fire departments. It just doesn’t make sense. They are just greedy people. They are not worried about taxpayers who are struggling to get by right now.


It seems like the mayor of Elgin and the city council are doing whatever they can do to attract every cuckoo from all around the Chicago area to come live in Elgin. Come live in Elgin and we will take care of you. We will give you a place to live. We will give you food. What is wrong with the city council? It is time to get voted out.


Speak Out is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, call us at 312-222-2460 or email couriernews@tribpub.com. Please include “speak out” in the subject line.