The Elgin Police Department’s two animal control officers say their own experiences and police department statistics show just how unusual it was for three stray dogs to go after a couple as they were walking along a trail in the Bluff Fen Spring Forest Preserve in June.


“Having a pack attack is very rare,” Officer Matt Ciesielczyk said.


The city has its share of stray dogs, but “no more than in any other jurisdiction,” and a large number of them are ultimately reunited with their owners, he said. Those that aren’t typically find new homes through rescue organizations.


“Loose dogs are usually found running alone,” Ciesielczyk said. “Occasionally we will find two dogs together, but they usually got loose from the same yard. It is very rare to find more than two dogs loose at the same time together.”


In his more than his 14 years with the department, Ciesielczyk said they’ve had calls about about packs of dogs but have never actually found one.


That’s not to say there haven’t been dog attacks in which someone was bitten, as was the case in the Bluff Fen situation. Ann Berardi, 61, of Gurnee, required three stitches after one the three dogs bit her leg as she and her husband were trying to get away from them.


That case was under the jurisdiction of the Cook County Forest Preserve District, although Elgin police help locate the animals, which were euthanized. Their owners were never identified, officials said.


Elgin police have had 45 dog bite incidents in 2018, records show. Of those, 17 involved a dog biting another dog, 27 were a dog biting a person, and one was a dog that bit another dog and a person.

In 2017, there were 85 dog bite reports — 26 involving a dog biting another dog, 53 for a dog biting a person and six in which a dog bit another dog and a person, according to Ciesielczyk.


“In 2016, we had 133 dog bite reports,” Ciesielczyk said. “Of those reports, 33 were dog versus dog bites, 97 were dog versus person bites and three were dog versus dog and person bites.”


Couple attacked, woman bit by stray dogs running in Elgin forest preserve, police say »


Any time a person is treated for a dog bite, the doctor is required it to report it to local law enforcement under state law, he said.


The owner is responsible if their animal bites someone or exhibits other aggressive behavior, and the department can add the pet to their list of dangerous or vicious dogs, Ciesielczyk said. Being placed on either of those lists means a long list of restrictions and requirements for the owner to keep their animal, including a mandate that it be microchipped and spayed or neutered and adherence to insurance, signage and fencing rules.


“These are put in place to prevent future bites,” Cieisielczyk said.


Animals can be removed from the dangerous list after 36 months, but only if there was no bite or physical injury during the initial incident and no other cases are reported, he said.


Currently, there are 29 dogs on the dangerous dog list and five on the vicious list, Ciesielczyk said. One dog has been on the vicious list since November 2010; the most recent addition was a dog that was deemed dangerous on June 1.


Since the creation of the lists in 2010, no dog has been ordered to be euthanized or, as the rules allow, banished from the city, Ciesielczyk said.


Ciesielczyk and fellow Animal Control Officer Kristi Woolard are the ones that end up dealing with dangerous or vicious animals but thus far have mostly escaped injury. Ciesielczyk said he has been bitten twice, both times superficially and by small dogs.


“I’ve been bitten once, and that was by a cat,” Woolard said.


Stray dogs are taken to Gulf Rose Animal Hospital in Schaumburg. In 2017, 233 dogs had to be taken to Gulf Rose, and the number was 255 in 2016. Of those numbers, only four have had to be euthanized for their behavior or for medical reasons, Ciesielczyk said.


“Elgin police have not shot a dog in the line of duty since January 2015,” Ciesielczyk added. That happened during an aggravated battery call, when the dog charged and bit the officer, he said.


mdanahey@tribpub.com