Elgin Chief of Police Jeffrey Swoboda is the top candidate to become police chief in Fort Collins, Colo., according to that community's city manager.


The announcement came late Friday night, after Fort Collins City Manager Darin Atteberry and the department's deputy chief, Greg Yeager, spent the day in Elgin interviewing city and police staff, the mayor and other community and business representatives.


Fort Collins had announced in February that Swoboda was one of five finalists for the position. According to a news release, Swoboda was part of a group including Major Edward Bergin of Anne Arundel County, Md.; Deputy Chief Michael Bray of Sacramento, Calif.; Deputy Chief Ashley Gonzalez of Norwalk, Conn.; and Terri Wilfong, a law enforcement consultant from Lexington, Ky.


Swoboda, 48, was sworn in as Elgin's chief on April 16, 2010. He began his career in the city in 1992 and rose through the ranks. He spent five years as an officer in the resident officer program of Elgin, and went on to attain the ranks of sergeant, lieutenant and deputy chief.


Swoboda stepped up to the position of acting police chief after former Chief Lisa Womack went on administrative leave March 10, 2010. He was sworn in as chief April 16 of that year.


According to Atteberry, pending further background check results, an offer could be coming by the end of the week.


"I am excited to receive an offer soon and will be in further discussions with their city," if and when that happens, Swoboda said Saturday morning.


He said he was impressed with the Fort Collins hiring process, noting that community visits were the norm even when hiring police officers.

About 20 people met with Atteberry and Yeager during the visit to Elgin.


"I am impressed with the amount of people that met with him," and that those interviews were less about him than how Elgin "does business," Swoboda said. "He met with social service people, activists in the community, people within the police department. They learned a little more about me but more about how the community works together, how we run things here, and more about the culture we have here and the connections in the police department."


"We consistently heard about Jeff's ability to lead through tough challenges, connect and build relationships, champion change, create a compelling vision, and move skillfully between strategy and detail," Atteberry wrote in a message to his city staff. "We learned about his commitment to service, his passion for excellence and ability to hold all to a high level of accountability."


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.