A Russian national who is a fugitive wanted by federal authorities for three years on tax evasion charges owns a downtown Elgin building that has seen its own share of trouble in recent times.


Now an Elgin entrepreneur is eyeing the space, which he wants to transform into a food hall for budding businesses.


Kane County records state that 51 S. South Grove Ave., which had Smooth Fox as its most recent tenant, is owned by Victor Lipukhin/LV Management, Inc.


According to court documents Lipukhin, 54, ran LV Management and was indicted in March 2014 on one count of attempting to interfere with administration of IRS laws and three counts of making and subscribing a false tax report.


Department of Justice spokeswoman Nicole Navas Oxman said Lipukhin is not in custody, is considered a fugitive, and the case against him is pending.


Despite the situation, Kevin Echevarria said he has a rent-to-own agreement and believes he will be the one to succeed in the building.


"They were asking for $950,000 and that's what we committed to," Echevarria said.


Echevarria has plans to be in the space by January, growing his LocalVore operation at 11 Douglas Ave. and his Shared Dream Kitchen at 1544 Fleetwood Drive.

LocaVore is a pop-up venue for anything from art classes and art shows to restaurants and test kitchens. Shared Dream Kitchen is a food service incubator. Both are part of Echevarria's PKE Enterprises, which Echevarria started with his father.


St. Charles attorney Robert W. Smith is listed as a registered agent for LV Management with the Illinois Secretary of State's Office, but he would not comment on the potential deal.


"I represented LV Management in an eviction case. That's all I can tell you," Smith said.


Court documents state Lipukhin formerly served as president of Severstal Inc., a subsidiary of AO Severstal, the largest steel producer in Russia. He lived in St. Charles from at least 2001 through mid-2007, according to the indictment. Lipukhin ran several domestic entities, including Charlestal, LLC and LV Management, LLC, which owned and rented out properties in the suburbs of Chicago, the indictment states.


Authorities allege that from 2002 at least until 2007, Lipukhin kept bank between $4 million and $7.5 million in Swiss bank accounts. Money from those accounts was held through two entities in the Bahamas, one which initially held $47 million. Lipukhin also had set up two shell companies in the Bahamas, failed to report his ownership of these accounts and failed to report any income earned in these accounts on his tax returns, according to court filings.


According to the indictment, Lipukhin used fictitious mortgages through an entity controlled by a Canadian attorney to conceal his purchase of real estate in the United States with funds from the foreign accounts. Lipukhin also set up another company to buy a building in St. Charles and arranged to have funds transferred to a domestic bank account to conceal the source of the funds, which he used for personal expenses, according to the Department of Justice.


The indictment also alleges Lipukhin attempted to prevent an automobile dealer from filing a Form 8300 — which is required for certain cash transactions over $10,000 — with the IRS in order to report Lipukhin's cash payment to purchase an automobile.


He faces charges of attempting to interfere with the administration of the internal revenue laws and three counts of filing false tax returns. Each is a Class D felony punishable by up to three years in prison and a $250,000 fine, according to court documents.


The 51 S. Grove Ave. address has hosted a number of businesses in recent years. It most recently was home to Smooth Fox, a restaurant and nightclub that closed after about a year in business. Owner Justin Hodge was evicted in June for owing $9,000 in back rent. During Smooth Fox's run, Elgin officials and police held several discussions with Hodge about the number and type of calls for service to the establishment.


According to Courier-News reports, the former department store had been converted into a spot for music and food called Mad Maggie's that opened in 2008 and closed in September 2010. It opened briefly later that year as a spot called The Hangout.


In summer 2011, a Wisconsin couple had signed a lease and planned on opening a restaurant and bar at the location. But costs associated with renovations, particularly elevator repairs the city requested, led to the couple never opening, the Courier-News reported.


In late 2012 the Mexican restaurant Mr. Tequila opened in the space and closed in early 2015, the Courier-News reported.


In 2015, a Plainfield couple planned to turn the spot into a restaurant and bar with a Prohibition era speakeasy theme. They told the Courier-News they stepped away due to issues with an elevator that was not fully operational and a grease trap that leaked and had been badly patched and kept. According to the Kane County Treasurer's Office online records, property tax payments on the downtown Elgin property are paid and up to date, with an installment of $7,914.80 made June 1 and a payment of $8,033.52 made Sept. 6.


Echevarria said if the Grove property became tied up in the case against Lipukhin, he believes the government would work with him instead of kicking him out.


While he has worked with the property broker to set up the deal, he said he has never talked with Lipukhin or Smith, the lawyer. He was on a couple email threads "that had everyone connected on them, but I've never had a direct conversation with his lawyer," he said.


Echevarria declined to provide names of those involved in the deal.


Echevarria said his lease-to-own deal is a "true buy option," he is confident it will allow him to take full control of the building, and that he has the best interests of Elgin at heart for what he is doing.


The South Grove spot would provide more room for pop-up businesses, have a retail aspect and could be used for the 75 dream kitchen members Echevarria works with and space to cater events. Echevarria's plans for the building include having a commercial kitchen and dining room, private event and meeting space, a city liquor license with a separate tap room and offering management and business-development services clients.


Elgin Corporate Counsel William Cogley said if Lipukhin is still an owner that would not be a factor to keep the city from granting Echevarria a liquor license.


"We've done a lot of due diligence," Kevin Echevarria said. "We're confident in the deal. It has language that protects us."


However, Mayor Dave Kaptain said, given the circumstances, Echevarria should be very careful in any deal for the property.

"I know Kevin, and I like him. He's a good guy, and I don't want him to have any trouble with his business," Kaptain said. "But based upon what I've heard, I wouldn't touch that building with a 10-foot pole until things are resolved between the current owner and the federal government."


mdanahey@tribpub.com