On Oct. 20, Pat Pistorio made the trip to Evanston to watch the Wildkits face Niles North in the regular-season finale for both football teams.


Pistorio’s team at South Elgin was 7-1 and would finish its regular season the next day. His task: Scouting Evanston, a potential Class 8A first-round playoff opponent.


Evanston defeated Niles North 48-9, but something about the visiting Vikings caught Pistorio’s eye.


So much so that the fifth-year South Elgin coach was intrigued when he read in March that Niles North head coach Mike Garoppolo had resigned to join his brother, San Francisco 49ers quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo, on the West Coast. Pistorio declared himself “very interested” in the job.


After what Pistorio described as a rigorous interview process, the 37-year-old Elgin native and Larkin graduate was hired as the Vikings’ new coach on May 25.


“Reflecting on what I saw (aginst Evanston), it wasn’t so much about the outcome, but more about the potential the student-athletes at Niles North have,” Pistorio said. “It will be a challenge, but I’m confident with the approach and the system I’ve been able to develop. I’m looking forward to the challenge.”


Pistorio’s challenge is turning around a program that went 3-15 in Mike Garoppolo’s two seasons. Niles North has only one conference victory in its two years in the Central Suburban South after moving over from the CSL North.


The conference record included last season’s forfeit to Maine South, which came during a weeklong suspension of the football program after a possible hazing incident. The program was reinstated after school officials and police determined no criminal conduct had taken place.

The Vikings have made the state playoffs only four times. They made it to the Class 7A quarterfinals as a No. 31 seed in 2015.


In five seasons at South Elgin, Pistorio’s teams went 29-19 and twice made the Class 8A playoffs. His only playoff win was a big one: South Elgin defeated Evanston 62-10 in 2015.


Last fall, the Storm went 8-2 and lost to Palatine in the first round of the playoffs. Their only regular-season loss was a 10-7 setback at Batavia, which went on to win the 7A title.


Niles North athletic director Brett Bildstein said he was impressed by Pistorio’s competitiveness, his coaching success and stories he heard about Pistorio’s work ethic.


“We ask interview candidates, ‘Why do you want to be the head coach at Niles North?’” Bildstein said. “Pat (said he) loved the challenge of the CSL South. He has a proven track record, and every person we talked to about Pat said he is a tireless worker who is not going to stop until the job is done.”


Bildstein and Niles North principal Jim Edwards — who was the principal at South Elgin during Pistorio’s first three seasons — also cited Pistorio’s commitment to academics. Pistorio said his South Elgin team had a 3.1 GPA last season.


“Pat will bring a focus on the student within the student-athlete context. Accountability for himself, his coaches and players,” Edwards said in an email. “(He will be) preparing his team not only for the game, but for the gamut of challenges that life beyond the gridiron presents.”


Pistorio spent three years as the wide receivers coach at Division III Lake Forest College, served as the offensive coordinator at Harper College for two years and spent seven years as an assistant coach for the Chicago Slaughter professional indoor football team.


The winter-to-spring schedule of the indoor league actually allowed Pistorio to be employed as a professional and college coach at the same time.


“There were six or seven years where I was coaching two seasons of football,” Pistorio said. “It’s a lot of football, but I wake up thinking about football, go to sleep thinking about football. It’s a big part of my life.”


Pistorio, a high school receiver and quarterback, said he prefers a spread offense and also has employed the option. He said his teams at South Elgin often were pass-heavy, but with starting quarterback and college baseball recruit Nate Gomez trying not to overuse his right arm last season, the Storm adjusted and relied more heavily on the run.


Pistorio, who will teach in Niles North’s physical welfare department, said he and Bildstein were still finalizing the football coaching staff. Pistorio said he, his wife Christine and their three daughters eventually plan to relocate from Elgin to the Skokie area.


Bildstein said Pistorio likely will meet his players for the first time on June 11 and will hand out equipment that day. Summer workouts will begin June 12.


Dan Shalin is a freelance reporter for Pioneer Press.


Twitter @Pioneer_Press