Persecuting Trump like Christ: This Christmas when I think of Christ's birth, I also think of his persecution. It is President Donald Trump, the most persecuted man since Christ, that makes me feel this way. I see Trump being nailed to the cross by the Democrats, the news media has placed the crown of thorns on his head and his own party, the Republicans, give him a sponge full of vinegar when he asks for water.


Peaceful Christmas season: It is the Christmas season. The celebration of our Lord Jesus Christ, the son of God. He sent us a leader of righteousness and love, but it seems the retail business is trying to take over the season. I understand we want to have a gift under the tree to celebrate not our birthday but Christ's birthday. Take time out to listen to a family quality program on TV, or at the theater or in church. It is the history of Jesus. Pray for those who kill that they hear the message. Go in peace, joy and love this wonderful season.


Great job, Elgin: This is about the Elgin Police Department and Chief Jeff Swoboda. We have a great police chief in Elgin, and I've been in Elgin since '64. I have seen a lot of changes within the city. Our crime rate is down, and you don't see gangs writing stuff on buildings anymore. The city of Elgin should be proud we have a great police department and fire department. I know a couple of retired police officers I hang out with at car shows, and they agree, the city is so much better. Keep up the good work.


What ever happened to: Two questions: What happened to the senior complex that was going to go up on the hill at Laurence and Route 31? Tom Hartwell owns that property, I guess. The other complex that was supposed to go up on Route 72 and Randall Road, on the old Galvan property, what is going on with that? Did they all fall through or what?


Keep it classy: Congratulations to the city and the owner of Copley Hospital on the wonderful job that is being done securing that building. Only in Aurora would you see an owner board up busted windows from the inside while leaving the jagged and dangerous glass on the exterior for everyone to see. Keep it classy, Aurora.


What mothers do: In Chicago the biggest complaint concerning the rodent-plagued school was the children would not be served a hot meal. My gosh, it must kill mothers today to prepare a school lunch. I wonder what mothers do for children today. I think just find a place to drop them off.


Rushed tax bill: The Republicans and the president are rushing this tax bill, pushing it down Americans' throats. If you do your research, you will see that single people right off the bat are going to get hurt by this bill. Single people who itemize. Second, the middle class will get stomped by this tax bill as they did in the Reagan and Bush administration. This is just something they want to rush through because the president may not be able to serve his full term.


Send criminals to war: It's a shame to see the terribly disabled veterans from the Middle East war, then see criminals run the streets freely. It used to be the military did not accept criminals, but Afghanistan or wherever is where they belong. Capture them and send them to face ISIS, the Taliban and Al-Qaeda so decent Americans can enjoy this country they appreciate.

One-sided Speak Out: It is incredibly sad how one-sided your articles are that you publish on Speak Out. I know for a fact it is not all you receive. There was one week, probably when you were on vacation, that it was unbiased. Maybe we should take it up with the editor of The Beacon-News.


Do more to help children: I think you can do more to help the children in school. What you are doing is not good.


What's wrong with GOP? I don't know what is wrong with the good ol' GOP because right now I have never seen the Republican Party in such a way that they are now. It seems like they are angry at the world, and they want to take it out on Joe Q. citizen. If you think this tax bill is not going to rip you apart, you better think again. Right now, Lindsey Graham says if we are wrong, we will pay for it. Part of this bill helps the alcohol industry, and guess who profits from the alcohol industry. Yes, Graham's family.


Need new mayor in Batavia: With all this talk about morals and ethics, it seems like Batavia's mayor left his in his office. He broke the tie vote for the Shodeen One Washington Place project. In fact, the Batavia mayor is a Realtor, so he has a vested interest in ensuring that project goes forward. The people of Batavia and the Planning Commission don't want the project as evident in all the aldermen voting against it, with seven voting against it. The only ones voting for it are not in the TIF district. Maybe it is time that we have a new mayor in Batavia. I supported our mayor as long as we've been here. I've thought up to this point he has done a reasonably good job. Now when he is going against the people, he is no longer representing the people, and I think it's time. Maybe I will run against him this time. I have been urged to run against him before, so maybe I will this time.


Investigate nonprofits: "Area Nonprofits Worry about Tax Changes" — well, they should save their money. It is as bad as the school system. They are always going out to dinners or something and go to expensive places, restaurants and hotels. All that stuff should be investigated.


Aurora should bring back vehicle stickers: I see the brainiacs who run Aurora want to tax natural gas and electricity to make up for lost income. Have they ever thought about having city stickers brought back like we used to have for our vehicles? Judging by the thousands and thousands of cars I see lined up bumper to bumper along the curbs and four to eight cars in driveways, we should make a pretty good haul even at $10 a sticker. Here's another thought: All this downtown property Aurora is buying for artists' studios — how many artists are in Aurora, and how much income is this going to bring?


Dangers in Middle East for Americans: I would like to tell you that if you are an American and are planning to travel to the Middle East, don't. President Little Fingers just made it very unstable and dangerous over there for Americans.

Hefner's legacy: All these high-profile, old celebrities and politicians recently caught up in lecherous sexual behavior are graduates of the late Hugh Hefner's playboy culture. It is ironic this all hits the fan just when the king of playboys, who reigned for 60-plus years, is dead.


Solution to Mideast turmoil: Now that President Trump has stirred up all the Mideast maniacs over Jerusalem, I offer my solution to all the warring factions. It's the smartphone craze that has swept America. Our people are so memorized they would never lay down their tablet to pick up a rifle. This is the greatest thing ever to world peace.


No Pearl Harbor Day coverage: I will tell ya, Courier, you people are pretty standard. Here we have Pearl Harbor Day and not a thing in the paper. I called to remind you to get a couple of pages about it. If it wasn't for the guys who died in the war, you may not have a job at the paper. The Courier did a lousy job.


Bye, bye ,Franken: Now Sen. Franken is blaming everybody else but himself for his misdeeds. It is a good thing he is getting out of there. Anybody with a brain should not have voted for him in the first place.


Need third party: I am an independent voter. Now, the Democrats are not doing too well even though the Republicans look very awful at the moment. I think we actually need a good third party because we are going backward. We have a president that is endorsing a guy who is very, very possibly and looks like to be a pedophile, which leads me to this: The president himself has been accused of the same thing. We are not making America great again.


Sad ending for Copley: What a shame Aurora's old Copley Hospital must face a sad ending. I recall Copley had the most comfortable, homey main waiting room with soft leather furniture and high paneled wood walls. Another loss from Aurora's fabulous history.


Copley on five-year plan: Is the city on the five-year plan for boarding broken windows at Copley? Even in government where things move incompetently and slowly, I have never seen a more pathetic response to conditions at a dangerous building. Way to bring the hammer down, Aurora.


Be happy, don't worry: Here's a good idea for all American citizens: Let's stop being so angry at politicians. Keep an eye on them, but let us not destroy the beautiful American way of life. Maybe if we are lucky, we can get all the music on TV, radio, etc., to start in 2018 to play all of our American songs. Let's get into a strong, loyal, honorable mindset and stand up for our freedom all year long. We are Americans. We are the USA. We are strong people. Don't let politics get you down, and get on the bandwagon singing about the good ol' USA.


Sexual harassment witch hunts: I thought the Salem witch trials were over. But apparently we have new witch trials in the form of sexual abuse allegations. It is trial, conviction and punishment without ever going to trial or ever having evidence presented other than gossip or "he said, she said." I think these women coming out after the fact are really sullying the real attempts to fight sexual abuse and sexual harassment.


Editor's note


Speak Out is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, call us at 312-222-2460 or email couriernews@tribpub.com. Please include "speak out" in the subject line.