From left to right: Favio Velazquez, Ira A. Burdine and Dana J. Prouty.

From left to right: Favio Velazquez, Ira A. Burdine and Dana J. Prouty.

Elgin police said Wednesday the indictment of three people on charges related to illegal weapon purchases in Kane County is related to the discovery of a cache of weapons last year.


Three people face criminal charges in an alleged plot to illegally buy guns, according to a news release from Kane County State's Attorney Joe McMahon.


Ira A. Burdine, 40, of the 1900 block of Gideon Avenue in Zion; Dana J. Prouty, 46, of the 9000 block of Sheridan Road in Kenosha, Wis.; and Favio Velazquez, 38, of the 1700 block of Alum Creek Drive in Columbus, Ohio, have been indicted on a class X felony count of unlawful purchase of a firearm.


They have been accused of providing false information at the time the weapons were bought, saying the weapons were not being bought on behalf of another person, according to the charging documents.


"The law that these three individuals are alleged to have violated is in place to protect against guns getting into the hands of the wrong people," McMahon said in the release.


The charges stem from the discovery in August 2016 of a cache of weapons including fully automated firearms and hand grenades in a Big Timber Road storage facility, police said.


Juan Mexicano, 32, of Addison, was arrested after that search. He remains in the Kane County Jail on $1 million bail awaiting trial. Mexicano was charged with five class 2 felony counts of possession of weapons-machine guns.


Juan Mexicano

Juan Mexicano

Kane County prosecutors are handling the cases because the guns were found in Elgin, officials said. Federal officials have not indicated where the weapons were bought or their intended use.

According to Kane County court documents, the guns recovered in Elgin included:


&lt;z_sym_square_bullet&gt;A Colt AR-15 SP1 model .223-caliber rifle designed to shoot more than one shot without manual reloading by a single function of the trigger.


&lt;z_sym_square_bullet&gt;Two unknown model .233-caliber rifles designed to automatically shoot more than one shot.


&lt;z_sym_square_bullet&gt;An MP28 Schmeisser designed to automatically shoot more than one shot.


&lt;z_sym_square_bullet&gt;A .45-caliber Thompson submachine gun designed to automatically shoot more than one shot.


The arrests were part of a joint investigation between the Elgin Police Department, Homeland Security Investigations and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, police said.


After the indictments, warrants for their arrests were issued. Burdine's bail was set at $150,000, Prouty's at $100,000 and Velazquez's at $200,000.


Burdine and Prouty were taken into custody Sept. 11 by agents from Homeland Security Investigations and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. Burdine posted bond and was released. His next court appearance is Oct. 5 at the Kane County Judicial Center. Prouty remains in Kane County Jail. Her next court date is Sept. 28 at the Judicial Center.


Velazquez was taken into custody Sept. 22, in Columbus, Ohio, by local ATF task force officers, according to the release. His extradition from Ohio is pending.


James M. Gibbons, special agent in charge of Homeland Security Investigations' Chicago office said, "Anyone who 'straw purchases' guns circumvents the federal laws designed to keep firearms out of the hands of criminals, terrorists and other threats to national security and public safety."


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for the Courier-News.