On most nights since Christmas Eve, Tammy Wheatley has left her full-time job and headed to Elgin's First United Methodist Church for her volunteer job — coordinating the emergency homeless shelter.


She and other volunteers, rotating a sleeping schedule, stay at the church for 12 hours, from 7 p.m. to 7 a.m., making sure those who have come to stay warm are also safe and fed.


At the Public Action to Deliver Shelter (PADS) of Elgin location, it has been open all day, every day, once temperatures started hitting 15 degrees, said Sarah Ponitz, executive director of the shelter.


Meanwhile, on Friday afternoon, three area homeless residents sat in the Elgin Police Department lobby to warm themselves. Two of those residents said they sometimes stay at the emergency shelter but that they don't use the PADS location.


Elgin's homeless situation has been in the national spotlight following a Courier-News story about the city's decision to shut down a local resident's makeshift basement shelter. The facility consisted of cots and blankets in an unfinished basement where Elgin resident Greg Schiller allowed people who are homeless to stay overnight. He compared it to a slumber party. News outlets such as the New York Post, NBC News and the Miami Herald have featured the story.


A year after an Elgin resident was cited for allowing people to sleep in a garage in the 400 block of Lawrence Ave., he has been cited again after he said he let people who are homeless sleep in his unfinished basement.

Greg Schiller said his reading of city code allows for "slumber parties," and...

Schiller and his girlfriend, Teresa Quarles, who owns the home, were cited in December for violations by Elgin's code compliance department. The city was called by an unidentified resident who reported Schiller was operating a shelter in a basement of the house in the 400 block of Lawrence Avenue. Schiller said he only opened his doors on nights when wind chills were expected to hit 15 degrees or below, the threshold that would trigger the opening of another shelter.


Elgin's city code specifically prohibits hotels, houses and apartment buildings from being used as a homeless shelter.


The city obtained a warrant Tuesday to enter the property and cited Schiller and Quarles for the illegal shelter. The cots lining the home's basement have been removed, city officials said.

Since the recent cold snap started, both Elgin shelters — the emergency shelter in the basement of the First United Methodist Church and the PADS shelter — have been open.


The emergency shelter opens only when temperatures dip below 15 degrees. The PADS shelter has opened for full days — rather than its typical 7 p.m. to 7 a.m. schedule.


There have not been more people using the PADS shelter at 1730 Berkley St. since the cold snap started, Ponitz said. They have averaged 50 to 55 people a night.


Now in its fifth winter in Elgin, the First United Methodist Church's emergency shelter — operated by the Matthew 25:40 Ministry of Elgin — housed 45 people Tuesday night. That is the most people it's ever had in one night, Wheatley said.


Schiller, who co-founded the Matthew 25:40 Ministry with Wheatley, resigned from that organization in the summer of 2016. Schiller said that even though he left the ministry, he felt it was his duty to do what he could for the homeless.


"I felt that the bare minimum wasn't good enough," Schiller said.


The Rev. Rick Carlson, minister with Matthew 25:40, asked Wheatley to return to run the shelter.


"By then there was a bit of a change" in the ministry leadership, he said.


Wheatley and the current Matthew 25:40 board — which has received federal nonprofit status — have operated the church shelter for two consecutive years.


Before the latest cold snap, the shelter had been open for two nights this winter season. On one of those nights, the temperature dropped below 15 degrees around 6 a.m., Wheatley said.


As temperatures are expected to rise, the shelter will likely close and then reopen if temperatures drop below the 15-degree mark, Wheatley said.


Those involved in the emergency shelter said they would gladly open at higher temperatures but for one major road block: a lack of volunteers.


"Immediately, (the need is) people. We need people who can be here all night long for 12 hours. That means we need people who do not have anything going on in the daytime," said Carrie Olinger, a member of the Matthew 25:40 Ministry since it began operating the emergency shelter.


Wheatley said that while the shelter needs 12-hour coverage, she can also use people who can only work a portion of the night — shifts from 6 to 10 p.m. and from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.


While both agencies — the emergency shelter and PADS — serve the homeless, they are serving different populations.


The emergency shelter is designed to be used by those who otherwise cannot, or will not, use PADS, she said.


PADS does not take people who have been convicted of violent felonies, including those on the sex offender registry; have an unmedicated mental illness; are actively using drugs or alcohol; or are unable to prove Elgin residency, Wheatley said.


"They have the rules they have because they have families there," Olinger said of PADS.


PADS has, in recent months, worked to adjust the rules about who can use the shelter. Originally, those using the shelter had to show a six-month connection to the community. The board is moving to ease those restrictions, Ponitz said.


The shelter serves residents of Elgin, Hanover and Dundee townships. "We are going to be expanding our boundaries as well, hopefully," she said.


A 58-year-old woman who identified herself as homeless said she has gone to the emergency shelter but that she does not stay at PADS.


"I normally hang outside," she said Friday in the Police Department lobby. She said she prefers the outdoors, noting that she will also stay warm at the Gail Borden Library, at laundromats or by getting on a PACE bus. "I go to whatever open door," she said.


A 47-year-old woman in the Police Department's warming space Friday said she came to Elgin four months ago, before she knew PADS only took residents with local connections. "Nobody wants to sleep there," she said of the PADS shelter.


She said she works but doesn't have money for a place to stay yet.


"I am sleeping on the street until I get paid," she said.


She did not know that PADS had opened during the day with the cold snap but was aware the adjacent Wayside Center was open full time.


PADS requires clients to blow into a Breathalyzer. They are allowed to stay in the building's vestibule until they can show they are not drunk.


"We don't deny anyone shelter" if they can follow the guidelines, said PADS board President Steve Stauffacher. "If they are not drunk, not high and not a violent felon, we don't turn away. They can stay."

There is a perception that PADS has "this big list of rules at the front door. That is not true. We are not interested in turning people away," Stauffacher said.


There are homeless people who do not want to use PADS — or can't — Wheatley said. A handful of the 45 or so known homeless people in Elgin who do not fall in one of those prohibited categories have indicated they are not comfortable with staying at PADS and its rules for staying there, she said.


Those people are allowed into the emergency shelter as long as they do not bring in alcohol or drugs or harm another person, Wheatley said.


One of the complaints about either shelter is the 15-degree cutoff, which some consider too low a threshold. At least one person involved in the shelter thought that was a Federal Emergency Management Agency guideline, but neither the Chicago FEMA office nor the Illinois Emergency Management Agency were aware of any temperature guidelines for emergency shelters.


"What is the right number? Is it 18, 19, 32 degrees?" Stauffacher said.


The emergency shelter opened five years ago following deaths in Elgin's homeless community, Wheatley said. At some point in that first year, two uniformed officers arrived with a letter from the city that allowed the emergency shelter to operate when temperatures were expected to dip to 10 degrees, Wheatley said. In 2016, during a meeting of social service providers, Elgin police Chief Jeff Swoboda suggested the 15-degree threshold, Wheatley said. Swoboda said he is supportive of the efforts by shelter volunteers.


"I have had many (conversations) with members of Matthew 25:40 over the past few years as we have discussed how to best serve those needing shelter," Swoboda said Friday.


Wheatley and Olinger said they would love to operate a permanent shelter or work with PADS to create a shelter for those underserved communities. They also believe the threshold could be increased.


"We need someone with expertise" to create a plan for a permanent shelter for those not served by PADS, Wheatley said. A "low-threshold shelter" that reduces the requirements of who can get in would be her ideal, Wheatley said.


"We need a separate group to do long-range planning" for a second shelter or add to what is already here, she said.


"We want to do it right, and we want to do it with integrity. There are no quick fixes for this," Wheatley said.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.