Fourteen  people are facing a total of 71 counts of felony charges in Aurora after a nearly yearlong investigation into allegations of drug dealing and firearms sales led to execution of search warrants and several of the suspects being arrested, according to a post Saturday on the Aurora Police Department Facebook page.


“The streets of Aurora are safer due to our partnership with the FBI and the Kane County state’s attorney’s office and our shared mission of targeting weapons and drug offenders,” Aurora police Chief Kristen Ziman said in the Facebook post.


According to the post, 13 men and one woman were charged Friday.


One man, Alexander Fuentes, 20, of the 600 block of South Fourth Street, faces 23 charges, five of which are Class-X felonies, which call for enhanced penalties if he is convicted, police said.


According to the social media post, the FBI and Kane County state’s attorney’s office assisted Aurora police with the investigation where authorities made undercover narcotics and weapons purchases, and used confidential informants.


Officers from the Elgin Police Department and Cook County sheriff’s office also aided the investigation, authorities said.


Police said the undercover purchases were all video or audio recorded — or both — and took place in various locations in Aurora.


“Nine of the suspects were taken into custody Friday, when approximately 70 Aurora police officers and FBI special agents fanned out across the area and executed arrest warrants either at the suspects’ homes or places where they were known to frequent,” police said in the Facebook post. “Two of the suspects were already in jail and three remain at large. All are from Aurora except one. “

Noe Vargas Jr., 19, of the 800 block of Claim Street, faces 12 charges, including unlawful sale or delivery of a firearm, unlawful possession of a firearm by a street gang member and aggravated unlawful use of a weapon.


Jacqueline Castaneda, 26, of the 800 block of Spring Street is charged with unlawful delivery of a controlled substance.


Fuentes, Vargas and Castenada are still at large, police said.


Nikitas Turner, 33, of the 200 block of Chestnut Street; Kenzail Taylor, 21, of the 1700 block of Ravine Park Lane; Juan Anaya, 22, of the 700 block of Front Street; Gabriel Guerrero Jr. 24, of the 800 block of Gates Street; David Guzman, 21, of the 800 block of Superior Street; Ivan Patino, 24, of the 700 block of East New York Street; Marcus Serrano, 25, of the 700 block of Fifth Street; Jose Meraz, 24, of the 1100 block of Rural Street; and Torey Payne, 31, of the 100 block of North West Street, Plano, are all each charged with felony delivery of a controlled substance.


Juan Bucio, 21, of the 600 block of East Downer Place, faces charges of unlawful possession of a firearm and unlawful sale or delivery of a firearm.


Ricki Rodriguez, 26, of the first block of North Highland Avenue, was charged with unlawful delivery of methamphetamine.


Some of the drug charges were enhanced because the deals took place near schools, churches and parks, police said.


Police confiscated drugs and weapons as a result of an 11 month investigation, including cocaine, methamphetamine and eight guns, police said on Facebook.


Four of the weapons were handguns and one was equipped with a scope. Two rifles and two shotguns were seized as well. One of the rifles had an obliterated serial number and one of the shotguns had been stolen in an Aurora burglary, police said.


Ziman said the police department would do “whatever we can” to see to it that the suspects are convicted and get lengthy prison sentences.


FBI Special Agent in Charge Jeffrey Sallet said his agency is committed to working with local law enforcement to focus on the "contagion of violent crime" in the city of Chicago and suburbs.


“We are bringing to justice those who choose to threaten our communities," Sallet said.


Kane County State’s Attorney Joe McMahon said the multi-jurisdictional cooperation was crucial in the investigation that ended Friday.


“Cooperation and communication across local, state and federal lines is the best way to minimize risks and attack important community issues such as illegal guns and drugs," McMahon said in the same post.


Authorities said that more Charges against additional suspects are possible as the investigation continues.


Police ask that anyone with information on the whereabouts of the people at large call Aurora Police Special Operations Group Investigators at (630) 256-5600 or their local law enforcement agency by calling 911. Police said to remain anonymous and qualify for a cash reward of up to $5,000 for information that leads to any of their arrests, people may call Aurora Area Crime Stoppers at (630) 892-1000.


Linda Girardi is a freelancer with The Beacon-News.