Two Elgin Community College police officers allege gender, age and race discrimination and retaliatory tactics from the former campus police chief in a federal lawsuit.


The complaint, filed with the U.S. District Court Northern District Illinois on Tuesday, reiterates many of the allegations Tami Haukedahl and William Powell first made public in April.


According to the complaint, former campus police chief Emad Eassa engaged in gender and age-based discrimination against Haukedahl, and race discrimination against Powell.


Haukedahl is a deputy police chief with Elgin Community College employed since 2009, while Powell has been an ECC officer since 2010. Haukedahl is a former Illinois State Police commander, while Powell is a former chief for the Aurora Police Department.


In the lawsuit, the plaintiffs and their attorney, Peter Katsaros, allege Eassa made frequent, vulgar and harassing comments toward women, older college personnel, ECC President David Sam and African Americans. Haukedahl and Powell said Eassa made their working conditions feel hostile. Katsaros has previously said these incidents date back three years.


College officials responded Thursday afternoon, with Sam in a written statement saying they don't ordinarily comment on pending litigation. However, he did issue a short statement, saying, "The employees in question have elected to pursue their claims in court, as is their right. While we respect their right to do so, the college also respectfully disagrees with the claims raised in the recently filed lawsuit."


Sam continued, "Despite the College's position, I want to stress that, like all College employees, the employees in question remain fully protected by the College's policy that prohibits discrimination, harassment, and retaliation of any kind."


According to the lawsuit, when the two went to Elgin Community College human resources in 2016 to bring their complaints, they said ECC and Eassa retaliated. Haukedahl said she was being paid less than her male counterparts and given less desirable work shifts, the lawsuit said. Powell, 65, also alleges he was given work shifts not generally in his schedule, as well as Eassa not talking to him directly, the lawsuit said.


The two are seeking lost wages, punitive damages, compensatory damages, liquidated damages, attorney fees and costs, and any further damages.


raguerrero@tribpub.com 