Attorneys Joe Cecala and Randy Kretchmar announce a lawsuit filed on behalf of Benahdam Hurt against the Elgin Mental Health Center, the Illinois Department of Human Services and four of its employees, on Nov. 2, 2017, at the Union League Club in Chicago. (John J. Kim / Chicago Tribune)



Attorneys Joe Cecala and Randy Kretchmar announce a lawsuit filed on behalf of Benahdam Hurt against the Elgin Mental Health Center, the Illinois Department of Human Services and four of its employees, on Nov. 2, 2017, at the Union League Club in Chicago. (John J. Kim / Chicago Tribune)

A former Elgin Mental Health Center patient alleged in a federal lawsuit this week that he was the “sex slave” of a licensed social worker who abused her position of trust during a nearly three-year relationship in which he said the two had regular trysts in her office and his bedroom.


In the complaint, the Aurora man also accused the former state employee of allowing him unfettered access to other patients’ medical files and lavishing him with electronics and other gifts during their alleged affair in the state-run facility.


The 26-page lawsuit filed Thursday in U.S. District Court names as defendants the Illinois Department of Human Services, the social worker and three other state medical professionals who oversaw the man’s care.


The social worker is a woman is her 50s. She resigned Aug. 23, officials confirmed. She had a nearly $90,000 annual salary, according to state payroll records. The social worker did not respond to several requests for comment. Her professional license remains in good standing, according to state licensing officials.


State authorities declined further comment. “We are aware of the lawsuit regarding allegations against a former Elgin Mental Health Center employee, but cannot comment any further on pending litigation,” said Meghan Powers, a department spokeswoman.


In response to a question about the allegations, Illinois State Police confirmed they are investigating “an alleged incident” at the facility “involving a former employee,” but they declined to name the person or give details about the nature of the probe.


“This is an active and ongoing investigation and no further information is available,” state police Master Sgt. Mike Link said in a statement.


The man who filed the complaint, Benahdam Hurt, 24, was involuntarily committed for treatment to the secured mental health facility in summer 2014 after he was found not guilty by reason of insanity for felony aggravated battery of a peace officer in Aurora.

He was released in July, but he said the social worker “continued to send gifts and packages” to his home “in the hope that (he) would keep silent regarding (her) sexual misconduct,” according to the lawsuit.


Hurt and his mother joined his attorneys, Randy Kretchmar and Joe Cecala, at a news conference Thursday in Chicago.


Kretchmar said Hurt’s treatment providers turned a blind eye to the sexual assault and battery of a disabled adult and should be held accountable for an alleged systemic pattern of abuse that has long existed at the facility due to a lack of training, supervision, and proper investigative procedures.


cmgutowski@chicagotribune.com


Twitter @christygutowsk1