Flooding largely spared the Elgin area Friday, despite having received nearly two inches of rain Thursday and Friday.


However, the Fox River is under a flood warning through June 29, with the river expected to swell with runoff water from the rain.


The National Weather Service reported fhe Fox River was at 10.4 feet as of noon Friday as measured at a reporting location in Algonquin. The flood stage is 9.5 feet at the location, and it was expected the water level would continue rising to near 11.2 feet by Saturday morning. The river won’t return to below flood level for at least a week, the weather service said.


The Kane County Office of Emergency Management advised Elgin city officials the Fox would rise about two feet and crest at over 11 feet, Elgin Assistant City Manager Laura Valdez said. Although high, the flood level is significantly less than last July’s record-setting floods, in which towns like Algonquin, East and West Dundee and South Elgin had water go far beyond the river banks.


Valdez said they are not anticipating any significant residential flooding or evacuations as a result.


Observers from sites in Elgin reported rainfall totals of 1.66 inches to 1.89 inches over the period from Wednesday through Friday, meteorologist Matt Friedlein said.


“This rain isn’t your traditional June thunderstorm system. … It is a little more uniform — actually quite a bit more uniform,” said Friedlein, noting rainfall totals in the Chicago area did not vary that much.


Some minor flooding was reported in and around Elgin as a result of the continuing rain, a city official said.

While water affected some streets in the Maroon and Varsity drives area, near Poplar Creek, it did not cause any traffic problems, Elgin Police Department spokeswoman Kristie Hilton.


Tyler Creek is reported to be high, but the Royal Bridge over Tyler Creek on Royal Boulevard has not been impacted, Hilton said. Eagle Heights Park in the Tyler Creek area reported some standing water, she said.


raguerrero@tribpub.com


Twitter @rafaguerrero14