The McDonald Road bridge is close to completion and is just one ongoing project in South Elgin nearly done or in the middle of redevelopment, said Village Manager Steve Super.


Those projects include renovations at village hall, 10 Water St., the State Street bridge, and new housing and commercial projects throughout South Elgin, he said.


"We are rocking and rolling in this town, there is stuff happening everywhere," Super said this week.


The village is also working to prepare for future development, and the likely need for more village administrative space in the future. In recent weeks, South Elgin purchased the Third Rail Tavern at 97 N. LaFox Street (Route 31) and in 2018 plans to raze the building, Super said.


"The main thing was to acquire it for the future expansion of village operations on this block, and to remove the blight and improve safety at that intersection," Super said.


For traffic coming off of Spring Street westbound onto Route 31, it was nearly impossible to see oncoming traffic from the south "until you were nose into it," Super said.


The village — and the adjacent South Elgin and Countryside Fire Protection District fire station, are also in need of more parking, Super said.


The purchase further cements the LaFox Street/State Street corridor for future village needs. South Elgin owns the block on the south east corner of the intersection as well.

While any village or municipal center construction is likely 10 years or more away, South Elgin is working to update village hall.


Work started in July on village hall. The $1 million project completely replaced the building's roof, will give the building separate entrances for the police department and village business, and should serve residents better once completed, Super said.


The remodel includes moving several offices from the second floor to the first floor, putting clerks and village administrative staff on the same floor and to be better able to interact with residents, Super said.


The police department is getting a separate lobby, washroom facilities and some meeting room space.


Overall, the separation gives those who need police services some privacy from those looking to enroll in recreation programs or pay a water bill, officials said.


Outside village hall, the State Street bridge has been undergoing a renovation. That project began in early June and is expected to open to two-way traffic in November.


The $1.2 million project improves the bridge's aesthetics while widening the Fox River Trail bike path on the bridge's south sidewalk. The project adds decorative lighting that matches the downtown South Elgin lights and adds a scenic overlook on the north sidewalk.


During construction eastbound lanes remain open to allow traffic and South Elgin and Countryside Fire Protection District vehicles across the bridge. However, westbound traffic is allowed from about 4-5 p.m. to 6 a.m. but is restricted during construction hours.


Just east of that bridge, South Elgin has been rebuilding many of the streets in the village's southwest corner — adding curbs, gutters and sidewalks where it could, putting in additional stormwater drainage, and generally working to solve flooding issues in that part of town.


"That is a massive project … making a completely new neighborhood," in one of the older parts of South Elgin, Super said. The project improved pedestrian access from downtown to Lions Park and connects to previous projects on Fulton Street, he added.


"That whole section had limited pedestrian access. Now they have significantly bigger streets, stormwater controls and sidewalks," Super said.


Some special engineering had to happen in the area to help preserve driveways and front yards while still widening streets, Super said. "We really wanted to improve their quality of life," he said.


Another massive project in South Elgin this season has been the reconstruction of the McDonald Road bridge west of Randall Road. That project, which began in March, is set for completion on Sept. 21.


The $2.5 million bridge reconstruction raised the bridge by about 6 feet to allow pedestrian access underneath. The bridge's width was doubled and also includes pedestrian sidewalks and a shoulder on both sides.


"It is a complete transformation and an amenity for the area," Super said of the new bridge.


While the municipal projects are ongoing, South Elgin also is seeing an increase in housing and other commercial developments.


A new Speedway convenience store is under construction at Bowes Road and Route 31, and a automotive dealership is set to redevelop the corner of Route 31 and Division Street, Super said. The village is also in talks with potential users for acres that became available when the Bowes Road extension opened in 2015.


New commercial/industrial complexes are under construction in the Shannahan Industrial Park and off of Umbenstock Road, two new single family housing developments are underway off of Silver Glenn Road, and a 300-unit market rate apartment complex is under construction at Stearns and Gyorr Roads.


The new housing construction, including the apartments, may be the most housing units approved in a single year by South Elgin in its history, Super said.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for the Courier-News.