

Police continued to search for evidence near Montrose Harbor on Oct. 31, 2017, after some body parts were found in the Lincoln Park lagoon over the weekend.

An autopsy has been performed and DNA testing is underway to determine whether a body found in duffel bags in a Chicago lagoon is a missing Elgin woman, Elgin police said Monday.


"We are investigating this as a criminal investigation and are working with the Chicago Police Department on the possibility that the body that was found near Lincoln Park may be part of this case," said Elgin assistant police chief Bill Wolf.


The Cook County medical examiner's office does not know the identity of the person found in the lagoon, but a spokeswoman, Becky Schlikerman, confirmed testing is taking place. Schlikerman said the body is believed to be that of a white woman.


Schlikerman also said the remains include a torso and parts of two legs.


On Friday, Elgin police asked — via its Facebook page — for the public to be on the lookout for Gail Peck, 76, who was last seen in the 700 block of Littleton Trail on the east side of Elgin, in the area of East Chicago Street and Shales Parkway.


At that time, police were told she had left home a few hours earlier to walk her dog, Doris. Police said the dog returned home without Peck. She is described as 5 feet tall with black hair and hazel eyes; her clothing description was unknown.


On Saturday morning, a fisherman at the Lincoln Park Lagoon located a duffel bag filled with what appeared to be human remains, according to police.


The fisherman first told Chicago police he "caught something heavy," according to a law enforcement source. A zookeeper at Lincoln Park Zoo also reached out to police immediately after the first bag was discovered, but when reached by phone on Monday, one of her co-workers said she could not discuss the incident because of her position with the zoo.

The law enforcement source in Chicago said detectives were questioning a person of interest, though it was not clear whether those were detectives from Elgin or Chicago. It also wasn't clear whether that meant anyone has been detained, arrested or was voluntarily answering questions.


Marine Unit divers and detectives went to the lagoon after the initial 911 calls in Chicago. Searchers found a second bag with more remains, said Frank Giancamilli, a police spokesman. The remains were all believed to be from the same person, he said.


Authorities said further dive missions were suspended the following day and no additional dives were planned.


On Friday night, Elgin police conducted an extensive search for Peck, Wolf said.


Elgin's K9 teams, as well as those from other agencies, were called in to search for the woman. Members of Elgin's Community Emergency Response Team, the Hanover Township Emergency Response Team, the Elgin Fire Department's drone and a Cook County helicopter were all brought out as part of the search, Wolf said.


"As the evening progressed on Friday, we received information that (Peck's disappearance) did not occur as it was reported. The investigation suggested that what was reported may not be accurate," Wolf said.


Other information has suggested the Lincoln Park remains and Peck's disappearance may be related, Wolf said. He would not elaborate on the ongoing investigation.


Schlikerman said that from the remains that were located, it is clear the woman has a scar on her back, which was the result of an earlier back surgery.


"Scientific testing is necessary to confirm identity," Schlikerman wrote in an email.


The autopsy Monday did not conclusively reveal cause or manner of death, and the determinations are pending both further testing and the investigation, she said.


"The medical examiner's office is working with Elgin police to determine if the remains match a missing person's case from Elgin," Schlikerman wrote.


kdouglas@chicagotribune.com


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for the Courier-News.