An Elgin police sergeant received a three-day suspension after using pepper spray while responding to a complaint of loud music, according to documents obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request.


The suspension was not the first for Sgt. Travis Hooker, who was cited for conducting himself in an unprofessional manner, according to documents obtained by The Courier-News.


Elgin police Chief Jeff Swoboda said Hooker was off work without pay Nov. 9, 16 and 21 because of his actions the night of July 2. The suspension meant Hooker lost $1,289 in salary, Deputy Director of Records Maureen Kehoe said.


Hooker could not be reached for comment.


"Sgt. Hooker has taken full responsibility for his actions that fell short of this department's expectations, and that goes a long way with me. He's also been through training, and my hope is the incidents like this will be handled much differently in the future," said Swoboda, who issued the suspension Oct. 31.


Hooker "immediately addressed a subject sitting next to a radio and attempted to seize the radio without obtaining additional information or fully investigating the situation," the report states.


The officer's actions escalated tensions and resulted in the use of pepper spray, according to the report. The use of the spray met the department's use of force policy, the report states, but "the policy and associated training also requires officers to slow actions, gather more information and use de-escalation strategies when reasonable, which Hooker did not do."


The information provided by the city indicates someone filed a complaint July 5, claiming that Hooker pepper-sprayed the crowd and broke a stereo during the July 2 call. A 15-year-old boy and 21-year-old man were charged with resisting arrest that night, according to documents provided.

A Sept. 4 memo from Lt. Chris Jensen to Cmdr. Ana Lalley notes police reported a crowd of more than 20 people, found detonated fireworks in the driveway, saw empty liquor containers and smelled cannabis.


The address was known to police, who had responded to calls there seven times since 2014, according to the documents. Complaints included loud music, loud people, a loud party, a shooting, unlawful use of a weapon, a suicide linked to a handgun connected to someone at the address, and shots fired.


According to a disciplinary review form, Hooker went to assist officers on a call about loud music, which was turned down when police arrived.


A memo recapping a Sept. 7 hearing on the matter notes Hooker said that on July 2 he had been working a double shift on a busy day. He admitted to making mistakes at the call in question, including not verifying how many calls had been made to the address in question that day, not asking who owned the radio, not knocking on the home's door and moving too fast.


Hooker took responsibility, attended training sessions and had done a lot of reflection since the incident, the memo notes.


Hooker has been an Elgin police officer for almost 21 years and was promoted to sergeant in April 2016.


In response to a Freedom of Information Act request filed by The Courier-News, records showed that Hooker received a letter of reprimand in February 2013 for failing to appear in court as a witness in an August 2012 case, which resulted in the loss of a contested hearing.


In May 2014, Hooker received two days of suspension for missing a Kane County grand jury court date in 2013 after being subpoenaed. Hooker claimed he missed the date because of a flat tire and had called the state's attorney, but he could not produce evidence, according to the documents.


In February 2015, Hooker received a verbal warning after an internal investigation found he was at fault in an accident involving his squad car the month before. The squad car slid on ice and hit the rear of a Ford Explorer, doing minor damage to both vehicles, according to reports.


In January 2016, Hooker received a one-day suspension related to a November 2015 call. According to police documents, Hooker failed to complete a police report for a woman regarding statements she perceived as threatening to her son. After the woman asked to speak to a supervisor, Hooker escorted her to the vestibule and locked the entrance doors to the station, according to the document.


That January, Hooker also received a three-day suspension for failing to appear as a witness in a Cook County court case in December 2015 and failing to notify the department he would be absent.


mdanahey@tribpub.com