Crash takes place at Route 38 and Peck

ST. CHARLES – About 4 p.m. Sept. 6 a crash took place on Route 38 and Peck Road in St. Charles. A 2010 Subaru Outback driven by Anne Hannan, 36, of the 100 block Warbler Avenue in Cortland, made a left turn onto northbound Peck Road from Route 38 and hit a 2005 Dodge Caravan that was traveling west on Route 38. Hannan was taken to Northwestern Medicine Delnor Hospital in Geneva, as were two children in the vehicle, who were not injured, according to a news release from the St. Charles Police Department. A passenger in the Caravan also was taken to Delnor. Hannan was issued a ticket for failure to yield left turn.

Library, animal shelter teaming up for pet supply drive

ST. CHARLES – The St. Charles Public Library, 1 S. 6th Ave. St. Charles, is teaming up with Anderson Animal Shelter in South Elgin to sponsor a pet food and supply drive to help out the dogs and cats awaiting homes at the shelter. The drive began Sept. 8 and runs through Sept. 16, and the library will accept donations for animals in need. Donated items should be placed in the collection bin near the library’s circulation desk. Suggested donations include: Petco WholeHearted Grain-free dog and cat food, Friskies Pate Turkey and Giblets canned food, Nylabone dog bones, pet wipes, Thundershirts in all sizes, Frontline Plus, paper towels, gently-used towels, flat sheets, blankets and more. A complete wish list is available on the library’s website at www.scpld.org.

Marathon to prompt road closures

ST. CHARLES – Several roads in St. Charles will be closed for the Fox Valley Marathon from 7 a.m. until 2 p.m. Sept. 17. The run begins in St. Charles on the Illinois Street bridge and continues south to Aurora before returning to the finish line back in St. Charles. First Street between Illinois and Indiana streets will be closed at 5 a.m. Sept. 16 to set up. The Prairie Street and Illinois Street bridges will be closed for the entire event on Sept. 17; motorists are advised to use either the Main Street bridge or the Red Gate bridge. Geneva Road will be closed and traffic will be detoured to South Third Street. Traffic on Riverside Avenue will be reduced to one lane between Moore Avenue and South Fifth Avenue as runners return to St. Charles. Police and emergency management personnel will be at key locations to assist with traffic direction. Motorists are advised to expect delays when traveling through the city. Drivers are reminded to watch out for runners, spectators and emergency responders assisting with the event. The CASA Kane County, Fox Valley KIDS Marathon will be held at 3 p.m. Sept. 16; the Prairie Street bridge will be temporarily closed at the start of the event, but the event is expected to be less than 30 minutes.

'Art Appreciation 101' taking place Sept. 14 at library

ST. CHARLES – Art historian and private guide Jeff Mishur believes that art can be accessible and understandable to everyone, according to a news release. Mishur will present "Art Appreciation 101: Talking Intelligently about Works of Art" at 7 p.m. Sept. 14 at the St. Charles Public Library, 1 S. Sixth Ave., St. Charles. In his slide lecture, Mishur will offer an introduction to the appreciation of art. He will focus on how to analyze how artwork is "built" out of colors, lines and similar visual components, and will discuss basic design principles. The program is being presented in conjunction with ArtsFest St. Charles. Registration is recommended for the program. Sign up at the reference desk, by calling 630-584-0076, ext. 1, or online at www.stcharleslibrary.org. And for more ArtsFest programming, visit stcharlesartscouncil.org/artsfest.

Genealogy workshop to take place in St. Charles

ST. CHARLES – The St. Charles Public Library is offering a genealogy workshop for those interested in learning the basics of how to interpret and understand DNA test results. "Understanding Commercial DNA Test Results" is scheduled for 7 p.m. Sept. 19 in the Carnegie Community Room. Forensic genealogist and author Marsha Peterson-Maas will explain the three types of commercial DNA tests (atDNA, Y-DNA and mtDNA) and the options for networking to find kindship matches. "The Fundamentals of Genealogy: Basics for Everyone" textbook will be available for purchase. Registration for all genealogy workshops is recommended. For more information or to register, visit www.stcharleslibrary.org or call 630-584-0076. The St. Charles Public Library is located at 1 S. Sixth Ave. in St. Charles.

Fish orders being accepted now

​Need fish for a pond? Those who have a new pond or an old pond in need of stocking or restocking can order fish from the Kane-DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District. Included in the sale are channel catfish, largemouth bass, triploid grass carp, hybrid sunfish, hybrid redear, fathead minnows and bluegill. The deadline for ordering triploid grass carp is Sept. 18. All other fish must be ordered by Sept. 25. Fish pick-up will take place from 7 to 8 a.m. Sept. 30 at the Kane-DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District office, 2315 Dean St., Suite 100, St. Charles. For an order form, visit the district webpage at www.kanedupageswcd.org or call the office at 630-584-7960, ext. 3.