Kane County Transportation Director Carl Schoedel started Wednesday morning geared up for a bicycle ride.


But as he left his house and prepared to go down the driveway, his neighbor, who was just returning from a morning run, stopped him and warned him that it was very icy.


"I went back inside," Schoedel said.


Not only did Schoedel's neighbor possibly save him from injury, he gave Schoedel an introduction as to what he was going to face when he got to the office. In fact, the icy road conditions throughout the Fox Valley had already wreaked havoc for drivers and school buses, causing almost 100 wrecks in Aurora and contributing to a fatal accident near North Aurora.


The fatal four-vehicle accident that included a Pace bus killed an Elgin woman at about 7 a.m. on Route 31, north of Oak Street, in an unincorporated area near North Aurora.


According to the Kane County Sheriff's Office, a Mercury Mountaineer SUV was traveling north on Route 31, north of Oak Street. The SUV appeared to lose control due to the icy road conditions, and crossed the center line.


It entered the southbound lane of traffic and was struck by a Pace bus that was traveling south on Route 31. The bus pushed the SUV back into the northbound lanes of traffic where it struck a northbound Honda Civic. After striking the Honda, the SUV was struck by a GMC van that was traveling north on Route 31, according to the Sheriff's Office.


Hundreds of traffic crashes, at least three of them fatal, were reported Wednesday morning as a surprise bout of freezing rain paralyzed much of the Chicago area.

National Weather Service meteorologist Andrew Krein said the forecast had called for light snow, but the cloud layer proved too shallow...

Monica Cruz, 41, of Elgin, the driver of the Mercury, was pronounced dead at the scene of the accident, the Sheriff's Office said.

The drivers of the Honda and GMC van were uninjured. The driver of the Pace bus and one passenger were transported to an area hospital with minor injuries.


The icy road conditions in the morning appear to have played a role in the crash, the Sheriff's Office said. The crash remains under investigation and no citations have been issued.


To deal with the icy conditions in the area, Kane County's trucks had been out salting as early as 3 a.m. And while others also rallied quickly to deal with the icy roads, Schoedel said the very light mist that fell through the early morning hours and hit the pavement at just the right temperature to form a thin layer of ice was not predicted.


"I don't know we were anticipating what we got," Schoedel said.


Schoedel said when such icy conditions are forecast, road maintenance agencies usually get the trucks out ahead of time to put down a layer of brine or liquid salt.


Naperville police responded to more than 80 vehicle crashes during this morning's icy commute, which tied up traffic throughout the city.

Commuters on social media describe the roads as "ice rinks" and 8-minute drives turned into 30 minutes of slipping and sliding.

A pre-dawn Naper Notify message...

"We could have been out yesterday, doing some anti-icing," he said. "All of the agencies kind of missed on that."


The weather led to a myriad of accidents in the area. The city of Aurora, for instance, reported about 100 traffic crashes between 5 and 11 a.m. The city's 911 operators took 573 total calls during that time.


Most of the wrecks were minor, and the city kicked in its Deferred Crash Reporting Protocol for the morning commute. Under that protocol, people in an accident with no injuries and where the vehicles are drivable go to a safe location out of traffic and exchange information.


Accident reports can be completed between 7 a.m. and 3 p.m. Saturday at the Aurora Police Department. The department suggests drivers coordinate a time between those hours to come to the police department to complete the report.


If the drivers cannot make it on Saturday, they can meet at the police department within 10 days of the accident.


In Naperville, police responded to more than 80 vehicle crashes during the morning's icy commute. A predawn Naper Notify message warned residents and business owners of the extremely icy road conditions throughout the city. Residential trash collection was postponed a day.


As of just before 11 a.m., the Naperville Police Department had responded to 81 crashes, Naperville Police Cmdr. Lou Cammiso said. Of that number, 58 were dispatched as non-injury accidents, 10 had injuries and 13 had unknown injuries, Cammiso said.


Night shift officers were held over through the morning to help respond to crashes and calls. Between 5 and 9 a.m., the department received 202 emergency 911 calls and 233 non-emergency calls, which is far more than usual, Cammiso said.


One crash on Diehl Road between Washington Street and Freedom Drive involved two Naperville squad cars. An officer was responding to a report of a crash with injuries when his vehicle slid off the road and hit a tree, Cammiso said. The subsequent squad car responding to that crash was hit by another vehicle, he said. No officers were injured.


The icy weather also kept some area hospitals busy. Edward Hospital officials estimated they'd seen about 40 patients for injuries and conditions related to the weather Wednesday morning, said Keith Hartenberger, spokesman for Edward-Elmhurst Health.


"What they're seeing are injuries to wrists, ankles, shoulders, a lot of head lacerations," Hartenberger said. "But people have been treated and released; nobody's been admitted."


Edward's emergency room called in more doctors and nurses to handle the influx of patients, Hartenberger said.


"Edward's emergency room is one of the busiest in the state, and even by our standards, this was definitely busier than usual," he said.


Courtney Satlak, public relations manager for Rush Copley Medical Center in Aurora, said "the doctors at the emergency area saw a few people earlier this morning that were injured due to motor vehicle accidents, but they weren't serious."


The icy roads also affected students trying to catch a bus to school.


Indian Prairie School District 204 sent out messages alerting families buses were running 15 minutes late due to weather. In Batavia, several elementary school routes were running about 30 minutes behind schedule, according to a Tweet sent to parents. Elementary School orchestra practice there also was canceled, according to Twitter.


West Aurora schools reported middle school buses delayed, and Oswego schools sent out a general posting on Facebook saying buses were running behind schedule.


slord@tribpub.com. 


Naperville Sun reporter Suzanne Baker and freelance reporter David Sharos contributed to this article.