My Block, My Hood, My City volunteers gathered to shovel snow from sidewalks after nearly 24 hours of snowfall in Chicago on Feb. 9, 2018. (Antonio Perez / Chicago Tribune)



My Block, My Hood, My City volunteers gathered to shovel snow from sidewalks after nearly 24 hours of snowfall in Chicago on Feb. 9, 2018. (Antonio Perez / Chicago Tribune)

The winter storm that walloped the Chicago area Friday, depositing up to a foot of snow, provided many people a celebrated “snow day” reprieve from work or school. Stay home, build a snow fort, make hot chocolate.


But for others, it meant just the opposite: a treacherous journey to work on snow-covered streets, icy expressways, wind-swept train platforms and slush-slickened sidewalks.


And there is more on the way, forecasters say, with several more inches expected over the weekend.


For community activist Jahmal Cole and a small brigade of volunteers, the snowstorm was a chance to help some neighbors in need.


Cole’s crew from the mentorship and youth empowerment group My Block, My Hood, My City fanned out during Friday’s snowstorm to shovel the stairways and sidewalks of senior citizens who could not complete the chore themselves.


“It's wonderful,” M. Dubose, a schoolteacher, said as the group cleared her neighbor’s front walk.


The visit to the block of South Sangamon Street was the first of about 25 blocks the group planned to shovel as snow began to pile up.


“Instead of complaining or saying ‘the city is messed up’ or ‘politicians are messed up,’ I'm challenging people to say what's something simple we can do to have a positive impact on our block,” Cole said at the CTA Red Line's 79th Street station, where he met up with volunteers before heading by van to homes.

The storm that began Thursday night had ramifications beyond the good deeds of neighborhood shoveling and the joys of a day off from work or school. The snow snarled traffic and led to dozens of crashes on the roads, canceled at least 1,000 flights and contributed to the death of a man in his 60s who had a heart attack while shoveling snow in Naperville, Edward Hospital spokesman Keith Hartenberger said.




Chicago records nine straight days with “measurable amounts” of snow, which, the National Weather Service explains, means 0.1 inches or more.

The blast of winter weather is expected to continue through the weekend. The National Weather Service is forecasting another round of snow Saturday morning that could deliver 1 to 2 inches. Yet another system could arrive Sunday morning with 1 to 3 more inches.


Some areas of the region recorded 10 to 12 inches by Friday afternoon, with at least 6 inches of snow covering much of the city and suburbs, according to National Weather Service reports. Snow fell at a rate of about an inch per hour throughout the day, the weather service said.


“We had a band of heavy snow move across the area overnight into today,” said Gino Izzi, a national weather service senior meteorologist. “In the city generally 6 to 9 inches of snow fell, with the snow that began yesterday and continued across the area today. The rest of the week we are going to have additional waves of lighter, less impactful snow.”


Through noon Friday, 7.3 inches were recorded at O’Hare; Midway had 6.8 inches.


The city of Chicago deployed more than 300 salt-spreading plow trucks from the Department of Streets and Sanitation fleet. More than a dozen agencies have prepared a “unified, uniform and unyielding response,” Mayor Rahm Emanuel said.


With most schools shuttered, parents scrambled to find child care or rearranged work schedules. Many Chicago-area government facilities and businesses were closed. “Are you working from home?” quickly became one of the day’s most-asked questions.


Restaurant delivery services were busy. One man in Glen Ellyn took a ride on a snowmobile in the street.


But for plenty of others it was business as usual.


“Work is work; customers are waiting,” said Mark Kaszowski, an employee of Fox Valley Fire and Safety as he fueled up his company truck at a gas station on Route 59 in Naperville.


A time-lapse shows the winter storm that brought over 5 inches of snow to Chicago overnight Feb. 8-9, 2018. (Chicago Tribune)



A time-lapse shows the winter storm that brought over 5 inches of snow to Chicago overnight Feb. 8-9, 2018. (Chicago Tribune)

In Lockport, Larry Bornhofen wasn't about to let a few inches of snow stop him from opening his auto repair shop. As he shoveled the sidewalk in front of Dellwood Tire and Auto Repair on State Street, Bornhofen said there was never a question whether he would be open.


"We have to stay open in case people get flats, especially for plow drivers," he said.


Inside Bridgeport Coffee in the Kenwood neighborhood, nearly every seat was taken by someone glued to their laptop screen or hunkered down over a cluster of papers. College students and academics worked on their projects like any other day.


"We're sort of a refuge here," said Evan Carter, 33, as he served up a mocha espresso. "I think people come here to have their own space and focus without all of the hustle and bustle."


For others, the weather was a chance to enjoy the outdoors. At the McCormick Tribune skating rink at Millennium Park, dozens raced around the ice.


"We're just enjoying winter in all of its loveliness," said Julie Hartney, a nurse who lives in Lincoln Park enjoying a rare day off from work.


Others walked dogs, who reveled in small curbside mountains of snow, and others snapped selfies as the snow fell.


"This is Chicago," Hartney, a Chicago native, said. "Fourteen inches is nothing. This is beautiful."


The Loop’s sidewalks and streets were noticeably less crowded in the business district. Maintenance crews busily revved snowblowers, sweepers and salt spreaders to clear building entrances,


One man churned his bicycle through an unplowed downtown bike lane, leaving behind a meandering tire track.


Classes were canceled at Chicago Public Schools, but CPS buildings remained open and accepted students who came to the schools. Chicago Public Library and Chicago Park District facilities are open during normal operating hours for families seeking alternative youth facilities and programs.


Chicago public schools are expected to be open Monday.


To put together its forecast, the weather service uses weather balloons, aircraft reports, satellites, and other tools to take snapshots of weather conditions, feeding the information into a network of computers, Izzi said. With these computers, “sophisticated equations” are done that describe the changes happening in the atmosphere.


These equations are recalculated millions of times and a prediction is made. Sometimes, depending on the model (there are many kinds, he says) the calculations are done 60 to 120 times each hour. It’s not perfect, he acknowledged, though for this storm, there was ample warning.


For the Chicago shoveling crew, Cole used social media to find elderly residents, asking them to send their addresses where snow removal was needed.


"I love shoveling and I live in the Loop and there's nowhere down there that I can do it," said volunteer Dave Stanford, 39.

After about 20 minutes of clearing snow, Cole scrolled through a lengthy list of home addresses on his smartphone, trying to figure out the next stop. He said he knew it was going to be a long afternoon.


“All right everybody,” he said. “Time to head to the next block.”


Suzanne Baker of the Naperville Sun, Craig Lyons of the Post-Tribune, Karen Ann Cullotta of the Pioneer Press, Chicago Tribune’s Madeline Buckley and Jason Meisner, and freelancer Yadira Sanchez Olson contributed.


poconnell@chicagotribune.com


wlee@chicagotribune.com


eolumhense@chicagotribune.com


Twitter @pmocwriter


Twitter @MidnoirCowboy


Twitter @essayolumhense


RELATED


Updated snow totals: How much did you get? »


Column: Shovel your neighbor's sidewalk, push out a stuck car, and don't whine: How the best Chicagoans handle snowstorms »


Column: First big snowfall brings Judge Dibs to the bench »
