When Elgin Chief of Police Jeff Swoboda arrived in town as a rookie officer 26 years ago, he started saving notes from residents and others thanking him for things he’d done as an officer.


That file was a good foot thick, Swoboda said this week. He read through them before deciding it was time to toss the file — admitting a few moved him to tears — as he prepared to retire from Elgin’s department and become chief of police in Fort Collins, Colo.


A retirement ceremony is set for 3 p.m. Thursday at the Centre of Elgin, and Swoboda starts his new job Monday.


Swoboda said he’s gone through a range of emotions as he prepares to leave Elgin.


“It changes from moment to moment. I go from excited to proud to sad,” he said.


He spent Memorial Day weekend in Elgin, attending the services at Bluff City Cemetery Monday and the Fox Trot race Saturday.


Many Elginites approached him at those events to thank him for his time here. It was amazing, he said, to hear “from the amount of people happy with the job I have done and we have done as a Police Department. That gives me the most pride,” he said.


It is that relationship with people that made Swoboda want to become a police officer when he was in middle school, he said. It was the actions of another officer, and a police officer neighbor, that introduced him to the profession.

“My dad had a heart attack and I saw a police officer helping him. That has always stuck with me, this officer was working on my dad,” in a time of crisis for the family, Swoboda said. “He was calm, reassuring. He was just exactly how you want an officer to be in a tough spot like that,” he said.


Then, a neighbor in Westmont, where Swoboda was raised, also became an officer. “I was able to find out the reality of the job,” by joining that neighbor — now Huntley Chief of Police Bob Porter — on ride alongs, he added.


“I couldn’t think of a better job,” where he not only got to help people in crisis, but help to catch people committing crimes against the community, Swoboda said.


Asked what events — good or bad — stuck with him and that he would share with younger officers learning the job, Swoboda mentioned two.


“I had a guy in the back of my car I had arrested, he was 18 or 19, cursing at me, calling me names … and I was talking calmly to him, asking him what was going on and why he was so angry.


“He wasn’t having it at all,” Swoboda said.


Swoboda was tempted to respond and give it right back to that arrestee, but he said that wasn’t what his Elgin field training officers taught him. He kept his cool.


“You get paid to be the professional. Others don’t always remain professional,” Swoboda said his training officers told him.


Years later, that arrestee reached out to Swoboda to thank him, he said.


“He said, ‘You didn’t go off on me — I was doing everything I could to get you to go off on me so I had a a reason to not like you, but you wouldn’t go there,’” Swoboda said.


He also recalled an incident while working in the Resident Officer Program of Elgin, an initiative that encourages members of the department to live in distressed areas to build goodwill and help residents take ownership of their neighborhoods.


Late one night, a resident knocked on Swoboda’s door. The resident had found his missing, stolen car right across the street.


Instead of calling in on his radio or just going out to make that report, Swoboda handed the phone to the man and told him to call 911.


So, a call went out on the radio that there was a 911 call to a Resident Officer Program of Elgin home. It took him years to live that down around the department, Swoboda said.


But it also taught him a lesson about not cutting corners and doing his job even when he was tired. “Your fellow police officers won’t forget it,” he said.


He hopes the legacy of the Elgin Police Department, no matter who comes in as the next chief, is that officers here strive to do the right thing.


“Knowing that you have done the best you can and you leave it in capable hands makes it a little easier. How you leave is important, you will remember your sendoff forever,” he wrote in a text.


“I’m so proud (of) how good we as a team within EPD are. We hire good people with a heart for service and train them to be great.


“The connection this city has with their police department is special. We all need to recognize that. Whether you are happy with us or upset, we are here to listen to you and work with you.


“(The) 22-year-old Jeff Swoboda wants to thank the community. A kid came here wanting to find a community he could work with to make a difference. He found one special community that has made him a better person for having been here. Thank you Elgin.”


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.


RELATED


Jeff Swoboda leaving Elgin for police chief's job in Fort Collins, Colo. »


Elgin to hold 'conversation' on policing in wake of Decynthia Clements death »


Wyatt Cenac says novelty of Elgin's Resident Officer Program perfect for new HBO series »