As a longtime Aurora alderman, Juany Garza has frequently heard concerns over the years from residents in her heavily Hispanic 2nd Ward about the police department’s gang list.


Some community members, particularly at neighborhood meetings, have complained it contains names of those who were not in a gang or had gotten out, but still had the stigma associated with being involved in street crime.


“The police department is doing a great job,” she said. “But keeping a list of gang members not only can hurt those who should not be on it, it is not good for the city” because it puts too much emphasis on gang activity “and not on all the good things” going on in these communities.


“You have to be very careful with these lists,” Garza added. “Sometimes good kids make mistakes or are in the wrong place at the wrong time. And ending up (on these lists) can compromise their future.”


Garza is not the only one voicing concerns. A recent story in the Chicago Tribune pointed to a growing number of groups nationwide questioning the value of these databases, describing them as inaccurate, outdated and racially skewed. And those complaints, according to the news report, are drawing the attention of politicians and law enforcement, including the Chicago Police Department, which is beginning discussions on whether to make changes to its system.


But here in the Fox Valley, both Aurora and Elgin police staunchly defend their gang lists, insisting they are not only accurate and as up-to-date as possible, but are critical surveillance tools in fighting gang-related crimes as well as predicting future crimes.


And officials from both departments point to these databases as an important reason each city’s crime rate has plummeted over the past two decades, despite impressive population growth.


“The entire reason for the drop (in gang crime) is intelligence,” insisted Elgin Deputy Chief Bill Wolf. “That’s really what has helped us drive those numbers down.”

Still, Wolf recognized the community has concerns over how the list is compiled, and insisted that police in Elgin “want to respect the rights of those on the list.”


For that reason, he said, every six months — for at least the last decade — a purge takes place, where officials “go through the record management system” and take a close look at the names on the list.


“We ask if that person is still active, have we had contact with that individual, and if not, we put them into a pending list, where they are monitored for the next six months before being purged,” said Wolf.


According to Lt. Rick Robertson, with the Aurora Police Department’s Special Operations Group, the APD updates the list multiple times each week based on new gang intelligence and reviewing existing gang files.


There is a list of criteria the department has used since it began tracking gang activity back in 1991 that determines membership or affiliation with a gang, he said. Those include self-admission, the use of symbolic clothing, hand signs, gestures, slogans or jewelry associated with particular gangs, and associating or “hanging out” with known gang members in certain locations. Only information on active gang members is shared with the Illinois State Police and goes into the LEADS database, added Robertson.


The Aurora police, he said, understand certain individuals may only be involved with a gang for a short time, which is the reason there is a delineation between those who are active and inactive.


Both Elgin and Aurora police departments point out that before any gang contact is deemed valid and entered into its records, it is reviewed by well-trained experts in gang activity. One of the major reasons names are not removed from the list is in instances of cold case investigations, said Robertson, where suspects or witnesses may have been gang members but are no longer active.


Currently Aurora has 1,688 active members and 5,414 inactive, he said. In Elgin, according to Wolf, there are currently just over 500 active gang members and 280 inactive.


Robertson said “gang members and associates cross all racial and ethnic lines.”  While some complain when a young family member goes on the list, he said notification through the department’s “Knock and Talk” program that the child is associating with gang members can be an effective deterrent.


The Aurora police “currently does not remove names from the gang list,” but those that go into inactive status “are not on a published list and stay in the background,” he noted. Concerns will be heard from anyone who believes he or she has been unfairly documented, and that person’s qualified gang contacts will be reviewed before a determination is made as to the level of involvement.


Complaints are “extremely rare,” Robertson said, adding there have been a couple of instances where individuals on the gang list had their gang tattoos removed and therefore their membership status changed.


Wolf insists Elgin, too, is always striving to be fair and reasonable.


“If they are active, we want to be able to reduce the impact of any criminal behavior. But if they are out of the gang, we don’t want them to have to deal with the stigma of being on that (active) list … It becomes a pride thing, and we want to help them.”


One former gang member no longer on the Elgin list, he said, asked for help in getting his name removed from another jurisdiction’s database, “which we were able to do.”


“We know these guys well,” Wolf said of many gang members. “The bottom line is, if someone has a problem with it, we are always willing to take a look at the list.”


dcrosby@tribpub.com


Twitter @dencrosby