Elgin Chief of Police Jeff Swoboda has been named one of five finalists for a job as police chief in Fort Collins, Colo.

Elgin Chief of Police Jeff Swoboda has been named one of five finalists for a job as police chief in Fort Collins, Colo.

Elgin Chief of Police Jeff Swoboda has been named one of five finalists for a job as police chief in Fort Collins, Colo.


Swoboda verified that he was being considered for the position Saturday morning, following a news release posted on the Fort Collins city website and other media reports.


"It is a very cool city, and I have been there before on vacations," Swoboda said. He noted, however, that he loves his current job in Elgin.


"Things are going very well here and unless it is a perfect fit there, I won't be going anywhere," Swoboda said.


According to the release, Swoboda is joined as a finalist by Major Edward Bergin of Anne Arundel County, Md.; Deputy Chief Michael Bray of Sacramento, Calif.; Deputy Chief Ashley Gonzalez of Norwalk, Conn., and Terri Wilfong, a law enforcement consultant from Lexington, Ky.


Some highlights of Elgin's 2017 crime statistics aren't reported to the FBI, officials said as the police department released its annual report.

The most serious crimes reported to state and federal authorities are down 1 percent for the year, but there are successes that are not included that...

Elgin Mayor David Kaptain said he was aware Swoboda applied for the position, adding that he served as a reference for the job.


If Swoboda is selected "the department will go on. We have a great bunch of support people in the department now ... a great farm team," Kaptain said, noting that other commanders, lieutenants and deputy chiefs have left for other communities in recent years.


"I am happy to see them grow," Kaptain said.

Elgin City Manager Rick Kozal agreed.


"The Elgin Police Department produces exemplary chiefs and Jeff Swoboda is certainly among its best," Kozal said in a prepared statement


"(He) is not one to back away from any new challenge and I have no doubt he will always excel as a police chief whether it be Fort Collins or continuing here in Elgin," Kozal wrote.


Swoboda was one of 66 applicants, according to the release.


"The overtime killers" is what the Elgin Police Department's SWAT team has dubbed its most effective pieces of equipment — the Ballistic Armored Tactical Transport and accompanying robot cameras.

When the ballistic truck — BATT — rolls up to a hostage situation, standoff, or warrant arrest, less-than-cooperative...

"The city engaged in an extensive recruiting effort to identify potential candidates for the ... position. KRW Associates, a public sector executive search firm out of Colorado Springs, posted the chief position in December," the Fort Collins release said.


"We feel we have found a list of very qualified candidates for this important community position," said Fort Collins City Manager Darin Atteberry in the prepared statement.


At the end of February, candidates will be in Fort Collins interviewing for the position and residents are invited to participate in the process, the release stated.


Residents there were invited to speak with the candidates during a formal meet-and-greet set for March 1.


The search for a new chief follows the resignation of Fort Collins former Chief on May 12, the release said.


Swoboda was named Elgin chief in 2010 and has been with the department for 26 years.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for the Courier-News.