Bill Wolf, Elgin's deputy chief of police, was named interim police chief Friday by City Manager Rick Kozal.


Wolf will serve in the post until a new chief is selected to replace Jeff Swoboda, whose last day on the job was Friday. Swoboda, a 26-year veteran of the Elgin Police Department, becomes the new police chief for Fort Collins, Colo., on Monday.


"Wolf will now be responsible for running the department of nearly 300 employees, including 182 sworn officers, and an annual operating budget of more than $44 million," according to a news release on the appointment.


Wolf, 49, is also a 26-year department veteran. He was made a lieutenant in 2006, commander in 2012 and deputy chief in 2013.


Wolf said he ready to fill the job on a temporary basis.


"It is an honor to be named the interim chief for such a great law enforcement organization," Wolf said in an email. "I will do my best to lead the incredible women and men of the department and continue moving us forward until a permanent chief is named."


Swoboda said he believed Wolf was the right person for the job.


"I don't think there is a more prepared person, as the deputy chief, to lead the department as Bill Wolf," Swoboda said. "Every initiative over the past 26 years, he has been involved with."

Kozal said the process to choose a permanent successor to Swoboda is under way.


"The talent runs deep in the Elgin Police Department and all effort will be made to ensure the next chief will build on that strong foundation," Kozal said in the release.


When Elgin Chief of Police Jeff Swoboda arrived in town as a rookie officer 26 years ago, he started saving notes from residents and others thanking him for things he’d done as an officer.

That file was a good foot thick, Swoboda said this week. He read through them before deciding it was time...

"I am continuing to seek guidance from the city council, the community and staff on the qualities desired in Elgin's next police chief, and a decision will be made shortly."


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.