Elgin police collect evidence inside the home of Gail Peck, 76, who has been missing since Oct. 27, 2017. (Stacey Wescott / Chicago Tribune)



Elgin police collect evidence inside the home of Gail Peck, 76, who has been missing since Oct. 27, 2017. (Stacey Wescott / Chicago Tribune)

Angered after being told he was playing Jimi Hendrix music too loudly, an Elgin man allegedly killed his mother, dismembered her body and then disposed of the remains along Chicago’s lakefront over two days in bags and newly purchased luggage, Cook County prosecutors said Tuesday.


Brian Peck, 55, was ordered held without bail after being charged with two counts of first-degree murder and one count of concealment of a homicidal death, authorities said. Cook County Judge Steven Goebel, at the Rolling Meadows courthouse, said Peck posed an extreme threat to the general public.


Testing is still underway to determine if body parts found Saturday in a lagoon in Chicago’s Lincoln Park are those of Gail Peck, 76, police said. But authorities said there is enough evidence to charge Brian Peck, who lived with his mother in a home in the 700 block of Littleton Trail in Elgin.


Brian Peck has been charged in the slaying of his mother, Gail Peck, of Elgin. 

Brian Peck has been charged in the slaying of his mother, Gail Peck, of Elgin. 

Assistant Cook County State’s Attorney Maria McCarthy said the Cook County medical examiner’s office determined that the body parts were consistent with those of a 76-year-old woman. An autopsy also showed a scar on the victim’s back consistent with spinal fusion surgery Gail Peck had received in the past, she said.


According to authorities, the body parts found in duffel bags by a fisherman and divers at a Lincoln Park lagoon included only a torso and parts of two legs. Brian Peck told authorities he also disposed part of the body at Montrose Harbor, where police were investigating on Tuesday.


DuPage County court records show that last year, Brian Peck pleaded guilty to domestic battery and received a jail sentence and probation after his mother told police her son threatened to kill her. The two at the time had shared a home in Oak Brook. That incident also was brought on in part by complaints about loud music, documents show. Gail Peck also had requested an order of protection but later lifted the request, records show.


Gail Peck initially was reported missing Friday afternoon. But police said they quickly began doubting Brian Peck’s story that his mother had gone for a walk with her dog, Doris, and that the dog had come back in its own.


A search for the woman was conducted in far east Elgin but was scaled back about 9 p.m. that night. By Saturday morning, police said they no longer needed the public’s help.

“Information received began to suggest that Gail Peck’s disappearance may not have occurred as reported. As additional information was obtained, more investigative resources were devoted to the possibility of the case being criminal in nature,” said Elgin Assistant Police Chief Bill Wolf.


During Tuesday’s bond hearing, prosecutors described a gruesome series of events.


After police found a large blood stain and cleaning supplies in his mother’s bedroom during a search Friday, Peck told officers his mother had fallen and cut her knee on a plate and knife she had dropped, McCarthy said.


Investigators also found blood stains on furniture, in bathrooms and on a steam carpet cleaner Peck had purchased Thursday, McCarthy said.


When investigators later showed him surveillance photos of his purchases of suitcases, a duffel bag and bricks, plus photos of the recovered body parts, Peck changed his story, McCarthy said.


The 6-foot-1, 260-pound Peck told police that after the argument over the Jimi Hendrix music about 3:30 a.m. Wednesday, he knocked his 5-foot-4, 140-pound mother down and stomped on her head and neck. Realizing she was dead, he put her in the bathroom of the guest bedroom and dismembered her, McCarthy said.


“He told police, ‘I put her in the bathtub and hacked her up.’ He severed her body parts with the hand saw that was found in the duffel bag that contained the severed legs,” McCarthy said.


Peck put the severed parts in garbage bags and wanted to store them in a refrigerator in the basement but disabled the refrigerator when he tried to remove the shelves in it with a hatchet, McCarthy said. 




Police continued to search for evidence near Montrose Harbor on Oct. 31, 2017, after some body parts were found in the Lincoln Park lagoon over the weekend.

On Wednesday, Peck took the bags containing some of the body parts to Montrose Harbor and threw them in the lake, McCarthy said. On Thursday, he purchased a set of suitcases and a duffel bag, put other body parts in them and threw them into the water near Diversey Harbor, she said.


Peck, according to prosecutors, told the family cleaning lady not to come to the house on Wednesday to clean, prosecutors said.


McCarthy said police were able to track some of Peck’s movements through iPass records and store surveillance videos. Police also uncovered drive-up bank surveillance video showing him withdrawing $500 using his mother’s debit card and car, she said.


On Friday, Peck transferred $4,000 from his mother’s savings account to her checking account, McCarthy said. She said Peck was “living off” his mother and was not her major caregiver, as Peck’s attorney stated.


Peck told the judge he had no money and needed a public defender. Prosecutors said Peck had had operated a financial business until two years ago. He was his mother’s only child, McCarthy said.


Elgin police on Monday announced the possible connection between Gail Peck and the body parts found in Chicago.


Chicago police supplied personnel and equipment to Elgin detectives throughout the search.


After dive searches were called off near the lagoon during the weekend, a dive team on Tuesday was searching in an area near Chicago’s Montrose Beach.


In 2016, Brian Peck pleaded guilty to domestic battery after his mother told police he threatened to kill her, punched her in the face and attempted to choke her. He was sentenced to two years of probation, according to DuPage County Circuit Court records.


While he was in jail, his mother visited him and told him “that he crossed the line when he became violent with me and that he was no longer my son and that I never want contact with him again,” according to DuPage Court documents.


He served 100 days in the DuPage County Jail, and was released with the no-contact order. He also received 24 months of probation.


Peck has six felony convictions, including aggravated battery, identity theft, computer fraud, possession of a stolen vehicle, and theft by deception, McCarthy said.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for the Courier-News. George Houde is a freelance reporter for the Tribune. Chicago Tribune reporter Katherine Rosenberg-Douglas also contributed.