A Chicago police lieutenant who rose to become the first woman to ever command the department’s Marine and Helicopter Unit filed a federal sex discrimination lawsuit Thursday alleging she was harassed by a sexist boss and ultimately demoted because he didn’t want to see a woman in her post.

Lt. Allison Schloss alleged in the 19-page complaint that at the time of her appointment in May 2014, she was among only a handful of women assigned to the Police Department’s so-called Special Functions Division, which includes the bomb squad, SWAT team and mounted patrol in addition to the Marine and Helicopter Unit.

In fact, as of May 2016, only eight of 175 positions available in Special Functions were held by female officers — and only one of those was assigned to the marine unit, according to the lawsuit.

The “abominable” record also included no women on a SWAT team of nearly seven dozen members, the suit alleged.

Schloss, who was appointed as marine unit commander by then-Superintendent Garry McCarthy, alleged that her immediate supervisor, Deputy Chief Steve Georgas, "resented and bridled” at her being named to the prestigious position.

“He did not place her there, and he did not want a woman in that post,” the suit alleged.

Over the next two years, Georgas harassed Schloss by assigning her busy work, overriding her personnel decisions and denying her the opportunity for additional training that he’d approved for her male counterparts, according to the suit.

The situation came to a head over Memorial Day weekend in 2016 when the marine unit was called to search for a missing boater in Lake Michigan who ultimately drowned, the suit alleged. Schloss was off-duty on the day of the drowning but showed up at the scene anyway to help coordinate the search, according to the suit.

On the Tuesday after the holiday weekend, Georgas ordered her into his office and removed her from her command, the suit alleged. After Schloss filed a complaint with the legal department a week later, she was transferred “involuntarily” to the Major Accident Investigation Unit, where she remains as the unit commander.

Schloss alleged that Georgas used the tragedy of the accidental drowning as an “opportunistic” excuse to get rid of her. Meanwhile, a male sergeant who was on-duty at the time of the drowning faced no discipline, according to the suit.

Georgas has since been redeployed to Detached Services and currently heads security for the Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority, which operates Navy Pier and McCormick Place, records show.

The lawsuit named the city of Chicago as the lone defendant. A spokesman for the city’s Law Department declined to comment Thursday. Georgas could not be reached.

Schloss also filed a sex discrimination and retaliation complaint before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, according to the suit.

jmeisner@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @jmetr22b

RELATED

  Elgin Community College cops allege discrimination, harassment in federal lawsuit »


  Berwyn police detective files sexual harassment suit against deputy chief »