Cmdr. Ana Lalley will be Elgin's next chief of police, and Cmdr. Al Young will step into the deputy chief job, the city of Elgin announced Friday.


The promotions go in effect in August following the retirement of Bill Wolf, the current deputy chief now serving as interim police chief, a city news release said.


“The process for filling the police chief and attendant leadership positions draws from the diverse backgrounds, skills and perspectives of police officers in which the organization and residents have invested for decades,” City Manager Rick Kozal, who made the appointments, said in the release. “The talent runs deep through the ranks, and these promotions embody the police officers’ investment in development, training and their commitment to the community.”


The announcement was something of a surprise given that some Elgin City Council members expressed a desire to look at candidates outside of the department in addition to in-house applicants. Kozal could not be reached for comment on why he didn’t opt to widen the search beyond Elgin.


Lalley said Friday she’s excited about the new job and ready to take on the challenge.


“I have worked with Bill (Wolf) and I respect him. I was more than happy to work for him (had he become chief),” she said. “But an opportunity came up, however it came up. No one was expecting this to happen but I was always preparing myself (to become chief). I was making sure I was current with trends and the things I was sure a police chief needed to be ready to do.”


Lalley, a 22-year department veteran who has been serving as acting deputy chief, succeeds Jeff Swoboda, who retired to take a new job as the police chief in Fort Collins, Col.


Lalley’s police career began in Elgin in 1996 as a patrol officer, and she was promoted to detective in 2001, sergeant in 2007 and lieutenant in 2010, the release said. She became a police commander in 2012, overseeing the department's operational divisions: patrol, administration, investigations and strategic initiatives.

Among the projects she has managed was the implementation of department body camera program, the Real Time Information Center, the drone program and several community engagement initiatives, including Coffee with a Cop and the Not in Our Town film series.


Young, hired as a patrol officer in 1991, has been with the department for 27 years and was named a commander two years ago, the release said.


He has overseen the investigations and administrations divisions, helped to develop the department’s RAVE Alert and Smart 911 systems, and worked on the resident alert and update services. Internally, he worked to realign the records, communications and administration departments so information is more readily available to residents, managed the body camera, squad and Real Time Information Center video footage, and handled and Freedom of Information Act requests, the release said.


Kozal praised both commanders for what they’ve done for the department.


“Lalley’s distinguished tenure has demonstrated a remarkable ability to provide vision and leadership in the police department,” Kozal said in the release. “With every new challenge, she continues to exude an unbridled determination to push the department to even greater accomplishment.


“Young’s knowledge and experience with the department and with the community make him the obvious candidate for the deputy chief position,” he said. “His extensive investment in Elgin has been demonstrated countless times as he works to strengthen foundations in the community and empower employees to feel heard and bring ideas forward.”


Councilwoman Tish Powell, who advocated for more community input before a selection was made, congratulated Lalley and Young on their promotions.


‘I have had the pleasure of working with both of them in the past … and will in the future. I wish them both the best,” Powell said.


Community conversations can still happen, with residents asked to provide input on what they want to see in the department, she said, but that may be unfair to the new chief — changing expectations after taking on a job.


For Councilman Terry Gavin and others on the council, it made sense to promote internally.


“I’m already getting messages of happiness and joy in the community from citizens, fully supporting (the selections of Lalley and Young),” Gavin said.


He wanted to go with an internal candidate after a community survey last year showed residents were very happy with the police department.


“The survey … showed that police services were our number one rated service by our citizens,” Gavin said. “Police officers are not called to hand out candy and fix a boo-boo. They come when there is a problem.”


Lalley and Young will be recognized at a public ceremony that will also honor Wolf, who has accepted a new job as the deputy chief of the Schaumburg Police Department. The event will be at 3 p.m. July 17 at the The Centre of Elgin’s Heritage Ballroom, 100 Symphony Way.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.


MORE COVERAGE:


Elgin police chief grapples with emotions as he prepares to retire »


Interim police chief says he's leaving Elgin police for Schaumburg deputy chief job »