Bail was set at $5 million Wednesday for the two Chicago men were charged with first-degree murder in connection with the Sunday shooting deaths of two Elgin men.


Travaris Stevenson, 22, of the 5000 block of West Congress Parkway, and Lee Spain, 32, of the 8000 block of South Ellis Street, face multiple counts of first-degree murder for the deaths of Mark McDaniel, 26, and Raymond Dyson, 29.


The two men were shot shortly after 2 p.m. in the first block of Longwood Place, near Wing Park on Elgin’s west side, police reports said. The shooting occurred in the parking lot of an apartment building.


Both victims were taken to Elgin hospitals and transferred to trauma centers, where they later died, reports said.


Kane County Assistant State's Attorney Bridget Sabbia said Stevenson was released on parole in 2014 after being convicted of unlawful delivery of a controlled substance to a person under the age of 18. He is also a suspect in a Chicago shooting, she said.


No information on a possible motive for the gun attack was provided, but Elgin Deputy Chief Bill Wolf said information provided by the public led to the arrests.


“The arrests of Mr. Spain and Mr. Stevenson are a direct result of people in our community becoming immediately involved by notifying 9-1-1 and providing statements as to what they saw and heard,” Wolf said in a news release.


“Because of their information, officers were able to quickly apprehend subjects that matched those descriptions. The investigation took a significant effort on multiple fronts by the dedicated men and women of the department.”

Wolf said earlier Tuesday that Elgin police were working with the Chicago Police Department, Illinois State Crime Lab, Kane County Sheriff’s Department and other police agencies in an effort to lock down charges.


In addition to eight counts of murder for Stevenson and four counts of murder for Spain, both men were charged with unlawful possession of cannabis with intent to deliver and unlawful possession of cannabis, both felonies.


Stevenson and Spain are being held in the Kane County jail.