After acing an aptitude test three years ago, veteran Chicago police Officer Maureen Bresnahan thought she was well-positioned for a promotion to the department’s elite Bomb Squad, even though the 11-member unit hadn’t included a woman for years.


But her superiors had other ideas, a federal lawsuit alleged. After a round of interviews, they rejected Bresnahan’s application, writing in an evaluation form that she was “best suited for clerical” work, according to the suit, filed Monday.


Meanwhile, two male officers who had the same score on the written test were put on the promotions list, even though one had been accused of beating his fiance and another received only tepid reviews in the in-person interviews, the suit said.


Bresnahan’s federal discrimination lawsuit alleged “systematic discrimination” against women who seek positions in the Special Functions Division, a collection of specialty units including the Bomb Squad, Marine and Helicopter Unit, SWAT team and mounted patrol.


At the time Bresnahan applied for the promotion, only eight of 162 positions available in Special Functions were held by female officers — and none were assigned to the Bomb Squad, according to the 25-page lawsuit.


Reached by phone Monday, Bresnahan’s attorney, Marni Willenson, said the numbers show an astonishing degree of sexism built into the promotions process — particularly in relying on interviews in which superiors tend to give preference to “people who look like themselves.” She also said the city is aware of the problem but has failed to fix it.


“How does the city justify using this set of procedures when this is the result?” Willenson said. “Because it’s hard to imagine clearer evidence of discrimination than this.”


A spokeswoman for the city’s Law Department said Monday she could not comment because the city had not yet been served with the lawsuit.

The litigation comes on the heels of a separate suit filed last week by Chicago police Lt. Allison Schloss, who alleged she was removed from her command of the Marine and Helicopter Unit, and ultimately demoted by the boss of the Special Functions Division, Deputy Chief Steve Georgas, because he didn't want to see a woman in her post.


While those allegations focused mainly on the actions of Georgas, the lawsuit filed by Bresnahan alleged a much more widespread culture of discrimination that could have a far-reaching impact on how the department fills positions in Special Functions.


Bresnahan, the valedictorian of her Police Academy class who has a master’s degree in education, was a 10-year veteran of the force at the time she applied for the job with the Bomb Squad. According to the suit, Bresnahan and two male officers scored the highest of all 130 candidates on a written aptitude test designed to evaluate mechanical and electrical skills. She later passed a physical fitness test, using only half of the allotted time, according to the suit.


About 75 candidates who passed the aptitude test were then interviewed by three evaluators: Sgt. James Egan, who heads the Bomb Squad; an officer under his command; and an FBI agent “invited by the city to participate in the promotions process,” the suit said.


In his interview, one of the male officers who’d scored the same as Bresnahan on the written exam — identified only as Candidate 53 — was asked to describe a time when he “had to make a quick decision based on information available at the moment” — a key criterion of the bomb technician position, the suit alleged.


The officer, who had spent the previous five years in a desk job with the police News Affairs office, cited his arrest for domestic violence against his then-fiance, saying that “in hindsight, (he) would have reacted in a different direction and had ‘learned from the incident,’ ” the lawsuit said, quoting from the interviewer's notes.


The male officer was recommended for the promotion, the lawsuit said. Notes from a worksheet filled out by his evaluators said he “lacks experience/training, but has the intelligence to learn.”


Bresnahan, meanwhile, also got high marks for her intelligence in her one-on-one interviews. But instead of being recommended for a promotion, she was given notice that she’d been cut, the lawsuit alleged.


“Best suited for clerical, office,” the notes on the evaluation worksheet read, according to the suit.


It was followed by a notation reading “DNR,” short for “do not recommend.”


jmeisner@chicagotribune


Twitter @jmetr22b


RELATED


First female Chicago cop to command police marine unit sues over alleged sex discrimination »


Elgin Community College cops allege discrimination, harassment in federal lawsuit »