When Al Young was a newly minted commander for the Elgin Police Department, he missed an important meeting he was supposed to attend.


His boss, Elgin Police Chief Jeff Swoboda, called him into his office and gave him two options to choose from to ensure it never happened again, Young said.


While he chose not to disclose just what those options were, neither were good, Young said with a laugh.


Swoboda and his fondness for giving his officers “options” to correct behavior — as well as lauding his leadership for eight years as chief of police — were among the memories shared Thursday at Swoboda’s retirement ceremony.


Technically, it was more of a goodbye party given that after Swoboda serves his last day as Elgin’s chief Friday, he starts a new job Monday as the police chief for the city of Fort Collins, Colo., which boasts a population of more than 164,000.


The event was held at the Centre of Elgin, and attracted a large number of dignitaries from the city and beyond. Among them was U.S. Rep. Peter Roskam, R-Wheaton, who presented Swoboda with a copy of the speech he made on the House floor in which he honored the departing chief for his work and dedication to the Elgin department.


Memories were also shared by the director of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Elgin, Senior Services Associates, Centro de Informacion, and others who said the work Swoboda did as chief made a difference.


Students from the Boys &amp; Girls Club presented Swoboda with a signed basketball in honor of all the games he played there. Senior residents held “We will miss you” signs, and told stories of his chivalry and one instance where he agreed to slow dance with one of the women at the Senior Services center.

Jaime Garcia, of Centro de Informacion, which provides services for area Hispanic residents, said Swoboda eased many minds when he told a group last spring that police do not double as not immigration officers.The first job is to serve and protect the community, he told them.


Joe McMahon, Kane County state’s attorney, talked about how he often went to Swoboda for counsel and advice when looking at new programs from his office, and that he planned to keep in contact as Swoboda after he leaves.


“He is candid and honest with me, he sees the big picture, and his number one objective is to protect and serve the people of this great community,” McMahon said.


Many of the command staff and those who have worked with Swoboda over the years commented that he often left them, and a meeting, with one reminder.


“He always made it known: challenge yourself, think about your legacy and put your community first,” Cmdr. Ana Lalley said.


Members of Elgin’s Senior Citizens Associates held signs thanking Jeff Swoboda for his service during a ceremony honoring the retiring police chief on May 31, 2018.

Members of Elgin’s Senior Citizens Associates held signs thanking Jeff Swoboda for his service during a ceremony honoring the retiring police chief on May 31, 2018.

Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.