

Decynthia Clements was shot and killed by Elgin police officers along Interstate I-90 on March 12, 2018.

Elgin police videos taken during the fatal shooting of Decynthia Clements will be released late next week, Elgin Chief of Police Jeff Swoboda said Friday.


Although the Illinois State Police investigation into the case is ongoing, "the public has a right to know what happened," Swoboda said in an announcement posted on the department's Facebook page.


"It is against the preference of the Illinois State Police to release the video, but our community needs answers," he said in the post.


There will likely be "hours" of video released, with multiple feeds from both body and squad cameras, Swoboda said after issuing the post. No decision has been made on how it will be released, he said.


"We haven't decided on the mechanism or how it will be housed, but we will figure it out," he said.


Clement's family will be given the footage before it is released publicly, Swoboda said.


The Elgin police officer who shot a woman armed with a knife on Interstate 90 early Monday morning is a 19-year department veteran who has received 22 commendations, including 2014 manager of the year, Elgin Police Chief Jeffrey Swoboda said.

Lt. Christian Jensen is a member of the department’s...

The state police will be concluding the interview portion of its investigation into Lt. Christian Jensen's use of deadly force next week, but it will take several months for the probe to be completed, he said.


No other details on the case or what prompted the shooting were released.

Clements, 34, of Elgin, was killed in an incident last week in which she was pulled over by Elgin police on Interstate 90, near Route 25, but refused to exit her SUV, according to reports. While officers attempted to persuade her to come out of the vehicle for more than an hour, Clements pulled out a knife and set fire to the SUV, reports said.


The shooting occurred around the time that the fire forced officers to pull her out of the vehicle, reports said.


Jensen, a 19-year department veteran, is on paid administrative leave as the state police determine if he was justified in his actions and followed department protocol. Clements was shot "multiple" times, according to her autopsy.


The Clements family has hired a Chicago lawyer to represent them, and groups of people who fear there could be a cover-up and want an independent review staged a demonstration outside the Elgin Police Department Tuesday and plan to do so again Saturday and Sunday, according to posts on social media sites.


Swoboda said in his post that he has met with many people in reference to the case and thanked those who have come to his office to discuss it.


"We have had many conversations about a topic that I know brings many emotions to the forefront," he said. "We will be here and available to talk. Thank you for your continued patience and openness."


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.