Money to purchase police officer body cameras is set aside in Park Ridge’s recently adopted city budget.


Park Ridge Police Chief Frank Kaminski said he expects the department to begin pilot-testing the cameras this fall, with the devices being used by some officers after Jan. 1, 2019.


The city’s 2018-19 budget, which was adopted April 16, includes $58,701 for the purchase of cameras. The same amount of money is budgeted for the following three fiscal years as well.


Kaminski said cameras will be bought for all officers. He likened the body cameras to the squad car cameras the department already has in place.


“It certainly helps the officers,” he said of the devices. “Ninety-nine percent of the time, it validates that the officers did the right thing. We just have to be careful with body cameras. Sometimes they only get snapshots. It’s not a full-length movie; it’s an isolated picture of what the officer is seeing at that time.”


The police department will need to develop a policy regarding the use of the cameras, Kaminski said. One of the challenges facing the department will be handling Freedom of Information Act requests for footage from the devices he said, calling the process “labor intensive.”


“I’m certainly concerned it will be overwhelming for the records staff,” Kaminski said.


Police departments currently using body cameras include Chicago, Elgin, Evanston and the Cook County Sheriff’s Department, Kaminski said. Nearby, Rosemont and Des Plaines are beginning the process of equipping officers with cameras.

During a city budget discussion on April 11, Kaminski told the City Council he had chosen a vendor, Axon, to supply the cameras. He said the company supplied cameras to other police departments and “has become the premier company to work with for a pilot test and then implementation.”


Mayor Marty Maloney questioned why the city would not follow its procurement policy and seek bids from other companies as well.


“I want to see body cameras move forward, but pre-selecting who we’re going to go with doesn’t seem like the right process,” he said.


Kaminski said he was recommending Axon based on testing that the Elgin Police Department had done using the company’s products.


“They did the legwork for everybody,” he said.


Going out to bid for the cameras would delay their implementation, Kaminski said.


“If you want me to go out to bid, I’m going to have to do pilot tests for all those bids that come in,” he said. “So this is going to be delayed. I’m not going to recommend somebody if we’re not allowed to field-test and see how these things work.”


Sixth Ward Ald. Marc Mazzuca said the process of purchasing the cameras, which will require approval from the City Council, will be taken up at a future meeting.


Talk of equipping Park Ridge police officers with body cameras goes back to 2015, when Kaminski expressed interest in trying them out once they became available to police departments. State guidelines for the use of the cameras by law enforcement were signed into law in 2015.


jjohnson@chicagotribune.com


Twitter: @Jen_Tribune