Elgin police detective Anthony Rigano, far left, and police Lt. Frank Trost, far right, share information Tuesday on the opioid epidemic and what the Elgin Police Department is doing to help. Seated, left to right, are Opioid 101 panelists Claire Senglaub of the Kane County Health Department, Quincy Owens of Abraxas, and Colleen Koncilja of the Renz Center for Addiction Counseling.

Elgin police detective Anthony Rigano, far left, and police Lt. Frank Trost, far right, share information Tuesday on the opioid epidemic and what the Elgin Police Department is doing to help. Seated, left to right, are Opioid 101 panelists Claire Senglaub of the Kane County Health Department, Quincy Owens of Abraxas, and Colleen Koncilja of the Renz Center for Addiction Counseling.

Every day there are 174 drug overdose deaths in the United States. Of that number, more than 63 percent are caused by opioids and heroin , Elgin police detective Anthony Rigano told an Elgin audience Tuesday night.


More than 50 people filled a meeting room at the Gail Borden Public Library for Opioid 101, a program designed to provide a basic understanding of the opioid epidemic, present information on prevention and addiction, and outline what to do in the event of an overdose.


Most of the participants also registered for training to administer Naloxone, a drug approved for home use that stops an opioid overdose by neutralizing the effect of the drug. Those registered received home kits containing the drug after they completed training.


Gil Feliciano, the community coordinator for the Coalition for a Safe and Healthy Elgin, organized the event and brought several professionals together to provide information for the public.


"Our intention for today's event is basic understanding about opioids," Feliciano said.


Rigano, joined by Elgin police Lt. Frank Trost, said the department's philosophy has been one of public education and outreach to people who need help overcoming addiction.


"The Elgin Police Department has developed a new approach to the heroin epidemic. We cannot arrest our way out of this problem. We have to do something to address the issue," Rigano said.


"It is important to remove the stigma that the police are going to arrest you when drugs are found. Our goal is to get people into treatment who want treatment," Trost said.

Trost noted there is only a short window of time to get someone into treatment when they ask for help — usually 12 to 24 hours. If they don't get help in that time frame, they may go back to using again.


It's also beneficial if the person has the support of family and friends after treatment, he said.


"We act as a support system for them if they don't have anyone else," Trost said.


Jennifer Vergara, of Schaumburg, attended the event to learn more about the opioid problem. She works as a social worker for the Elgin Hispanic Network.


"I found the information to be basic to bring awareness and it was good from an outreach perspective. It seems like we had a good mix of people trying to educate themselves," Vergara said.


Among the panel of guest speakers was Colleen Koncilja, director of clinical services at the Renz Center. She said Renz offers community-based outpatient treatment for adolescents and adults with addiction and mental health problems.


Five suburban counties in Illinois filed lawsuits Thursday against several pharmaceutical companies, joining a growing nationwide effort to hold drug manufacturers accountable for the opioid epidemic.

Prosecutors in DuPage, Kane, Will, McHenry and Lake counties said in a statement that the “aggressive...

Quincy Owens, a client relations professional with Abraxas Youth, spoke about his organization's residential facilities for juvenile and adult males and the recovery and detox programs they offer at various locations in the area.


Claire Senglaub, a substance abuse prevention specialist with Kane County, shared information on prevention and provided education on the use of nolozone to prevent fatal overdoses.


The panelists agreed that often a person's first exposure to opioids is at home after dental or other types of surgery. Senglaub recommends keeping drugs locked up while they're being used and then disposing of them immediately after the patient recovers. This prevents them from being abused later by someone else, she said.


Pharmaceuticals can be dropped off at disposal bins set up at the Elgin Police Department or at local Walmart pharmacies.


Rigano said parents need to be aware of what is in their teenager's bedroom and what is on their cell phone. A change in an adolescent's behavior, such as nodding off, flushed skin, vomiting and scratching, could be a sign of drug abuse and parents should look for paraphernalia such as burned spoons, small tinfoil pouches called bindles, glass pipes or syringes, he said.


"If you know someone who is suffering with addiction, be ready with resources when they ask for help, get a noloxone kit in the event of an overdose and don't become a victim as you try to help them," Rigano said.


Elgin resident Christine Robeldo said she attended the event to gain information about the epidemic.


"There is a lot more about this topic that people need to know. Community education is the key," she said.


Jeanne Mayer is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.