

Svengoolie (Rich Koz) waits in the Burritt Building in downtown Elgin for fans attending Nightmare on Chicago Street to visit with him for photos and autographs. Koz was in Elgin for the annual event that may have drawn its largest crowd ever.

With summer-like weather Saturday, downtown Elgin's seventh-annual Nightmare on Chicago Street outdoor zombie-themed party probably drew its largest crowd ever.


"The lines were crazy for awhile," Fire Chief Dave Schmidt said.


Schmidt said that about 8,500 tickets for Nightmare were sold in advance for $12, with many more showing up and paying $15 to enter that night. What was slowing the entry process, Schmidt said, was this year the city hired an outside security firm to wand patrons and to do bag checks.


Public safety workers were present along the streets where the gathering was held, and police officers were stationed at each of the three entrances to the cordoned-off area. A good many of the city's full-time staff manned those entry points and, along with volunteers, performed a host of other duties for the event.


Building off the popularity of TV's "The Walking Dead" and other such fare, Nightmare on Chicago Street posits that a zombie outbreak has overtaken Elgin, with the prop-laden downtown a safe zone from the undead brain eaters — albeit one filled with monsters and other costumed characters of all sorts having fun.


Reanie Demunbrun said she has lived in downtown Elgin for eight years, and Saturday was the biggest crowd she had witnessed for Nightmare.


Police Chief Jeff Swoboda said that after 9 p.m., some lines to get into the festival were still more than a block long. He guessed the crowd would reach the 16,000 capacity the city had set for the event. Blessed with good weather every time it's been held, Nightmare has drawn more and more people each October. City officials said the event attracted 15,500 patrons in 2016.


As we spin our way into October, the nights come earlier and last longer, and things go bump in them. In the suburbs, on some nights, there can be heard the sounds of screaming. Mostly Thursday through Sunday nights about 7 p.m. to midnight. Yes, haunted houses are back, now through the first week...

Saturday, the Elgin Police Department Facebook page noted that the city's downtown parking lots were filled by 6:45 p.m. The post urged people to park at the Gail Borden Public Library lot a few blocks from the event staging area, or to park more than a mile away north in the lot by the Advocate Sherman Center Street Campus off Slade Avenue and to take a free shuttle downtown.

Despite the large number of people milling about, before 9:30 p.m. Swoboda said the event to that point had gone on without incident. And Elgin City Council member Rich Dunne and his wife Judy said that when they arrived around 9:30 p.m. there were no lines remaining to enter.


Still, some people took the to the event's Facebook page to complain about waiting 90 minutes or more to enter. Others claimed they gave up waiting, went elsewhere and would be seeing if they could get a refund.


Those at Nightmare, though, appeared to be enjoying themselves.


Carole Martin said she drove up from Springfield to attend Nightmare for the first time at the urging of her grandchildren, Lexie and Jack Sanders of Elgin.


"I love the diversity of costumes, and just about everything about this," Martin said. "There do seem to be quite a few spooky clowns, like the one in the movie, 'It.'"


Among the costumed was City Council member Carol Rauschenberger, dressed as Winnie the Pooh's pal Tigger, and Rauschenberger's friend Mary Kessuvan, dressed as a shark. The two were selling orange-and-black dreadlocks and lighted plastic mohawks to benefit the Downtown Neighborhood Association.


Downtown businesses were bustling during the event, too.


"Nightmare on Chicago is huge for us, and by far our busiest Saturday of the year," Elgin Public House chef and manager Eric Klekamp said. "The key to a night like this is making sure you're stocked up on everything, staffing to the maximum and having your all your A-team on duty."


Impressed by the gathering were at least two of the evening's draws.


Graphic artist Brian Allen, who designed the 2017 Nightmare on Chicago Street T-shirt, drove in with his wife, Lesha Allen from Pennsylvania to sell and sign his works. Allen said he typically sets up at a couple Halloween-time events a year and found Elgin's offering unique among what he's seen.


"It's wild," Allen said. "I hope I get a chance to take more of a look at it."


Back again was Chicago TV icon Rich Koz, in his role as wise-cracking horror movie host Svengoolie. Koz was posing for photos and signing autographs for fans inside the Burritt Building on Grove Avenue, then judging a costume contest.


"This event is always great. I'm amazed by the special effects they set up. It's pretty cool," Koz said.


Koz said Halloween time for him is like Christmas for Santa, and he would be making about 10 appearances this month as Svengoolie. Of Halloween becoming a holiday for adults as well as children, Koz said, "It's great that people can maintain their sense of fun and still dress up and goof around."


mdanahey@tribpub.com