Retirement wasn’t even an option for Sugar Grove resident Dave Kintz.

While some would consider it a dream to be able to retire after close to 30 years of hard labor, to see their schedule freed up so they could fish and golf whenever they want or simply kick back and relax, it isn’t for Kintz.

“Retirement is not even in the picture,” he said. “I’ve got a long way to go yet, and I still think I’m young and that’s OK.”

Kintz, 49, who was the St. Charles deputy police chief and served the St. Charles Police Department for 27 years, retired from his position at the beginning of January.

He had joined the department in 1990. He was promoted to sergeant 14 years later, advanced to commander the following year and to deputy chief in 2008. He also served as the president of the Kane County Chiefs of Police Association and as the public information officer for the St. Charles Police Department. For his service, Kintz received a Distinguished Service Award from St. Charles Police Chief Jim Keegan earlier this year.

So for the first time since the mid-1960s, there is no longer anyone from the Kintz family working for the St. Charles Police Department. Kintz’s father, Jim, was employed by the department from 1968 through 1990.

Even though he had enjoyed a long, successful and busy career, Dave Kintz still wanted to continue to serve in a similar capacity. That is why he took on a new position as the police chief at Elgin Community College, which he started Jan. 11.

“I was actually surprised with how similar the commute is here,” he said. “It’s not much farther than my previous commute to St. Charles. I’ve been pretty happy with the balance. Obviously there’s a learning curve to come into this environment, but I haven’t been fazed by the hours for work or anything, which is nice.”

While criminals on the streets are difficult to cope with as part of his job, Kintz continues to also deal with angry parents hollering from the stands during the fall and spring Illinois High School Association soccer seasons in his job as a soccer official. He coached soccer at St. Charles before it became St. Charles East and was even a member of the staff on state championship teams, but limitations with his work schedule with the St. Charles Police Department made it impossible to continue coaching. However, he’s still been able to officiate.

“The soccer keeps me involved,” he said. “It gets me to run around, and I still enjoy doing it.”

At Elgin Community College, Kintz is building relationships with his staff as well as a student population that is for the most part in its late teens and early 20s.

“There are similarities between St. Charles that I felt right off the bat with the great support here,” he said. “We do have a nice mix of students, including older adults for continuing education, so it’s a bit of different population of students today.”

Kintz often is greeted by high-fives from students before he even has a chance to say hello or good morning. It’s something a bit new to him and also appreciated.

There’s a good reason for his ability to relate so well with the younger generation in college – parenting. His son. Austin, is a Kaneland graduate who is at the Air Force Academy and his daughter, Ainsley, is a sophomore at Kaneland and active in chorus and theater.