Elgin's Police Department — and the city of Elgin — is poised to make its debut on a very national stage this spring.


A film crew from HBO Documentaries and comedian Wyatt Cenac — formerly of Comedy Central's "The Daily Show" — were in town this month interviewing residents and command staff from the Elgin Police Department.


The footage is expected to be used in a series set for this spring.


According to reports, the still-unnamed series stars Cenac and is produced by John Oliver.


The half-hour comedic documentary series "will take a satirical look at social and cultural issues from the former Daily Show correspondent's unique perspective," according to deadline.com and other online reports.


The producers declined to be interviewed via a request through police department officials.


Elgin Chief of Police Jeff Swoboda said the producers were somewhat quiet on how they identified Elgin, but did indicate the city would be shown in a positive light.


Cenac also sat down with Elgin School District U46 Board Member Traci Ellis.

"From what we were told, they learned about us because of national attention we had gotten," Swoboda said, including a July story in Governing magazine that looked at the Resident Officer Program of Elgin, known as ROPE, and a Courier-News story about a visit by a delegation from Swedish Parliament.


"We have received a lot of national recognition because of our community involvement and strategies here that are working," Swoboda said.


For the past several years, Elgin police have touted 40-year lows in Part 1 crimes, the most serious crimes reported to federal agencies.


"Through November, initial crime reports show a reduction of part one offenses down 3 percent. We hope that holds through December," Swoboda said.


Departments from around the country are being interviewed as part of the series, Swoboda said. "They are looking at community policing and where it is working; (to) identify where it could be used in more areas."


Much of the interviews focused on the ROPE program, including footage taken at Officer Heather Farrell's Spring Street home. The crews also filmed Swoboda's weekly "Friday with the Fuzz," broadcast on WRMN radio.


In the department's Facebook video of the weekly show, one of the cameramen can be seen shooting from Douglas Avenue back into the radio station's street-level studio windows.


Ellis was interviewed Friday at the Elgin History Museum. She said she sat down with Cenac for a one-on-one discussion after producers received her name from Fox Valley Peace and Justice, a community group.


It’s been a bumpy ride for Trevor Noah.

When he took over “The Daily Show” in September 2015, he was the interloper, the slick young — and let’s not forget, foreign — guy getting the job that many devotees of the show under Jon Stewart thought should have gone to longtime contributor Samantha Bee.

The two sat at a piano bench and began talking while the cameras were set up, Ellis said. Somewhere during that conversation, the taping began.


"I was complimentary, genuinely, of Chief Swoboda and the Elgin Police Department," Ellis said. "I have a good relationship with the chief and the department. I have criticized them and called them when I needed them," she said.


Her concern is that, while statistics may show that a majority of gang members are "black and brown men," at times officers may act as if all black and brown men are also gang members, Ellis said.


At times, the police here may be harassing minority men who are not affiliated with gangs, she said.


"They need to make sure it is the gang members they are harassing, or they are making it difficult for black and brown men in this town," she said.


While training minority youths on how to respond to police, the police also need to be trained on how to interact with black and brown youth, she said.


"It is a two-way street," Ellis said.


What Swoboda hopes the documentary series does is show local residents and others that Elgin is not afraid of talking about its problems publicly while looking for ways to address them.


With his first of four “Daily Shows” from Chicago this week, Trevor Noah presented America with a more nuanced version of the Windy City than it has been seeing lately.


Not that he is a particular fan of that nickname, the host said during an opening monologue Monday evening that was all about the...

"We believe our communication with the community as well as great police work is showing what is possible. With fewer officers than we use to have, we have driven crime to historic lows," Swoboda said.


"The days of Elgin being known for crime have been replaced with Elgin now being recognized for being strategic and solving problems. We openly discuss real issues with our community. This is resulting in Elgin routinely being named one of the safest larger cities in country. But … we still have much work to do," Swoboda said.


The series is set to begin in March.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News. 