Firefighters at Station 10 in Aurora help Sugar Grove resident Laura Dhom unload supplies Wednesday morning that will be sent on to Puerto Rico.

Firefighters at Station 10 in Aurora help Sugar Grove resident Laura Dhom unload supplies Wednesday morning that will be sent on to Puerto Rico.

Aurora's police and fire departments have teamed up with the Puerto Rican Fraternal Order Lodge to provide relief for those in need in hurricane-ravaged Puerto Rico.


On Wednesday, collection sites opened at the police department's main headquarters at 1200 E. Indian Trail Road as well as at all Aurora fire stations and the Puerto Rican lodge at 306 W. Union St. where nonperishable goods, baby care items, cleaning supplies and more will be temporarily stored.


Alvin Soto, an evidence technician for the Aurora Police Department, said he and others including Puerto Rican Lodge member Eddie Perez are more than anxious about the short- and long-term wellness of those affected by the hurricane in Puerto Rico, including their own family and friends living there.


It was only a few weeks ago that 96-year-old Virginia Garcia recounted for her children how terrifying it was to endure the 1932 San Ciprian hurricane as an 11-year-old girl in Guayama, Puerto Rico.

Earlier this month, Garcia died and her daughter Angela Garcia, of Racine, Wis., returned to Puerto...

"I have family there including my father, aunts, uncles and cousins, and I had a brief conversation this past Sunday with my father's wife and while they are all alive, they are struggling," Soto said. "We pretty much started talking right away after this happened about getting help down there, but we wanted to get more information, particularly about how we could get things shipped."


Perez, a retired Batavia police officer, said that he too has "pretty much the same collection of family in Puerto Rico" as Soto and agreed that one of the problems "isn't about the collection of supplies, but how to get them there."


"I've made a bunch of calls and reached out to various venues in Elgin and Chicago, and the plan is to piggyback our collection with theirs," Perez said. "I'm convinced there are a lot of people here locally that are willing to help, but I've heard it's difficult to get supplies delivered because the ship ports are in such bad shape there."


Perez added that his own family members and others living there "are used to working under sporadic conditions including low electricity and running out of supplies."


"The thing is, it could take two to six months before these supplies get down there and so we're looking at something long term, which is why things have to be nonperishables as they could sit there a while," Perez said.

Ray Torres of the Aurora Fire Department said he has two brothers as well as "nieces, aunts and uncles" currently living in Puerto Rico but that local efforts "are certainly for everyone living down there as they are our fellow Americans who need help."


In the days after Hurricane Maria struck Puerto Rico, Edith Del Valle spent most of her time in tears trying to reach her mother.

She kept busy sorting donations ranging from bottled water to canned food at the Humboldt Park-based Casa Puertorriquena, the group that organizes the annual Puerto...

"All of us, including Alvin and Eddie, grew up together here in Aurora, and as devastating as this was, we couldn't just sit back," Torres said. "The Fire Department was more than happy to help with this, and we have a total of nine collection sites and will try to get these supplies out as soon as possible."


Like Perez, Torres said it is important to take the long view and recognize that even if supplies don't reach people in Puerto Rico for a number of months, "it's important to have an inventory that has been built up."


"The logistical problems we may face are nothing compared to what people there are going through," Torres said. "There may be some frustration on our part, but it really pales in comparison. This is not going to be a short recovery and people's lives there are unimaginable compared to ours here as people just go about their daily business. Our supplies need to be (collected on an ongoing basis), and there is going to be more than one shipment."


Sugar Grove resident Laura Dhom was one of the first to donate Wednesday when collections began and brought about $50 worth of toothpaste, canned goods, hygiene products and batteries over to Fire Station 10 on the city's west side.


"I've been to the islands twice and took family there this past June," Dhom explained before firefighters helped unload her car. "Despite my being Mexican, I have a lot of Puerto Rican friends and though I grew up poor, we have so much more here than people there. It breaks my heart. People are being charged $1,000 a ticket to get out, and so many will have to stay. I want to come back next week and send more."


Collection of donations will continue through Oct. 4. For more information, visit the Puerto Rican Fraternal Order Lodge's Facebook page.


David Sharos is a freelance reporter for The Beacon-News.