A car crash that haunted a rookie Barrington Hills police officer — and the cause of death of the young newlywed he found in the wreckage — took center stage Tuesday at the opening of the trial of the man charged with killing his bride nearly 45 years ago.


The death in 1973 of 19-year-old Noreen Kumeta Rudd was first considered to be the result of car crash injuries, and her new husband Donnie Rudd was found cradling her body at the site of the crash.


But more than four decades later, Donnie Rudd, now 76, was charged with killing his bride and setting it up to look like a traffic accident. His murder trial opened in Cook County Tuesday with testimony from the police officer, family members and a retired emergency room physician.


In opening statements, prosecutors sought to paint Rudd as a persuasive and manipulative attorney who led a double life. They said that though Rudd was living with a girlfriend and her four children, he courted and then married Noreen Kumeta — who died less than a month later — because he was feeling financial pressure and wanted to collect on insurance that would pay him more than $100,000 if she died accidentally.


“The defendant didn’t marry Noreen because he loved her,” Assistant State’s Attorney Maria McCarthy said. “He married her because he wanted to kill her.”


For continuing coverage of the trial, click here and here.


McCarthy said that after Noreen’s death, Rudd immediately returned to his girlfriend, Dianne Hart.


“He was there (at Hart’s home) the day of the funeral,” McCarthy said.

Defense attorney Timothy Grace countered that Noreen Rudd was killed in a “tragic accident” and that the cause of death, as listed on an emergency room report, was a fracture to her cervical spine.


There is no evidence that Rudd knew anything about his wife’s insurance policies, Grace said. The defense attorney denied that Rudd was leading a double life, saying Rudd was simply “cheating on his girlfriend.” He said Rudd married Noreen Kumeta on impulse.


“They fell in love. It was an impulsive act,” Grace told the jury.


Among the first to testify was Christopher Bish, who was a newly minted, 21-year-old Barrington Hills police officer when he arrived at the scene of the accident on Sept. 14, 1973. It was shortly before midnight on a Friday, and Bish found Donnie Rudd holding his wife in the couple’s compact station wagon. The car was in a field off the roadway.


Bish, now a commander with the Georgia Department of Corrections, said he and other responding officers pulled her from the car and placed her on the ground where they tried to resuscitate her.


“It was a desolate, unlit area,” Bish testified. “It was the first time I handled a fatality, the first time I did CPR on a person.”


Under questioning by Assistant State’s Attorney David Coleman, Bish said he had his hand on the back of Noreen Rudd’s head and that it felt “mushy.” Bish said Donnie Rudd told him a car tried to run them off the road and that Noreen was thrown from the car as it went into the field.


Bish testified that Rudd pointed to a rock that Rudd said had Noreen’s hair and blood on it, but Bish said he never located the rock. He also testified that there was no grass or dirt on Noreen’s clothing.


Under cross-examination by Grace, Bish admitted that in his accident report he did not mention the condition of Noreen’s head or any suspicions he might have had at the time.


“You didn’t think anything nefarious happened?” Grace asked.


“During the crime scene search, no,” Bish said.


“Did you think about investigating the accident?” Grace asked.


“Yes, every day,” Bish replied.


Pressed by Grace, Bish said he never did any further investigation after a coroner’s jury ruled the death accidental.


Dr. Jae Han, the emergency room physician who pronounced Noreen Rudd dead on arrival after paramedics took her to Sherman Hospital in Elgin, also took the stand. He’d listed the probable cause of her death as a “fractured cervical spine.” He said he also noticed a scalp wound, but did not order any X-rays.


“There were no vital signs,” Han testified. “We try to treat the living.”


Prosecutors believe Noreen died from multiple blows to her head.


Testimony is due to continue Wednesday. Unlike many murder defendants, Rudd has been free while awaiting trial, having put up $400,000 in bail money.


George Houde is a freelance reporter.


MORE COVERAGE:


Man charged with wife's 1973 Barrington Township murder focus of TV special »


Life insurance details to be allowed at trial of man accused in 1973 death of wife »


Barrington woman co-writes memoir about life with stepfather facing murder charges »