Elgin officials and event planners Monday were beginning to review Saturday's Nightmare on Chicago Street, which drew its biggest crowd.


"It's a great event, but we have some work to do to make sure getting in is a smoother process. I can understand the frustration of those who waited in long lines to enter," Police Chief Jeff Swoboda said.


Nightmare on Chicago Street posits that a zombie outbreak has overtaken Elgin, with the downtown a safe zone from the undead brain eaters — a downtown duly decorated, filled with monsters and other costumed characters, and offering all sorts of entertainment options.


Fire Chief Dave Schmidt said the city sold about 8,500 tickets in advance, with many others arriving that evening to buy their tickets at the entrance.


Elgin Communications Specialist Molly Center said the city sold 16,000 tickets to the event, which was the cap set for attendance. Another 1,700 tickets were given as in-kind donations to Elgin nonprofits for their help with the event, and 300 volunteers worked the event, Center said.


"Police were monitoring the (Realtime Information Center) before, throughout and after the event, and capacity did not reach unsafe levels, she said.


The Elgin Police Department Facebook page noted that the city's parking lots were filled by 6:45 p.m. Saturday and urged people to park at the Gail Borden Public Library lot a few blocks from the event staging area or to park in the lot by the Advocate Sherman Center Street Campus off Slade Avenue and take a free shuttle downtown.




Svengoolie (Rich Koz) waits in the Burritt Building in downtown Elgin for fans attending Nightmare on Chicago Street to visit with him for photos and autographs. Koz was in Elgin for the annual event that may have drawn its largest crowd ever.

The city hired an outside security firm to wand patrons and to check bags before allowing them to enter the Nightmare.

Lines to the three entry points at times were blocks long. Some people took to Facebook to complain about waiting 90 minutes or more to enter the area.


On Sunday afternoon event organizers posted on the Nightmare on Chicago Street Facebook page acknowledging there were issues and seeking public input.


The post states: "We have heard frustration and disappointment. We also have seen excitement and enthusiasm. This year we are asking folks to break it down for us: please share your experiences on either side of the entry gate. We know that to improve the experience, we need your honest feedback."


Center said many factors combined to contribute to the length of lines, all of which the city is taking into consideration in planning next year's event.


One factor was the weather, which likely was the the warmest it has ever been for Nightmare, Center said. And there was no competing event, such as the Chicago Cubs clinching the pennant as they did in 2016, while Nightmare was happening.


"Given recent national events, we added an additional security check this year. The wanding slowed down lines at the entrance, but we felt this extra security measure was warranted," Center said. "To make room for the wanding and prevent some bottlenecking experienced in prior years, we moved ID stations outside the gates. Truly, we didn't realize how this would impact the lines, but we recognize it caused some backups and confusion."


Center also said the number of people and timing of their arrival contributed to the lines and waits.


"The ability to move that volume of people through three gates in a few hours will result in long lines. In past years, we've seen a more consistent flow of people through the gate, but this year we noticed more in line prior to the event starting," Center said.


Center said there was a record number of prepaid tickets purchased this year. While prepaid requires a quick scan of tickets, it can take longer than cash or charge if people have to look up multiple tickets, she said.


"If someone purchased multiple tickets, each individual ticket would need to be brought up on their mobile device, which could take several seconds. We estimate the number of prepaid tickets compounded over several thousand people could create significant delays," Center said. "The primary purpose of prepaid tickets was to offer a way to save money — for those who received the early bird price — as well as guarantee entrance if we had capacity concerns."


Center nsaid the event policy provides for no refunds, which was stated on emails sent with each ticket and on the ticketing website FAQ tab.


"We understand there are individual circumstances and we'll address those requests on a case-by-case basis. At no point did we no longer allow people in, so those that left did so at their own discretion," Center said.


Center said the city does apologize for the inconveniences experienced with the wait times in line.


"We recognize these wait times were not ideal and appreciate any and all feedback. We will improve our process to accommodate the increasing number of attendees. Improving those logistics will certainly be a focus for next year's event," she said.


Swoboda said city staff will hold a debriefing meeting soon to discuss how the night went and what might be done in 2018 to improve the experience.


"We're still cleaning up from the event, so debriefing has occurred informally at this point. A multi-department debrief will occur by the end of next week," Center said


As for policing issues, Swoboda said no arrests were made at the event.


There apparently was a minor skirmish between a few people that had broken up quickly and before police arrived, Swoboda said. And there was one auto vs. pedestrian accident downtown but outside the safe zone.


According to Deputy Police Chief Bill Wolf, the crash happened just after 10:30 p.m. south of the intersection of Kimball Street and Douglas Avenue and not far from Danny's on Douglas.


"The subject reportedly did not use the crosswalk and the 'don't walk' sign," Wolf said. "He was transported to Presence St. Joseph Hospital to be treated for his injuries and was conscious and talking to a police officer at the hospital."


First held in 2011, Nightmare has drawn bigger crowds each October. Elgin has never made money on the event.


City officials said the event cost Elgin $234,000 to put on in 2016, and it generated more than $221,000 back with admissions and vendor fees. The preliminary cost estimate for this year was $230,000, with revenues anticipated to be $225,000.


"The total staffing cost will not be ready until payroll is processed. We estimate that number to be ready early November," Center said.


Mayor Dave Kaptain said that with the success of the event, while it may be a boon for downtown businesses, Nightmare should at least break even for the taxpayers.

Aside from the long lines, Center said the city has received positive feedback from those who attended Nightmare on Chicago Street.


"It is the most well-attended event we've had, and we're proud there were no major incidents. We are thankful for everyone's patience as we had an extra security measure in place this year. The weather cooperated, and so many were able to enjoy this signature event," Center said. "We recognize there's adjustments that need to be made for next year to make sure attendees have a better experience at the gate and so that we can continue to accommodate the growing number of people at this highly anticipated event."


mdanahey@tribpub.com