Attorneys representing Mark A. Owens are joined by the plaintiff's father at a news conference in Chicago to discuss a lawsuit against the Illinois Department of Human Services and others regarding alleged abuse by a former social worker at Elgin Mental Health Center. Jan. 17, 2017. (Nancy Stone / Chicago Tribune)



Attorneys representing Mark A. Owens are joined by the plaintiff's father at a news conference in Chicago to discuss a lawsuit against the Illinois Department of Human Services and others regarding alleged abuse by a former social worker at Elgin Mental Health Center. Jan. 17, 2017. (Nancy Stone / Chicago Tribune)

For the second time in recent months, a former Elgin Mental Health Center patient alleged in a federal lawsuit that he was coerced into a sexual relationship with a staff member who abused her position of authority.


Mark A. Owens said his licensed social worker made sexual advances toward him shortly after he arrived at the state-run facility in early 2012. After Owens suggested their counseling sessions take place somewhere other than her private office, the woman retaliated by suggesting to his treatment team that he was paranoid, suffering from a major mental illness and in need of stronger medication, the complaint alleges.


The 27-year-old University Park man said he reported the inappropriate conduct to his psychiatrist, but the professional failed to take action, allowing the abuse to escalate and include sexual contact on at least three occasions, according to the complaint.


The lawsuit filed Wednesday in U.S. District Court names as defendants the Illinois Department of Human Services, the social worker and six other state medical professionals who oversaw the man's care. Owens is the second former patient to accuse the woman in a public complaint of sexual misconduct.


She resigned Aug. 23, state officials confirmed. The woman, in her 50s, had a long career and a nearly $90,000 annual salary, according to state payroll records. The social worker did not respond to requests for comment. Her professional license remains in good standing, according to state licensing officials.


In response to a question about the allegations, the Illinois State Police confirmed it is investigating an alleged incident at the Elgin facility involving a former employee, but it declined to name the person or give details about the nature of the probe.


“This is still an active and ongoing investigation,” state police Master Sgt. Mike Link said in an email to the Tribune.


Authorities with the state human services department declined to comment on the pending litigation.

Owens was involuntarily committed for treatment after he was found not guilty by reason of insanity in Will County for felony disarming a police officer in 2010.


He remains under treatment at Chicago Read Mental Health Center.


His father, Mark Owens Sr., joined his attorneys, Randy Kretchmar and Joe Cecala, at a news conference Wednesday in Chicago. The attorneys filed a similar federal complaint in November against the former state employee and facility, alleging a three-year sexual relationship between the woman and a 24-year-old Aurora man who is now free. The first suit is pending.


Both lawsuits seek $10 million in damages.


“Her behavior was the equivalent of extortion,” Kretchmar said. “She had an enormous amount of power over his short- and long-term future and, in this case, she used it coercively.”


Kretchmar said leadership at the state facility turned a blind eye to the sexual assault and battery of a disabled adult and should be held accountable for an alleged systemic pattern of abuse that has long existed at the facility because of a lack of training, supervision and proper investigative procedures.


cmgutowski@chicagotribune.com


Twitter @christygutowsk1


RELATED


Lawsuit: Elgin mental hospital patient became 'sex slave' of worker who abused her position of trust »