Here are the Tribune's endorsements for contested countywide races in DuPage, Kane, Lake, McHenry and Will counties. You'll find the candidates' answers to our survey, and all of our endorsements to date for the March 20 state primary election, at chicagotribune.com/candidates.


DuPage County


Sheriff: Two sheriff’s department veterans, Patrol Cmdr. James Mendrick of Woodridge and Undersheriff Frank Bibbiano of Elmhurst vie in the Republican primary to replace longtime Sheriff John Zaruba, who is not seeking re-election. Our strong preference is Mendrick, who has innovative and budget-conscious ideas to improve efficiency in the office. Mendrick seeks to expand the canine unit to battle drugs, create an elder assistance and abuse prevention program, and improve communication between the offices of the sheriff and county board chairman. Mendrick gets the nod.


Circuit Court Judge (Fawell vacancy): No endorsement.


Kane County


County Clerk: Our choice in this Republican primary is Stanton J. “Stan” Bond of Montgomery over longtime incumbent John A. “Jack” Cunningham. Cunningham missed many county board meetings in 2017 and has suffered serious health problems. Bond, who works in the circuit clerk’s Kane County Information Technology Department, has the expertise and energy to revamp the office — within budget. He promises to “examine every purchase order” to save money and improve efficiency. Bond is endorsed.


Sheriff: Incumbent Republican Donald E. Kramer faces a strong primary challenge from Kevin Tindall of Sugar Grove, a sergeant in the sheriff’s office bomb squad. Kramer gets high marks for his focus on officer training, mental health initiatives and community involvement. But he has stumbled in budgeting, starting in 2015 when he scrapped a $2.5 million contract to house federal detainees in the county jail. Kramer argued that the move would make the jail safer, but worries over jail safety persist. That move left his office with a huge budget shortfall and led to clashes with Kane County Board members, who have been reluctant to bail out Kramer’s department. Tindall vows to bring more fiscal discipline to the office. He suggests several ideas, including creating an auxiliary program of recently retired police officers willing to volunteer for light duties like traffic control during severe weather, freeing full-time officers for more serious enforcement missions. We’ll go with Tindall.


On the Democratic ballot, Kane County Sheriff’s Sgt. Ron Hain of Sugar Grove is an aggressive officer who has written a book about drug trafficking interdiction. He also works as marketing director and lead instructor of the Desert Snow program, which trains officers in detecting criminal and terrorist threats. Hain vows to set up a hotline to help battle the opioid crisis, seeks to beef up drug trafficking interdiction programs and would hire a “cyber-crimes/child sex trafficking specialist” to thwart internet predators. He is endorsed over Sheriff’s Deputy Lt. Willie M. Mayes Sr. of Aurora.

Circuit Court Judge (Akemann vacancy): For the Democrats, former prosecutor Lark Cowart of St. Charles is endorsed over former state Sen. Michael J. Noland of Elgin. For the Republicans, associate judge and former prosecutor Elizabeth Flood of St. Charles is endorsed in a close call over associate judge David P. Kliment, a former public defender, also of St. Charles. Circuit Court Clerk Thomas M. “Tom” Hartwell of Elgin also is on the Republican ballot.


Lake County


Clerk: Vernon Township trustee Adam R. Broad of Buffalo Grove gets the nod over former Hawthorn School District 73 educator Robin M. O’Connor of Libertyville in the Democratic primary. Broad currently works as a political researcher for American Bridge 21st Century, an organization that does opposition research into Republican candidates. He vows to increase efficiency in the office and improve election judge training. He is endorsed.


McHenry County


Clerk: We endorsed Republican Joe Tirio of Woodstock in the 2016 county recorder’s race for one reason: He pledged to lead a campaign to eliminate the office and fold it into the county clerk's office to save money. Result: The primary ballot includes a binding referendum to merge the two offices, effective in 2020. A pol keeping his promise? Bravo. In this primary, Tirio is strongly endorsed over Janice C. Dalton of McHenry, a legal assistant who filed for bankruptcy on the same day she filed to run for this office.


Circuit Court Judge (McIntyre vacancy): Judge Robert Wilbrandt of Woodstock is the clear choice in this Republican primary. He was appointed to the vacancy last year after serving as an associate judge since 2006. Also on the ballot are prosecutor Demetri Pete Tsilimigras of Cary, private attorney Ray Flavin of Woodstock and McHenry County Clerk Mary Elizabeth McClellan of Holiday Hills.


Circuit Court Judge, 1st subcircuit (Weech vacancy): Also on the Republican ballot, Judge Tiffany Davis of Woodstock, a former prosecutor appointed to the bench last year, is endorsed over Associate Judge Joel Berg of Harvard.


Will County


Clerk: Democrat Denise Mushro-Rumchak of Crest Hill, currently Lockport Township clerk, promises to modernize the office and improve customer service. She is endorsed over Lauren Staley-Ferry of Joliet, a Will County Board member, who says she is “truly sorry” for a felony forgery charge she faced in Arizona in 2002. The charge was later dismissed. The nod goes to the more experienced Mushro-Rumchak.


Circuit Court Judge (Rozak vacancy): Associate Judge David Garcia of Joliet is endorsed in the Democratic primary over prosecutor Moira K. Dunn of Shorewood and Daniel O’Connell of Joliet.


Join the discussion on Twitter @Trib_Ed_Board and on Facebook.