Clockwise from top left: Joshua Brodsky, Kevin Ganac, Kevin Willing, Randolph Zarecky and Stephen Palanca.

Clockwise from top left: Joshua Brodsky, Kevin Ganac, Kevin Willing, Randolph Zarecky and Stephen Palanca.

Five men who were arrested in Arlington Heights as part of a recent nationwide sting face charges of trying to buy sex at a motel in the village, police said.


Joshua Brodsky, 49, of Arlington Heights; Randolph Zarecky, 61, of Long Grove; Kevin Willing, 48, of South Elgin ; Stephen Palanca, 30, of Cary; and Kevin Ganac, 25, of Arlington Heights, all were charged with solicitation of a sexual act, said Arlington Heights Police Sgt. Chuck Buczynski.


Arlington Heights police arrested the five men after conducting the sting Jan. 25 at a motel in the area of Arlington Heights Road and Algonquin Road, Buczynski said.


Cook County Sheriff Thomas Dart said Tuesday the men who were arrested and charged in Arlington Heights were among more than 630 arrests police made across the country as part of the 15th National Johns Suppression Initiative operation, which was conducted from Jan. 7 through Feb. 4.


More than 30 police agencies across 16 states, including Illinois, targeted customers of prostitutes, known as "Johns," as part of the month-long operation, authorities said.


Aside from the five men arrested and charged in Arlington Heights, police arrested 57 sex buyers in Cook County, including 16 in Matteson, eight in Broadview, eight in Lansing and seven in Orland Hills, authorities said.


The Lake County Gang Task Force also arrested seven individuals as part of the nationwide sting, while five individuals were arrested in a joint operation between the Rockford Police Department, Winnebago County Sheriff's Office and the FBI, police said.


Of the roughly 638 sex buyers arrested across the U.S., 18 individuals face trafficking-related charges, with 15 victims – three of whom are juveniles – recovered during the stings, police said.

The recent sting also featured new technology after the Cook County Sheriff's office partnered with the organization Seattle Against Slavery to launch a "bot," called Project Intercept, in six municipalities during the nationwide operation, Dart said in a statement.


The bot posted ads online with phone numbers that connected to other online bots posing as prostitutes, carrying names such as Ariel, Brook and Cari, and interacting via text message with individuals seeking to buy sex, police said.


During the interaction, the bot eventually sets a price for the service, and after the price is agreed to, the bot sends a deterrence message letting the sex buyer know that soliciting sex is a crime, police said.


The message also directs potential buyers to websites with more information on the harms of soliciting sex, police said.


In addition to Cook County, the bot was activated in Boston, King County, Seattle, Los Angeles County and Phoenix, engaging with a total of 9,114 potential sex buyers.


More than 60 percent of sex buyers received the deterrence message, police said.


The bot also was used in Minneapolis during the day of the Super Bowl on Feb. 4 and recorded the most interaction of all active cities that day, showing demand for sex remains high in locations near the Super Bowl, police said.


"This incredible technology helps to further the work done by law enforcement to bring attention to the exploitative nature of the sex trafficking industry and reduce the demand for purchased sex that serves to perpetuate a cycle of violence, mental illness and drug addiction for victims," Dart said.


kcullotta@tribpub.com


Twitter @kcullotta