A snapshot from some of the most-read suburban Chicago stories of 2017.

A snapshot from some of the most-read suburban Chicago stories of 2017.

A brawl at Six Flags. A random act of kindness. A fatal gas station shooting caught on tape. These were just a few of the most read suburban Chicago stories of the year. Check out the rest below.


A north suburban couple whose dog was recently attacked by a coyote are warning other pet owners to take precautions when small animals are outside.


Vicky Dinges said her dog Boozer had been out of her Northfield home for less than a minute early Dec. 13 when a coyote emerged and attacked the cairn terrier, leaving the small dog with a bloody head wound.


Dinges said she ran out of the house screaming and the coyote scurried off. She retrieved Boozer, who suffered a deep gash in his head, a bloody eye and other injuries.


A surveillance camera at the home of Barnaby and Vicky Dinges in Northfield captured what appears to be a coyote attacking their dog Boozer, a Cairn terrier, on Dec. 13, 2017. (Keyth Technologies)



A surveillance camera at the home of Barnaby and Vicky Dinges in Northfield captured what appears to be a coyote attacking their dog Boozer, a Cairn terrier, on Dec. 13, 2017. (Keyth Technologies)

"He was shaking, I was shaking," Dinges said. "It could have been so much worse."


Brittany and Tiffany Coffland were shot to death before their mother arrived at her estranged husband's St. Charles condominium on the evening of March 10, according to a report released by St. Charles police.


A prayer vigil was held March 11, 2017, at the makeshift memorial for three people who died in a shooting at the Milestone Row condominium complex in St. Charles. (Nuccio DiNuzzo / Chicago Tribune)



A prayer vigil was held March 11, 2017, at the makeshift memorial for three people who died in a shooting at the Milestone Row condominium complex in St. Charles. (Nuccio DiNuzzo / Chicago Tribune)

According to the police report, Anjum Coffland said she received messages from her husband Randall that morning stating he was going to kill himself. She said he contacted her in the afternoon and told her he had secrets, too, according to the reports.


He told his wife to "come over so that he could tell and show her the secrets," according to the report.

The silent alarm on the Safe Haven Baby Box at the Coolspring Township Volunteer Fire Department in Michigan City has been tripped before, fire officials there said, mostly by people curious about the box on the east side of the building.


Mick Pawlik, chief of the Coolspring Township Fire Department east of Michigan City, displays the inside of a baby box where he found a newborn.

Mick Pawlik, chief of the Coolspring Township Fire Department east of Michigan City, displays the inside of a baby box where he found a newborn.

So when Chief Mick Pawlik's pager went off Nov. 7, he assumed it was another false alarm. He hoped it wasn't a baby, he said, because he was in his pajamas.


When he saw something in the box after getting the page at 10:24 p.m. and arriving at the station, he thought it was a dog or a raccoon. That's not what he found.


"I can see this sweatshirt. I can see this little baby arm," he said.


Melissa Rhone was last seen leaving work at a Chesterton thrift shop at 6 p.m. on March 21 before she went missing.


"It's rough," said her father Mike Rhone. "It's hard to sleep, with everything else. And telling the story 100 times, it gets old."


After more than a week, Mike Rhone said that an aunt picked Melissa up in Hammond and she returned home safely.


Nicholette Lawrence alternately cried and buried her face in her hands as her sentencing hearing for the murder of her 11-year-old daughter unfolded Jan. 12 in an audio- and video-assisted depiction of cruelty and brutality.


Nicholette R. Lawrence, who pleaded guilty in October 2015 to the murder of her 11-year-old daughter.

Nicholette R. Lawrence, who pleaded guilty in October 2015 to the murder of her 11-year-old daughter.

Lawrence, 34, of Waukegan, previously pleaded guilty to one count of first-degree murder and faces a sentence of anywhere from 20 years to life in prison in the death of her daughter, Raashanai Coley.


Raashanai died Sept. 5, 2014, two days after her mother punched her in the stomach, a blow that perforated her stomach and eventually killed her, according to autopsy reports.


In a videotaped interview shown Jan. 12 with the girl's younger half-brother, which was recorded after Lawrence's arrest, the child said his sister had been kept in a locked closet in her parent's bedroom, rarely fed and often beaten.


A 21-year-old driver with a history of speeding may have been traveling faster than 100 mph in a 40 mph zone when he slammed into another car in Des Plaines Feb. 16, killing himself and three members of a close-knit local family, officials said.


Anita Crawford, 50, second from left, Kirsten Crawford, 20, center, and Kevin Crawford, 52, right, were killed in a Des Plaines crash Feb. 16, 2017. Hailee Crawford, left, and Christian Crawford, lower right, were not in the crash.

Anita Crawford, 50, second from left, Kirsten Crawford, 20, center, and Kevin Crawford, 52, right, were killed in a Des Plaines crash Feb. 16, 2017. Hailee Crawford, left, and Christian Crawford, lower right, were not in the crash.

After the wreckage cleared, a veteran suburban police chief called the crash the worst accident he has seen in 40 years.


"I can't remember the last time I saw a quadruple (fatal) crash. It's just horrific, the impact," Des Plaines police Chief William Kushner told reporters. "Cars are safer now than they've ever been – seat belts, air bags – and it didn't save anybody."


Those killed in the crash were identified as Arlington Heights residents Anita Crawford, 50; her husband, Kevin Crawford, 52; and their eldest daughter, Kirsten Crawford, 20, the Cook County medical examiner's office said.


If Piotr Rog, the driver at fault, had survived the crash, police would have recommended charging him with reckless homicide.


A Chicago teen had been repeatedly warned about sneaking onto the basketball court at a Skokie fitness facility, but Officer Mario Valenti came up with an alternative to arresting him for criminal trespassing.


When workers at X-Sport Fitness in Skokie called police about a teenager who frequently trespassed onto the facility's baskeball court, the responding officer offered an alternative to arrest.



When workers at X-Sport Fitness in Skokie called police about a teenager who frequently trespassed onto the facility's baskeball court, the responding officer offered an alternative to arrest.

The officer offered to pay $150 out of his own pocket, and X-Sport said the money would go toward a two-year membership with a total value of $718 and X-Sport Fitness would pick up the rest of the cost.


"At the end of the day, it's not about gratitude," Valenti said. "Most of us took this job to help people, not to hurt them. The job can be negative. For the most part, the job is dealing with good people having a very bad day so you're not seeing the best side of people."

The teen, Vincent Gonzales, thanked the officer, saying, "It changes how I view police a lot, actually. Now, I know there are some bad cops and some good. There's a mixture. I used to think all cops were bad."


Courtney Buss, like many first-time mothers, wanted all the white, goopy film washed off her baby immediately after delivery.


Three years later, Buss said she knows better.


Vernix is a white substance covering newborns. It regulates a baby’s temperature. (June 12, 2017)



Vernix is a white substance covering newborns. It regulates a baby’s temperature. (June 12, 2017)

The white, waxy film is called vernix caseosa and "it's good stuff," said Buss, a nurse at Advocate Sherman Hospital in Elgin. If she knew just how much vernix helps newborns, she would have waited to bathe her daughter, she said.


"Wait to bathe" newborns is a concept Buss began researching in October 2015 and in June 2017, half of the Advocate Health System hospitals were adopting the policy.


A family of three was hospitalized Sept. 23 after being attacked by an adult and eight teens at Six Flags Great America after members of the larger group apparently cut in line and were using foul language when the family exchanged words with them, according to Gurnee police. The family later filed suit against Six Flags Great America, asserting that the operators of the park were negligent for allowing the "vicious" attack to occur and because security personnel “did nothing to intervene” to stop it.


Elmwood Park police released a surveillance video in May that shows an April 8 shootout at a BP gas station that led to the death of a 43-year-old Chicago man. Police released the video after a Freedom of Information Act request from the Pioneer Press.


The previous month, police announced that no one would face charges after Ronald Morales, 43, was shot multiple times at 7450 W. Grand Ave., Elmwood Park. Police had said the man who survived the shootout acted in self-defense.


Video released by the Elmwood Park Police Department shows the fatal shooting of Ronald Morales, left, on April 8, 2017. 



Video released by the Elmwood Park Police Department shows the fatal shooting of Ronald Morales, left, on April 8, 2017. 