Members of the Swedish Parliament, at the Elgin Police Department on Friday, learned about community policing. They sat on the police wagon in the department lobby for a photo opportunity.

Members of the Swedish Parliament, at the Elgin Police Department on Friday, learned about community policing. They sat on the police wagon in the department lobby for a photo opportunity.

The Elgin police have had site visits in the past with police department officials from other U.S. cities learning about the department's community policing model, Police Chief Jeff Swoboda said.


On Friday, more than a dozen representatives from Sweden, including members of the Swedish Parliament and staff, were the latest group the city hosted, specifically to learn how Elgin's department works in and with its community.


The representatives were from the Swedish Committee on Justice, including committee chairman Tomas Tobe.


In addition to Elgin, the group met with the Chicago and Baltimore police departments.


His country is seeing a rise in crime, including gang-related activity, Tobe said.


He complimented the Elgin department on its policing model.


"This wasn't great. This was amazing," Tobe said at the end of the presentation.


Beginning in the department's training room, Elgin police leadership ran through many of the areas where Elgin works directly with residents to reduce crime. That includes the Resident Officer Program of Elgin, the Neighborhood officer program, its school resource officers, its summer programs and gang interventions in the schools, and its social worker and senior liaison programs.

They were taken on a quick bus tour of Elgin to see the ROPE houses, where officers live in the neighborhood they cover, and stopped at an Elgin school.


When they drove up to Washington Elementary, the bus stopped and there was an impromptu site visit, Lt. Eric Echevarria said. The students swarmed around the Elgin officers. The Swedish officials took pictures.


"We are studying how to work with crime prevention and be more integrated in the community," Tobe said.


They heard Elgin was "very good and working with the community, compared to Baltimore." he said. "It was perfect."


The Moderate Party member said Elgin seemed to engage its residents in crime prevention.


"It feels like an attitude that they work for the community. It is not the community and police, the police are in the community," he said.


Elgin Police Cmdr. Colin Fleury started the day with giving data on Elgin. The city now has about 112,000 residents. The department has 182 sworn officers and 93 civilian employees.


The city is also seeing a nearly 43-year low in part 1 crimes — the most serious offenses, Fleury said.


If everything stays on track to the end of the year, Elgin may record below 1,800 part one crimes, he said. In comparison, when Elgin began using a community policing model in 1991, the city reported 4,877 of those crimes.


Part 1 crimes include burglary to motor vehicles, residential burglary, theft, robbery, criminal sexual assault and homicide. Those crimes are a "standardized federal measurement of serious crimes," as reported to the FBI, according to police.


The crime rate did not drop as fast as some would have liked, Fleury said. In fact, the crime rate spiked as some were afraid of calling their ROPE officers. There was also violence against those officers who moved into city-owned houses in crime-ridden neighborhoods.


But eventually, those residents saw the benefit of having an officer nearby and began calling them about the problems in their neighborhoods, Fleury said.


While there are always officers patrolling, there are also officers who work in schools, with crime victims, with parolees, with seniors and with other groups, he said.


But the most effective way to combat crime is with prevention, Fleury said.


Many department leaders came out of the ROPE program, Fleury noted.


That program didn't come without its challenges, Swoboda said. Even when he's explaining it to other cities, not everyone buys into the idea. It can be expensive, because the city owns the houses the officers live in, the utilities need to be paid, and a squad car is sent home with those officers.


"There is also the idea of 'buy in.' That it is not real policing. At the beginning we were answering calls and going to shootings, but the ROPE officer was organizing a football game. But you stick with it and over time. You won't see the crime reduced tomorrow, but five or 10 years from tomorrow," Swoboda said.


While the Swedish delegation was here to learn about how Elgin polices, it is also reaffirming for the department and Elgin residents, Swoboda said.


"What we are doing in Elgin is working and communities everywhere, even in Sweden, are looking to replicate our model. Every member of the Elgin Police Department, sworn and civilian, knows we can't be successful without community support," Swoboda said.


"Everything we do on a daily basis is viewed through that lens. Is what I am doing helping our community? If the answer is no, stop. We hire good people, train them well and then get out of their way," he said.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.