[A prayer vigil was held May 22 in support of the striking youth counselors and probation officers of the 16th Judicial Circuit outside the Kane County Judicial Center near St. Charles.]

ST. CHARLES – Clergy members and supporters joined striking Kane County youth counselors and probation officers of the 16th Judicial Circuit at a prayer vigil at 2:30 p.m. May 22 outside the Judicial Center in St. Charles.

More than 50 people gathered to hear ministers and labor organizers, who included two stewards of Teamsters Local 330, striking over wages and alleged unfair labor practices.

The 118 union members, who began the strike April 30, have been without a contract since Nov. 30, 2017.

"I'm here representing Northern Illinois Jobs with Justice," attendee Mary Shesgreen of Elgin said before the program started. "We are alarmed by the length of time the strikers have had to be out here. … It looks like they are trying to break the union."

The Rev. Denise Tracy, chaplain with the Elgin Police Department, said she thinks people ought to talk to each other and resolve their differences, so that the probation officers and youth counselors are able to get back to the people who need their help and service.

[The Rev. Michael Mann (from left) of St. Andrew United Methodist Church of Carol Stream; the Rev. Denise Tracy, chaplain with the Elgin Police Department; and the Rev. C.J. Hawking, executive director of Arise Chicago, a labor and faith community group, speak to gathered strikers outside the Kane County Judicial Center near St. Charles.]

The Rev. Michael Mann of St. Andrew United Methodist Church of Carol Stream said the United Methodist Church has a long history of supporting workers and their right to organize.

"… That way we address grievances in the workplace and bring justice for all," he said, adding it's important to him to stand with the workers.

Jared Weiser, youth counselor and a union steward, said the strike has gone on for 23 days, but they are standing firm, noting the strikers include people who have been on the job from six months to 20 years.

He said his co-workers have created bonds with individuals as they work at behavior modification. He added that later they receive thank-yous from people whose lives they helped turn around.

Because of the strike, thousands of offenders have gone unmonitored, Weiser said.

"It's a risk to public safety," Weiser said. "The rapport we've built is crucial. We want a fair contract. … It matters what we do."

He said their work unfairly has been deemed nonessential.

Fellow steward Krista Larson, a probation officer in the sex offender unit, said she and her colleagues have dedicated their lives to their work and deserve to be considered essential employees.

The Rev. C.J. Hawking, executive director of Arise Chicago, a labor and faith community group, said she has talked to the striking workers and finds their stories compelling and inspiring.

She called them truly dedicated to helping former offenders transform their lives. Arise Chicago lends a moral voice for what is happening in the workplace, she said, noting that its work is grounded in Scripture.

She talked of God speaking to Moses about leading his people out of the oppression of slavery and the trajectory to the efforts of Martin Luther King Jr., Mahatma Gandhi and Cesar Chavez on behalf of workers.

She said their courage is reflected in the striking county workers. She prayed for their courage to continue.

"The religious community is standing with them," she said.

At the rally was Terry Hancock, president of Teamsters Joint Council 25.

"Shoulder to shoulder we win," he told the strikers. "Stay together and walk together."

Teamster Local 330 President Dominic Romanazzi said the group will not accept substandard wages and unfair treatment, adding it's likely that 3,000 criminal offenders have not been monitored or supervised since the strike began.

He called upon Chief Judge Susan Clancy Boles to end the strike.

After the rally, he said an hour-long meeting between the union and county took place May 21 and he spoke with the county's counsel earlier May 22.

'I'm cautiously optimistic that movement will be made by management," Romanazzi said.

Clancy Boles could not be reached for comment.