

Community members gathered outside the Elgin Police Department March 13, 2018, to demand answers about the death of Decynthia Clements.

Nearly 60 people gathered outside the Elgin Police Department Tuesday to demand answers about the death of a 34-year-old woman fatally shot Monday by an Elgin police officer.


Many wanted to know why they were not being allowed see the video taken of the shooting, in which Decynthia Clements, an African-American Elgin resident, was shot by Lt. Christian Jensen, a white police officer, in an incident that took place about 2 a.m. on Interstate 90, near Route 59.


Marcus Banner, one of the more vocal participants, also questioned why Jensen — a former gang unit member — was on the scene as a shift supervisor and why non-lethal or less-lethal tactics were not used in order to get Clements out of her SUV and into police custody.


"Did they value this woman's life? They did not," Banner told the crowd. "Does she deserve to be dead when she was armed with a knife?"


Clements was stopped by Elgin police about 12:35 a.m., some time after officers initially attempted to pull her over and she refused to stop, Elgin Police Chief Jeff Swoboda said in a news release issued after the shooting. On Interstate 90, Clements refused to get out of her SUV and at some point pulled out a knife, the release said.




Decynthia Clements was shot and killed by Elgin police officers along Interstate I-90 on March 12, 2018.

When officers realized Clements' SUV was on fire, they were forced to remove her from the vehicle and that's when the shooting occurred, the release said.


Swoboda acknowledged Tuesday that they believe Clements may have brought the incident to a head with her actions, although he did not disclose why Jensen needed to fire his gun.


"We believe the fire was intentionally set by her," forcing the officers to act, Swoboda said.

An autopsy conducted Tuesday determined Clements had been shot multiple times. The Cook County Medical Examiner's Office deemed her death a homicide, but declined to provide information on how many times she was shot or if toxicology exams will be conducted.


Swoboda attempted to calm the crowd Tuesday, saying answers may not be immediately available because the Illinois State Police, not his department, is conducting the investigation into the shooting. However, he is not willing to wait indefinitely before the public is given some answers.


"If the state police says two weeks, then we will release (the body camera video) in two weeks," Swoboda said. But if the state police says it will take several months, he is unwilling to wait that long, he said.


That said, it's important that inaccurate information not be released that contradicts what the state police ultimately finds, he added.


If that happens, "(Clements' family and friends) are not going to get their answers, I am not going to get my answers."


An Elgin police officer fatally shot a woman who was armed with a knife early on March 12, 2018, after a fire started in her vehicle and the officer approached to pull her out, authorities said. 



An Elgin police officer fatally shot a woman who was armed with a knife early on March 12, 2018, after a fire started in her vehicle and the officer approached to pull her out, authorities said. 

In his 19-year career with the Elgin police, Jensen has never fired his weapon and no complaints lodged against him have been found to be valid.


Banner said the problem is one law enforcement agency investigating another creates a situation that, in his opinion, guarantees the shooting will be found to be justified.


Swoboda responded that a shooting can be found to be justified but they are also analyzing whether the officer violated department protocols and policy in his actions.


He added that talking to residents and trying to give them answers is part of his job.


"We heard there would be a gathering," Swoboda said. "(We) thought it was appropriate to walk out there and try to listen. This police chief doesn't hide in his office. People are upset and they want answers."


No one in the Elgin Police Department wanted the outcome of this incident to be Clements' death, and officers recently underwent training on implicit bias — biases they might not be aware of — and on procedural justice to ensure better outcomes.


He also urged residents to contact his department — or call him personally — if they have complaints against specific officers or if they feel their complaints are not taken seriously.


Janelle Walker is a freelance reporter for The Courier-News.