Middlesex County

Cloyd Edralin, left, and his family. Edralin, 47, was detained by ICE agents on Monday. (Courtesy of Seth Kaper-Dale)

Days after a father of four was arrested by Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents, family and friends of Cloyd Edralin, as well as his fellow church members, gathered Friday to protest the 47-year-old's potential deportation. 

Edralin was taken into custody early Monday morning after he left his house in Highland Park to head to his job as a machinist.

Edralin, who is married to a U.S. citizen and holds a green card, is currently being held in the privately operated Elizabeth Contract Detention Facility facing deportation due to a criminal charge from 2007.

Below are scenes from the emotional rally.

(Sonia Szczesna for NJ Advance Media)

Cloyd Edralin's wife, Brandi, and daughter, Michelle, hug during a rally denouncing his detention. 

(Sonia Szczesna for NJ Advance Media)

More than 60 members of the local community gathered at the Reformed Church of Highland Park to support the Edralin family after Cloyd Edralin was detained by ICE. 

(Sonia Szczesna for NJ Advance Media)

Laura Austria, the Northeast Regional Co-Coordinator of the National Alliance for Filipino Concerns, fights for the rights and welfare of Filipinos in the United States and abroad. She came out Friday afternoon to support the Edralin family. 

(Sonia Szczesna for NJ Advance Media)

John Wenz, a close friend of Cloyd Edralin and a member of the Human Relations Commission in Highland Park, holds a sign at the rally Friday.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        