
    
        
            By Alex Napoliello

anapoliello@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A father of four was arrested by Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents on his way to work Monday and could soon be deported due to a criminal charge in 2007.

Cloyd Edralin, 47, left his house in Highland Park at 5:30 a.m. to go to work as a machinist when ICE agents detained him.

Edralin, who is married to a U.S. citizen and holds a green card, is being held in the privately operated Elizabeth Contract Detention Facility, according to Seth Kaper-Dale, an immigration activist and pastor of the Reformed Church of Highland Park.

He faces deportation because of a third-degree gun offense he was given probation for 11 years ago.

Edralin, who now lives in Highland Park, struggled with addiction but was able to clean himself up and counsels others who are facing those same issues, 

He came to the United States legally 30 years ago from the Philippines to follow his mother, a U.S. resident.

Kaper-Dale, who met Edralin through a local softball program, said Edralin's family has been "deeply involved" with athletics in the area for a long time. He also worked with Edralin's wife, Brandi Davison-Edralin, who is a social worker.

An ICE spokesman, Emilio Dabul, did not return an email and phone call from NJ Advance Media. He told WNYC that Edralin is "removable" because of the gun conviction in 2007.

The pastor plans to hold a rally for Edralin Friday at 3:30 p.m. on the front steps of the Reformed Church of Highland Park, 19 S. 2nd Avenue.

In a phone interview with NJ Advance Media, Kaper-Dale said what is especially troubling about Edralin's detainment is that he's an example of someone who made a mistake, paid for it and has since turned his life around.

"As a religious leader, the stories that we celebrate are the stories of lives turned around, the stories of beauty, and the story of Cloyd and Brandi and their family is a story of beauty," he explained. "It should not be undone, and trauma should not be caused to the children because of the strange choice of the morality police that wear ICE uniforms." 

Alex Napoliello may be reached at anapoliello@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @alexnapoNJ. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        