
    
        
            By Kelly Heyboer

kheyboer@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

New Jersey's immigrant detention facilities are giving detainees food with maggots, dirty drinking water, too few pairs of underwear and shoddy medical and mental health care, according to a scathing new report by a human rights group.

Members of Human Rights First, a nonprofit and nonpartisan group that advocates for immigrants, toured three immigrant detention centers in New Jersey and interviewed more than 100 detained immigrants for their study, according to the report.

Asylum seekers and other immigrants are being held under "harsh and inhumane conditions" at the Elizabeth Contract Detention Facility, the Essex County Correctional Facility and the Hudson County Correctional Facility, the report concluded.

"In New Jersey, ICE has essentially stopped granting parole to asylum seekers, with a few exceptions, leading to unnecessary, lengthy, and prolonged detention," said Eleni Bakst, the lead researcher for Human Rights First's report. "This, coupled with inadequate and delayed medical and mental health care and often inhumane conditions, exacerbates the suffering of traumatized individuals, many of whom faced violence or persecution in their home countries."

ICE arrests surge in N.J. under Trump. Here's why.

The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, or ICE, uses detention facilities to house both refugees seeking asylum in the U.S. and those suspected of violating immigration law. Some of those held in the facilities are eventually granted asylum to live in the U.S., but are held under prison-like conditions until their cases are heard, the report said.

ICE officials responded to the group's findings with a statement: "While the agency has not had an opportunity to review the report, ICE remains committed to ensuring that all individuals in our custody are held and treated in a safe, secure and humane manner and that they have access to legal counsel, visitation, recreation and quality medical, mental health and dental care."

CoreCivic, the private prison contractor that runs the Elizabeth Detention Facility, also said it is committed to the humane treatment of people in its facility.

"CoreCivic is deeply committed to providing a safe, humane and appropriate environment for those entrusted to our care, while also delivering cost-effective solutions to the challenges our government partners face," said Jonathan Burns, a CoreCivic spokesman. "We work in close coordination with our partners at ICE to ensure the well-being of the detainees at our ICE-contracted detention facilities."

Among the findings in the "Ailing Justice: New Jersey" report:

Burns, the CoreCivic spokesman, noted the private contractor does not control how long the federal government holds detainees at the Elizabeth facility and the company does not oversee health care at the center. ICE officials also work full-time at the detention center and have day-to-day supervision of CoreCivic's administration of the Elizabeth facility, he said.

The report also raised concerns about suicide prevention in the immigrant detention facilities. The Hudson detention center, which placed suicidal detainees in sparce medical isolation units referred to as "suicide rooms," has had three suicides since January 2016, the report said.

"Most men and (women) interviewed report not seeking mental health services to avoid being placed in the 'suicide room.' The room is perceived as a completely empty room, cold, dirty and with no basic comforts," Cristina Muniz de la Pena, a psychologist who toured the Hudson facility with Human Rights First, said in the report.

The report did not include the full names or other details of the detainees making the allegations of inadequate medical care, bad food or other harsh conditions at the facilities. 

Human Rights First released the New Jersey report on the same day the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in a 5-3 decision that immigrants in detention are not entitled to a bond hearing, even if they have been in custody for months or years.

Two lower courts said immigrant detainees must be given a custody hearing within six months. The case now goes back to the federal appeals court to decide whether the detention rules violate the U.S. Constitution.

The American Civil Liberties Union, which represented the detainees in the Supreme Court case, said the Trump administration is increasing the number of immigrants held without a hearing.

"The Trump administration is trying to expand immigration detention to record-breaking levels as part of its crackdown on immigrant communities. We have shown through this case that when immigrants get a fair hearing, judges often release them based on their individual circumstances," said Ahilan Arulanantham, the ACLU attorney who argued the Supreme Court case, said in a statement.

ICE arrests have surged in New Jersey since President Donald Trump's inauguration.

There were 3,189 arrests in fiscal year 2017 in ICE's Newark region, which encompasses all of New Jersey, according to data released by the agency. That is a 42 percent increase compared to the previous year.

It is unclear exactly how many people are currently being held in ICE facilities in New Jersey.

The Elizabeth Detention Facility has space for about 300 people, according to the Human Rights First report. The Essex and Hudson facilities, where ICE rents space in the county jails for detainees, can hold about 700 people in ICE custody as well as inmates awaiting hearings in criminal cases.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        