

By Mike Hixenbaugh, Houston Chronicle and Lomi Kriel

Caption


Close

Administration officials have pointed to a set of laws and court rulings that they said forced their hand, including:

Administration officials have pointed to a set of laws and court rulings that they said forced their hand, including:

Kristen Ruiz has never thought of herself as an activist. But one night last week, as the stay-at-home mother of three  rocked her 17-month-old  to sleep, she was overcome with sadness and anger at the thought of the government taking her children from her.

So, on Sunday, Ruiz strapped her baby onto her back and marched with more than 50 others outside a downtown Houston warehouse where the federal government  plans to hold  children who have crossed into the United States illegally. It was one of dozens of  demonstrations across the country this weekend in opposition to President Donald Trump’s hard-line immigration policy that, in recent months, has led to the separation of more than 2,000 children from their parents.

“To think that our government would condone those kinds of acts is really appalling to me,” said Ruiz, whose husband is the son of Mexican immigrants. “These children need to be returned to their parents immediately.”

ON FAITH: Christian leaders divided on Trump border policy, family separations

Furious protests have continued in Texas and across the country despite Trump’s executive order last week directing border agents to stop the controversial practice while leaving in place his  “zero-tolerance” policy requiring criminal prosecution of every person who crosses into the U.S. illegally.

Four days later, immigration activists and lawyers said the administration still had yet to lay out a clear plan for reuniting children with their parents. And it remained uncertain how federal agencies would go about housing families detained together at the border.

“The reality is this is being figured out as they go along,” said Michelle Brané, director of migrant rights at the Women’s Refugee Commission, a national advocacy group.

In a statement released late Saturday, the Department of Health and Human Services pushed back against such characterizations, saying it had already reconnected 522 children with their parents and has established a coordinated plan to reunite some 2,000 others scattered at facilities and foster homes across the country.

“The United States government knows the location of all children in its custody and is working to reunite them with their families,” the agency said. “The process is well coordinated.”

Federal officials said Saturday that the Port Isabel Service Processing Center, an immigration detention facility in South Texas, would be the “primary family reunification and removal center.” Immigration and Customs Enforcement, an arm of the Department of Homeland Security that detains adult immigrants, said it has implemented an “identification mechanism” to ensure ongoing tracking of “linked family members” as they wind through the detention and deportation process.

DHS is coordinating with Health and Human Services to reunite parents with their children before they are deported and parents can call a government hotline to find where they are, the statement said.

Immigration lawyers, activists and Democratic lawmakers said the government’s description of an orderly and organized process does not match reality.

Advocates said parents in detention often cannot make or receive phone calls. There have also been reports that parents are being pressured into abandoning asylum claims and agreeing to immediate deportation to reunite with their children.

Some parents have already been deported without their children, including one Guatemalan father who had no idea where his 18-month-old was for five months until they were reunited in December. Other detained parents say they have struggled to learn the whereabouts of their children and have not been told how or when they would be reunited.

“I worry about my daughter constantly,” one Honduran father wrote of his 12-year-old child in an affidavit submitted as part of his lawsuit against the Department of Homeland Security. “I am not able to speak with her directly. I do not know if she has been sick. I do not know if she has been sleeping well or eating well. Not knowing anything about my daughter is torture.”

Search shelter violations

Brané, the Women’s Refugee Commission director, said she is concerned that government was focused only on reuniting parents and children as a precursor to deportation, rather than fully considering their requests for asylum.

“That is not a sufficient remedy for the harm that they have caused,” Brané said, noting that many of the parents fled because of legitimate fears of violence in Central America.

Efrén Olivares, a lawyer with the Texas Civil Rights Project that has filed an international complaint against the separation policy, said the timing of the government’s statement illustrated the lack of planning.

“The fact that it was released (Saturday) night, after over 2,000 children have been separated from parents, shows they are only now coming up with a process,” he said in a conference call with reporters. “This should have been in place from day one.”

The group has denounced family separations to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and Olivares said the body has requested more information on the practice from the Trump administration. It is asking for details on where parents and children are being held and on the justification for separating them to begin with. The government’s response is due this week, though it is likely to seek an extension.

The complaint names five parents who have been separated from their children, including one who is partially deaf. Lawyers with the group have also interviewed another 376 separated parents, Olivares said.

Of those, none have  been reunited with their children.

Protests continued along the border Sunday. Hundreds of people rallied at the port of entry at Tornillo, near El Paso, where children — about two dozen of whom were separated from their family — are being housed in a “tent city.” The speakers, who included former San Antonio mayor and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro and 88-year-old civil rights activist Dolores Huerta, protested the Trump administration’s immigration policies.

“Why don’t we use our tax dollars, and I think everybody here would agree, to give these families decent shelter, take them out of cages, take them out of detention, take them out of imprisonment?” Huerta said to cheers. “And Mr. President, we want you to also obey the asylum laws. Do not label all of these refugees as illegals.”

ON HOUSTONCHRONICLE.COM: Teenager is missing after walking away from migrant children's center in Texas

Earlier in the day, Trump fired off a series of tweets, blaming Democrats for failing to address immigration, comparing people entering the U.S. from Mexico to invaders and suggesting anyone caught entering the country illegally should be sent back immediately, without due process.

“We cannot allow all of these people to invade our Country,” the president wrote as he was being driven to his private golf club in northern Virginia. “When somebody comes in, we must immediately, with no Judges or Court Cases, bring them back from where they came. Our system is a mockery to good immigration policy and Law and Order.”

San Antonio Express-News staff writer Lauren Caruba contributed to this report.

 