
    
        
            By Steve Strunsky

sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

The Newark man wanted in the robbery and killing of an Irvington resident gunned down earlier this month in front of his wife and son was captured Tuesday in Pennsylvania, authorities said.

Tashan Green, 23, was arrested Tuesday in a home in Bethlehem, Pa. by authorities from both states and the FBI, officials said.

Green faces charges of murder, robbery, endangering the welfare of a child and weapons offenses in the Dec. 4 killing of 29-year-old Marco Angarmarca-Yupa, said Essex County Chief Assistant Prosecutor Thomas Fennelly.

Angarmarca-Yupa was shot to death outside his apartment on Grove Street in Irvington, as his 8-year-old son looked on.

Green was also charged with conspiracy, and Fennelly said the investigation was continuing with additional arrests possible. 

Green now awaits extradition to New Jersey from the Northampton County Correctional Facility in Pennsylvania, said Fennelly.

"It was an intensive investigation by the Essex County Prosecutor's Office Homicide Task Force," Fennelly said in an interview. "We received valuable assistance from the FBI and the Bethlehem Police Department, for which the prosecutor thanks them."

Fennelly said a lawyer for Green has not been identified.

Angarmarca-Yupa's landlord told reporters that Angarmarca-Yupa was a "good man," who had immigrated from Ecuadoran several years earlier and had been renting the apartment in the pale green multi-family house for several years. 

Steve Strunsky may be reached at sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SteveStrunsky. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        