Gallery: Newark teen charged with Thanksgiving night murder appears in court


    
        
            By Steve Strunsky

sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

In a brief but emotional hearing Tuesday morning, an 18-year-old Newark youth was ordered held in the fatal carjacking of a community activist in front of her Newark home on Thanksgiving night.

With his mother sitting in the courtroom, Supreme A. Allah of Newark was ordered to remain held at the Essex County Correctional Facility on charges of murder, felony murder, robbery, carjacking, weapons offenses, and conspiracy to commit murder in the Nov. 23rd incident. Superior Court Judge Nancy Sivilli ordered him held following a detention hearing Tuesday morning in Newark.

Authorities say the carjacking occurred at about 11 p.m. as 40-year-old Shuri Henry was returning to her South 20th Street home from Thanksgiving dinner with her young nephew. Henry was shot and her 2015 Kia Sorrento was taken, authorities said. Henry was pronounced dead minutes later at University Hospital.

Family members of the victim were also present at the hearing, though they left the courthouse immediately afterward. Allah's tearful mother, Pamela Robinson, lingered in the hallway and spoke briefly to NJ Advance Media. 

"He didn't do nothing," Robinson said through sobs. "He's a good kid. He don't get in trouble. He just got wrapped up in something he shouldn't have got involved in."

Allah is one of four people arrested in the case, three of them charged with Henry's killing.

A 14-year-old boy faces murder, felony murder, carjacking and other charges. Authorities have not released the name of the boy because of his age. His case is being handled in Family Court, and he is being held at the Essex County Youth Detention Facility, said Katherine Carter, a spokeswoman for the Essex County Prosecutor's Office.

Carter said the 14-year-old was too young to be tried as an adult, and he will remain in the juvenile justice system.

Along with Allah and the juvenile, a 26-year-old Newark man, Murad Lampley, is also charged with murder, felony murder, carjacking, and weapons charges.

Carter said Lampley is scheduled for a detention hearing on Dec. 12. 

The fourth person under arrest is Antonio L. Torres, 20, of Newark, on a charge of eluding police, and he is also being held at the Essex jail. Carter said a detention hearing for Torres had been scheduled for Wednesday, though there was a chance it would be rescheduled.



According to authorities, the day after the fatal carjacking Newark police saw Henry's car being driven near Springfield Avenue and Jacobs Street. The driver refused to stop, and Allah, Torres and the 14-year-old were caught after a short pursuit, authorities said.

Lampley was arrested separately last week, Carter said.

She said the investigation was continuing.

Tuesday's hearing lasted less than two minutes, after Allah was led into Sivilii's courtroom handcuffed and dressed in a plaid shirt and other civilian clothes that his mother had brought for him to change into from his prison garb.

His public defender, John McMahon, did not contest the request by Essex County Assistant Prosecutor Naanzeen Khan to keep Allah behind bars pending presentation of the case to a grand jury.

"Not at this point," McMahon said afterward.

Henry had been planning a community meeting for Nov. 30 to gather ideas about improving the quality of life in her neighborhood, according to Lyndon Brown, a party district leader who was helping plan the event with Henry.

Henry worked on Governor-elect Phil Murphy's campaign, and served as secretary of the alumni association of the local Boys &amp; Girl's Clubs, where she had been planning an reunion for March, Brown said.

Newark Mayor Ras Baraka had spoken publicly about the case immediately after the incident.

"I just want to say, we're on the family's side," Baraka said at the time. "And by the grace of God, we're going to bring some closure to you in this holiday season."

Steve Strunsky may be reached at sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SteveStrunsky. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        