
    
        
            By Noah Cohen

ncohen@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Rahway man has been charged in the stabbing and robbery of a University Hospital nurse, who was attacked in a nearby parking lot as she walked to her car after working a 12-hour shift at the Newark hospital, officials said Thursday.

Newark police spotted Brian K. Anglin, 56, Wednesday evening near Raymond Boulevard and Route 21 in the city, and detained him before he was turned over to Rutgers University police, according to authorities.

Anglin was being held at the Essex County Correctional Facility on charges including aggravated assault, robbery and weapons offenses, according to jail records.

The nurse, a 25-year veteran of the hospital, was attacked in Parking Lot 1, at 185 South Orange Ave. on Sunday night, officials said. She was headed to her car after a shift in the hospital's labor and delivery unit.

A union representative on Wednesday said the nurse, who is in her 60s, was in stable condition. She staggered to the hospital's nearby emergency room for treatment after the attack.

Following the attack, the nursing union called for increased security and Rutgers officials said they would boost patrols.

"This is a nurse with 25 years of experience at the hospital, who has dedicated her career to caring for mothers and babies, yet became a victim who was senselessly attacked," Bernie Gerard, vice president of the Health Professionals and Allied Employees, said in a statement.

"Going forward, HPAE will once again bring the concerns of nurses and healthcare workers to the administration calling on them to improve security protocols for the safety of workers, patients and their loved ones," Gerard said.

Rutgers University police, which has jurisdiction over University Hospital property, were working with hospital officials to "enhance security for the hospital's staff and visitors," school spokesman John Cramer said Tuesday.

"Security escorts continue to be available during evening and night shifts, and the RUPD will increase patrols in the area," Cramer said.

Noah Cohen may be reached at ncohen@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @noahyc and on Facebook. 

Have information about this story or something else we should be covering? Tell us: nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        