Gallery: Rahdi Richardson tries to withdraw guilty plea


    
        
            By Thomas Moriarty

tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A man who beat and choked his cellmate to death at the Essex County Correctional Facility four years ago has been sentenced to 29 years in state prison, the county prosecutor's office announced Monday.

Rahdi Richardson, 34, previously pleaded guilty to a charge of aggravated manslaughter on the first day of jury selection for his trial before Superior Court Judge James W. Donohue in the Aug. 31, 2013, death of Desmond Sanders, 27.

Sanders, of Newark, was found dead on Sept. 1, 2013, in the cell he shared with Richardson, according to a statement from Assistant Prosecutor Justin Edwab, who handled the case with Assistant Prosecutor Joseph Giordano.

At the time of Sanders' death, both he and Richardson were being held in connection with a June 2013 armed robbery, to which Richardson also pleaded guilty.

Richardson, who prosecutors said has four prior convictions for drug and weapons offenses, unsuccessfully tried to withdraw his plea during a hearing scheduled for his sentencing earlier this year.

Richardson's 15-year sentence for the June 2013 robbery -- which includes two counts of armed robbery, two counts of aggravated assault and weapons charges -- will run concurrent with his sentence for Sanders' slaying, the prosecutor's office said.

Thomas Moriarty may be reached at tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at @ThomasDMoriarty. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        