
    
        
            By Paul Milo

pmilo@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A man has been charged with carjacking two family members in the driveway of a Short Hills home as they were returning from a Thanksgiving getaway, sowing fear in an affluent community where violent street crime is rare.

Police said Thursday that Ahmed Anthony, 29, of Newark, has been charged with carjacking, robbery, kidnapping, theft, receiving stolen property and unlawful possession of a weapon. Anthony was arrested with help from the State Police and the U.S. Marshal Service.

Man threatened to kill my daughter 

According to one of the victims, who asked not to be identified when speaking to reporters shortly after the incident, he, his wife and their two children arrived home in their 2017 Range Rover around 2 a.m. Nov. 27.

As the man and his younger daughter, 13, retrieved their luggage, two masked men approached, demanding the keys to their Range Rover and a second Range Rover parked in the driveway. One of the men appeared to be armed and threatened to kill the girl, the man said.

The two men made off with only one of the vehicles after failing to start the second Range Rover, the man also told reporters at the time. One of the men ran towards a waiting vehicle and sped off while the second left in the Range Rover, the victim also said.

It was unclear Thursday if a search was still underway for other suspects. A message left for Chief Brian Gilfedder was not immediately returned.

Anthony was being held at the Essex County Correctional Facility.

Paul Milo may be reached at pmilo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter@PaulMilo2. Find NJ.com on Facebook.  


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        