
    
        
            By Taylor Tiamoyo Harris

tharris@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Newark man is being charged after police say he attempted to rob a barbershop where an off-duty officer was a customer, authorities said. The officer shot the suspect in the face, injuring him.

Police identified the robbery suspect as Phillip Hedgespeth, 42, of Newark.

Hedgespeth, was treated for a non-life threatening gunshot wound and charged with robbery, unlawful possession of a weapon and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose. 

The name of the the off-duty officer involved has not been released yet because it is an ongoing investigation, said Thomas Fennelly, the county's chief assistant prosecutor,. 

A second person of interest, who also has not been identified, has also been detained, police said.

Around 9.p.m. on Tuesday, police say Hedgespeth, who was armed with a handgun, attempted to rob the barbershop on the 400 block of Orange Street. 

The officer shot Hedgespeth in the face, and Hedgespeth fled the barbershop. 

Police caught Hedgespeth around the 1100 block of McCarter Highway and arrested him.

After being treated, the suspect was remanded to the Essex County Correctional Facility.

He is currently pending an appearance in the Essex County Central Judicial Processing Court. 

The investigation into this incident is active and ongoing. Additional arrests are possible.

Anyone with additional information may contact the Essex County Prosecutor's Office Professional Standards Bureau at (862) 520-3700.

Taylor Tiamoyo Harris may be reached at tharris@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @ladytiamoyo.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        