
    
        
            By Jessica Mazzola and Thomas Moriarty


            NJ Advance Media for NJ.com
            

NEWARK -- A woman in county jail on accusations that she killed a girlfriend she was once arrested with has died, officials confirmed.

Turqoise Williams, 30, a Newark woman arrested on murder, witness tampering, weapons, and other charges on May 5, died while in the Essex County Correctional Facility on Oct. 22, a spokeswoman for the Essex County Prosecutor's Office confirmed.

The cause and manner of her death are pending the results of a medical examiner's report, Chief Assistant Prosecutor Thomas Fennelly said Wednesday. She did not die by hanging, authorities confirmed.

Authorities confirmed Williams was arrested in the April 28 killing of Virdea Beard, who was shot multiple times while standing on the porch of a residence on the 200 block of North 9th Street in Newark.

During a hearing in May, an assistant prosecutor asking the court to keep Williams jailed pending trial described Beard's killing as a "domestic violence case, strictly speaking," noting she had been called Williams' "girlfriend slash described as wife," according to an audio transcript reviewed by NJ Advance Media.

"There do appear to be two witnesses who either saw or heard Ms. Williams shoot the decedent in this case," Superior Court Judge Ronald D. Wigler noted as he approved the detention motion.

During the same hearing, an assistant prosecutor said a charge of possessing a weapon as a convicted felon stemmed from Williams bringing a handgun to the courthouse when she arrived there at the request of detectives.

Williams and the then 37-year-old Beard had been arrested together in December 2016 after authorities raided a South 6th Street home following an investigation into alleged drug activity there. Authorities arresting the duo said they also found two handguns, a BB gun, ammunition, Xanax, ecstasy, and other drugs in the home.

Williams was released from prison Dec. 30, records show. The outcome of that case was unclear.

Authorities have declined to comment on whether or not Williams' death is suspicious, citing the forthcoming autopsy results.

Jessica Mazzola may be reached at jmazzola@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @JessMazzola. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Thomas Moriarty may be reached at tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at @ThomasDMoriarty. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        