
    
        
            By Chris Sheldon


            NJ Advance Media for NJ.com
            

A man was arrested Friday and charged in the fatal stabbing of a 20-year-old woman in Montclair.

Ahigjah Broomes, 21, of Orange, has been charged with the murder of Akirah Townes, also of Orange, who was stabbed outside a home on Hartley Street around 6 a.m. on Friday, the Essex County Prosecutor's Office said in a statement. Townes was brought to St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center in Paterson, where she pronounced dead at 6:42 a.m.

Essex County Assistant Prosecutor Thomas Fennelly said it appears that Broomes and Townes were in a relationship at some point in the past. As detectives were searching for Broomes, he turned himself in at the Orange Police Headquarters.

Broomes has been charged with murder, unlawful possession of a weapon and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose, Fennelly said.

He is being held in the Essex County Correctional Facility pending an appearance in the Essex County Central Judicial Processing Court.

Fennelly said Townes, a student at Kean University, was attempting to leave on a trip to Virginia Beach when she was stabbed. Hartley Street is just off Bloomfield Avenue a short distance from the Bay Street train station.

Friends posted several tributes on Townes' Facebook page Friday, and described her as funny, constantly smiling and a big Giants fan.

Chris Sheldon may be reached at csheldon@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @chrisrsheldon Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        