
    
        
            By Alexis Johnson


            NJ Advance Media for NJ.com
            

Police arrested and charged a man with murder and kidnapping in connection with a fatal Newark shooting that happened in the parking lot behind an apartment building on Thursday. 

Authorities charged Antwan Malone, 31, of Hillside, with the murder of 48-year-old John A. Sosa, of Roselle, who was found unresponsive in the back of an apartment building on Brunswick Street on July 5, according to the Essex County Prosecutor's office. 

Sosa was one of three men killed in the span of two deadly days in Newark.

The United States Marshal's Fugitive Task Force arrested Malone at a residence in Hillside Saturday afternoon, prosecutors said. 

Malone is charged with murder, felony murder, kidnapping, conspiracy and weapons charges.

Assistant Prosecutor Thomas S. Fennelly said Sunday he could not release any further details about the incident until Malone appears in court. 

Malone was taken to the Essex County Correctional Facility in Newark pending an appearance in the Essex County Central Judicial Processing Court.

The hearing is likely to take place Monday, Fennelly said. 

The investigation of this homicide remains ongoing, officials said.

Alexis Johnson may be reached at ajohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @alexisjreports. Find nj.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        