
    
        
            By Steve Strunsky

sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

IRVINGTON - It was "Showtime" for Irvington police and Essex County sheriff's officers raiding a Bloods gang member's apartment Thursday, when they allegedly found a pair of handguns and 25 exuberantly labeled packets of heroin.

Officers of the two departments, working together on a law enforcement task force, found the door wide open at 23-year-old Dwayne Spann's 18th Street apartment in Irvington on Thursday night, Sheriff Armando Fontoura's office said. Spann is an alleged member of the Bloods street gang.

When the officers entered the apartment, Spann ran into the kitchen, where he stashed a bag behind the freezer, later found to contain 25 packets of heroin labeled "Showtime" in purple ink, Fontoura's office said. The heroin had an estimated street value of $3,000, the office said. 

"An orderly search of the rest of the apartment yielded a fully loaded, .38 caliber, Smith &amp; Wesson semi-automatic handgun, a fully loaded and defaced EKOL Major 9mm semi-automatic handgun and an additional ammunition magazine which were hidden under Spann's bedroom mattress," Fontoura said in a statement.

Spann was charged with various drug and weapons charges and is being held at the Essex County Correctional Facility, the sheriff's office said.

Steve Strunsky may be reached at sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SteveStrunsky. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        