Gallery: Murad Lampley detention hearing in Newark


    
        
            By Thomas Moriarty

tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A 26-year-old man arrested on murder charges in a fatal carjacking in Newark on Thanksgiving Day gave a statement to investigators implicating himself in the crimes, an assistant prosecutor said Tuesday.

Following a hearing Tuesday afternoon, Superior Court Judge Peter V. Ryan ordered Murad Lampley jailed pending trial for his alleged role in the death of Shuri Henry, 40, of Newark.

Lampley, of Newark, is the fourth person arrested in connection with Henry's death, which the Essex County Prosecutor's Office said occurred during the theft of her 2015 Kia Sorrento in the 300 block of South 20th Street. Henry was with her young nephew when carjackers approached and shot her, Newark Mayor Ras Baraka said the day after the shooting.

Newark police officers spotted the car the next day near Springfield Avenue, and arrested Supreme Allah, Antonio Torres and a 14-year-old boy after a brief chase.

Lampley -- who was escorted into court by sheriff's officers Tuesday wearing a white and black plaid shirt and gray pants -- was arrested the following week, and charged with murder, felony murder, carjacking and weapons offenses, the prosecutor's office said.

"He provided members of the prosecutor's office with a statement implicating himself in those offenses," Assistant Prosecutor Naazneen Khan told Ryan on Tuesday.

Lampley's attorney, Christopher Dunn, told Ryan he would not contest the state's request for detention, pursuant to the state turning over certain documents.

Court records show Lampley has prior convictions for receiving stolen property and resisting arrest.

Allah, 18, of Newark, was ordered detained last week following a hearing before Judge Nancy Sivilli. He faces the same charges as Lampley. 

The prosecutor's office has not identified the 14-year-old defendant because of his age. The boy -- who also is charged with murder, felony murder and carjacking -- is being held in the Essex County Youth Detention Facility, authorities said. His case has been assigned to family court.

Torres, 20, of Newark, is being held in the Essex County Correctional Facility on a charge of eluding police, jail records show.

Henry had just returned home from Thanksgiving dinner with her nephew at the time of the shooting. Prior to her death, friends told NJ Advance Media, she had been organizing a meeting on solutions to social problems in the community. 

Thomas Moriarty may be reached at tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at @ThomasDMoriarty. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        