
    
        
            By Thomas Moriarty

tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A coach of a regional girls basketball team is facing sexual assault charges after prosecutors say he preyed on a 12-year-old girl in Nutley earlier this year.

In a statement, the Essex County Prosecutor's Office said Kevin Jimenez, a former coach at Good Shepherd Academy in Nutley, was affiliated with an Amateur Athletics Union (AAU) team called The Wolves at the time of the assault.

Prosecutors said the team includes girls from throughout the region and has practiced at Abundant Life Academy in Nutley and at Our Lady of Sorrows in South Orange.

Authorities did not say if the victim was on the team, and provided no other details of the alleged crime.

Jimenez has been charged with three counts each of aggravated sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual contact and endangering the welfare of a child, according to the prosecutor's office.

Efforts to contact the team's leadership for comment were not immediately successful Thursday afternoon. It was unclear whether Jimenez, 29, of Bellville, had retained an attorney who could comment on the charges.

Records show Jimenez remains jailed at the Essex County Correctional Facility. He's next scheduled to appear in state Superior Court in Newark on June 15.

The prosecutor's office has asked that anyone with information about the case contact Capt. Janine Straccamore of the Special Victims Unit at 973-753-1131.

Thomas Moriarty may be reached at tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at @ThomasDMoriarty.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        