
    
        
            By Jessica Remo

jremo@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A paraprofessional who worked with special-ed students at a Maplewood-South Orange elementary school is accused of masturbating in a ShopRite, exposing himself to students in the school hallways and taking "upskirt" photos of a student.

The aide, 21-year-old Kenneth Palmer of Randolph, who worked at Jefferson Elementary School, was scheduled for a court appearance Monday morning but the hearing was adjourned until next month.

Palmer's attorney, Sara Sencer McArdle, said the postponement was due to delays with the Essex County charges but did not comment further about the case.

Palmer was first arrested Sept. 28, 2017, at the Succasunna ShopRite after a loss prevention associate twice saw him masturbating and trying to get the attention of young girls, one an 8-year-old and the other a toddler between the ages of 2 and 3, according to the police report.

The report says Palmer "appeared to be attempting to get each juvenile to take note of what he was doing while at the same time attempting to avoid being observed by the juveniles' respective parents."

A surveillance video also captured the incidents, the report says. It also says Palmer admitted to masturbating in the store. 

When officers searched Palmer's cellphone after his arrest, they allegedly found upskirt pictures of females, including a student.

"The defendant claimed his phone was broken and would just turn on and record by accident," the report says.

The phone also contained videos and photos of Palmer masturbating in front of students as he walked through school hallways, it says. 

One of the videos showed Palmer masturbating while lingering outside a bathroom door as two students, an 8-year-old and a 9-year-old, walked out of the bathroom past him, the report says.

Another video showed Palmer masturbating and approaching a different 9-year-old student as he/she was facing a water fountain, it says. 

"He asked if the fountain worked and (the victim) turned around facing (Palmer) and walked away," according to the report.

Also, it claims Palmer surreptitiously took "upskirt" photos of the undergarment-clad genital area of another 9-year-old student, taken from under the student's desk.

Palmer did not return to the school after his arrest, but parents were not notified of the charges until April, after he was also charged in Essex County for the photos and videos that were allegedly found on his phone.

One parent said she felt the school was not forthcoming about the incident.

Suzanne M. Turner, director of communications for the Maplewood-South Orange School District, said administrators were directed by law enforcement not to discuss the case at all before Palmer was charged in Essex County and could only provided limited information afterward.

Palmer previously worked as a paraprofessional at Randolph Community School in Randolph from October 2015 to January 2017. The district said there were no allegations of inappropriate conduct during Palmer's time in Randolph, and that he cleared a criminal background check when he was hired.

Palmer is facing multiple counts of sexual contact in Essex and Morris counties; he has been held in the Morris County Correctional Facility since his arrest.

His next court date is scheduled for July 23.

Jessica Remo may be reached at jremo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @JessicaRemoNJ. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        