
    
        
            By Agustin C. Torres


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

While leaving the Hudson County Board of Freeholders chamber Thursday evening, one elderly woman who was among a crowd hoping to end the county correctional facility's relationship with federal immigration, told me what is the hurdle for activists in ending the partnership.

"The bad guy here is this Tom DeG -ICE," she said, pronouncing the county executive's name like the frozen water in your drinks. It was just a mispronunciation but it seemed more like a presumption of where the county's top official stands with the U.S. Immigration Customs Enforcement (ICE).

JAILHOUSE BLUES

Mixed groups of anti-ICE residents showed up calling for an end to the county and federal partnership under a pact referred to as "287g." They were also not happy with the county jail's reputation as a place where a seriously ill immigration detainee has a good chance of exiting feet first. There were accusations that the correctional facility lacked proper medical oversight or treatment.

The alleged medical charade supposedly became evident with the June 10 internal bleeding death of immigrant detainee Rolando Meza Espinosa, say activists.

Since then there have been three other inmate deaths that were considered suicides by officials and a fifth succumbed when he collapsed in a recreation area. Sources say the last person may have had serious heart issues and perhaps lifting weights was not such a good idea. The question becomes how much did correctional medical officials know of his condition.

Those attending the freeholder meeting demand that the county break its contract with CFG Health Systems, LLC, which provides medical treatment at the Kearny-based jail.  On Monday, it's expected that an investigative report on the death of the detainee is to be released. An internal debate on transparency is progressing on how much information will be redacted, besides medical records. Nevertheless, sources say there should be enough use of the word "negligence" in the three-part report to indicate that there is a serious problem.

The focus of the evening was on ICE. It was not hard to see what opinion most of the freeholders held.

In a very liberal county, considered one of the most diverse in the nation and where being a Democrat is a religious calling, helping to detain suspected border jumpers may not be a career boost for elected officials. Most of them feel strongly about welcoming almost everyone into the country and county or at least the freeholders gave that appearance Thursday evening.

TAKING IT NEAT

During the public portion of the session, activists calmly voiced their displeasure with ICE. Several of them provided narratives of what they say were unfair incidents, including the pick up of two Hudson County teenagers in Essex County and flying them to immigration facilities in California and never informing frantic parents.

County officials acknowledged not being informed and learning about a 14-year-old being shipped to California after investigating the matter. The ICE officials were not those with whom the county has a 287(g) agreement but rather that the pick up was the action of a special ICE task force, according to Ronald Edwards, director of the Hudson County jail. I take it to mean not all ICE cubes are alike.

Freeholder Bill O'Dea suggested that the county could endeavor to create a communications network with other counties in New Jersey and perhaps nationwide that would keep locals informed of detained immigrants from their jurisdiction. It drew applause.

During their address to the freeholders, several activists expressed their frustration at not being able to secure a meeting with DeGise to discus the detainees. OK, OK for those out there who are seething and insist - you can refer to the detainees as those illegal aliens, dilly, dilly.

O'Dea said that although the activists may not have been able to sit down with DeGise, the freeholder panel members have been actively pursuing the activists' agenda.

"In the past month or so, we've started to have what I see as very meaningful discussions with the county executive concerning us getting out of 287G," he said, drawing loud applause from half of the audience. He added that although it may be a little premature to claim any accomplishments, the freeholders will continue to raise the activists' issues in future meetings with the county executive.

Freeholder Tilo Rivas of Union City and panel members Jerry Walker and Joel Torres, both of Jersey, voiced their objections to the county's agreement with ICE. Walker seemed the most strident. "Being from Jersey City, I travel the world and I always meet people connected to Margaret Hague (the old Jersey City maternity hospital); I believe Jersey City is a world citizen and I think 287(g) is not something representative of our county and I'm against it - just for the record," he said.

Torres said: "... We are not fitting into the culture of the federal government and the false rhetoric." He was specifically talking about the call to end "chain migration," where settled family members sponsor non-nuclear relatives for entry into the United States. Its more familiar reference is "family reunification."

This is proving to be "The Song That Never Ends," but we await a conclusion, possibly in July when the ICE agreement comes up for renewal.

INSIDER NOTE

-- After the freeholders moved their Newark Avenue meeting chambers from the third floor to a new renovated facility on the first, I noticed that they also moved all their dedicated plaques and memorials for past elected officials and organizations with them - save one.

Missing was the county's memorial to Jersey Journal editor and political columnist Peter Weiss who died in 2003 to the shock of many who read his popular Political Whirl column and who personally liked the veteran journalist. I waited for them to restore it but it never reappeared. Some months ago I inquired about it and I was told they'd get right on it.

Annoyed, I asked about it again Thursday evening. I managed to catch Business Administrator Abe Antun in a hallway and he was surprised it was missing, responding that it had been dedicated by the freeholders and should be displayed. Antun said he would make an inquiry. A busy guy, still he is one of the few people I would believe about something getting done.

The new first-floor facility provides more insulation for the elected officials. People once roamed freely from office to office. Now it's like visiting the Pentagon. You can't tell if it's Italian or Latino buffet for the freeholders prior to meetings.

The Weiss memorial had also marked a press row seating area. Perhaps it's missing because under the new seating configuration there is no real area set aside for the media - when they do show up. Perhaps this was the real message.

 EDITOR'S NOTE: Agustin C. Torres' columns appear on the nj.com opinion website on Saturdays and occasionally in the print edition of The Jersey Journal. Submit letters to the editor and guest columns at jjletters@jjournal.com.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        