
    
        
            By Noah Cohen

ncohen@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A man died days after he was severely beaten in Newark and prosecutors have charged his accused attacker with murder, officials said Friday.

Tasheed Brown, 25, a city resident, was initially charged with aggravated assault and weapons offenses in the Dec. 4 attack of Muffee Melvin, 26, also of Newark, according to authorities. Melvin died Dec. 11.

The state Regional Medical Examiner's Office ruled the death a homicide caused by blunt force trauma, Acting Essex County Prosecutor Robert D. Laurino and Newark Public Safety Director Anthony Ambrose said in a joint statement.

A prosecutor's office spokeswoman, Katherine Carter, said Brown was later charged with murder.

Brown was being held at the Essex County Correctional Facility, according to jail records.

City police found Melvin injured after they responded to a Central Ward residence around 12:25 a.m. for a report of an assault, Ambrose previously said.

Brown and Melvin knew each other and the attack came after an argument involving the men, according to Ambrose. The alleged attacker fled before officers arrived, but detectives obtained an arrest warrant.

More information was not immediately available. The prosecutor's office Major Crimes/Homicide Task Force, which includes city detectives, was investigating.

Noah Cohen may be reached at ncohen@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @noahyc and on Facebook. 

Have information about this story or something else we should be covering? Tell us: nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        