
    
        
            By Thomas Moriarty

tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Massachusetts man charged in an alleged truck attack that injured three people at a Planned Parenthood clinic in East Orange is likely to face additional charges, an assistant prosecutor told a judge in Newark on Friday.

An audio recording of Marckles Alcius' first appearance at the Essex County Veterans Courthouse, reviewed Tuesday by NJ Advance Media, shows the automated risk-assessment tool used by court officials initially had recommended Alcius be released pending trial, with a requirement he check in monthly with pre-trial services.

Records show Alcius, 31, of Lowell, has been jailed at the Essex County Correctional Facility since Friday, two days after he allegedly drove a stolen bakery delivery truck into the health clinic on Martin Luther King Boulevard.

One staff member and two patients -- one of them a pregnant woman -- sustained minor injuries in the crash, the Essex County Prosecutor's Office said. All three were released after being treated for their injuries at area hospitals.

The assistant prosecutor representing the state at Friday's hearing said the prosecutor's office objected to the recommendation Alcius be released, and that the state was requesting he remain jailed pending trial.

"I'd also like to make the record clear, judge, that this is a matter that continues to be under investigation," the prosecutor said. "It's my understanding, in speaking with (a supervisor), that additional charges are forthcoming."

Alcius currently is charged with attempting to cause widespread injury or damage and six counts of aggravated assault, among other offenses.

Alcius has no convictions for indictable offenses in New Jersey, Judge Marvin Adames said, although he does have an out-of-state criminal history.

Authorities have not publicly alleged a specific motive for the attack.

Superior Court Judge Peter V. Ryan is expected to rule Wednesday on prosecutors' motion for pre-trial detention, following a scheduled hearing in Newark.

The case will be assigned to Judge Nancy Sivilli following the detention hearing, Adames said.

It was not known Tuesday whether Alcius had retained an attorney who could comment on the charges.

Thomas Moriarty may be reached at tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at @ThomasDMoriarty. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        