
    
        
            By Barry Carter

bcarter@starledger.com,


Columnist, The Star-Ledger

 The text message I received from Altorice Frazier on Friday evening relayed the good news he needed to jump-start 2018.

"Gov. Christie just called me.''

"What did he say?

"Full pardon.''

When I wrote about Frazier last February, he didn't want anyone to know he had applied for a pardon.

MORE: Recent Barry Carter columns  

My column then was how Frazier, 41, a Newark resident who had been convicted of selling drugs, returned home from jail in 2004 and proved that men like him can make it. I had not seen him in eight years when he tapped on my car window and began to explain how education saved him.

Frazier is now a married man, proud father of five, and most importantly, a vocal parent leader in the charter school movement.

His personal rebirth and parent advocacy were the only things he wanted to highlight when we bumped into each other. He mentioned the pardon, asked that I not include that angle, thinking it would leave an impression that he was grandstanding.

Today, Frazier can stand with renewed dignity after answering Christie's unexpected call at 5:58 p.m. Friday.

"I never thought that this would happen,'' said Frazier, who was among 26 people granted clemency. I feel like the state recognized now that's not who I am.''

He was eating at Wendy's restaurant on Market and Bergen streets in Newark with his 5-year-old daughter, Alanna, when an unfamiliar number appeared on his cellphone.

"This is Gov. Christie.''

Frazier had been waiting for this since he applied in May, but he began to worry when his name wasn't on the pardon list Christie issued last month.

All he could do was wait, pray and hope something would happen before Christie, who has issued 55 clemency orders during his tenure, left office. When the call actually came, Frazier was so excited to hear Christie's voice that he wanted everyone in line ordering food at Wendy's to know who had just called him.

"Hey, y'all. The governor is on the phone."

The conversation might have taken all of three minutes, but Frazier said it felt like 20.

"I can walk around now like I've never been locked up before,'' Frazier said. "It's like, wow. It's over.''

Considering how life started for Frazier, this is some kind of ending. Frazier bounced from one foster home to the other until he was adopted at age 9. By 16, Frazier was selling drugs and going nowhere when he dropped out of high school. The Garden State Youth Correctional Facility in Yardville became his home in 1999, when he was 22 and received a 13-year sentence for drug trafficking.  Frazier, however, served five, the earliest he was eligible for parole.

While locked up, Frazier wised up and education became important. He earned his General Educational Development diploma and took college courses in accounting, math and small business training. After his release, Frazier focused on self-improvement classes, anger management and cognitive thinking while he was at the halfway house.

Convinced that his life had purpose, Frazier remained employed in all sorts of positions, determined to stay out of jail. He worked for Pathmark, then an accounting firm. Next he prepared taxes for H&amp;R Block, until he was hired as a re-entry coordinator at the Community Education Center, a rehabilitative service for ex-offenders that once helped him.

Parent advocacy wasn't in his sights at all. He got into it as a way to bond with his stepdaughter when he unexpectedly won an election in 2005 to be president of the parent organization at North Star Academy Charter School.

From there, he was hooked, moving on to serve as a parent representative for five years on the board that governs the charter school. He was president of the parent group at one of the Newark Preschool Council sites, then chairman of its policy council. Now he's co-chair of the Essex County Council for Young Children, an initiative of Program for Parents, which is a non-profit group that advocates for parents and children.

This pedigree is not grandstanding. It's about commitment.

His mother, Patricia Frazer, is astounded. Her son didn't like school growing up in Elizabeth. Teachers called her constantly about his behavior, but look at him now.

His passion is education, school reform and working with parents.

"I would have never in a million years thought my son would be in the school system,'' she said. "He's always been a good guy who just needed a fair chance and he was blessed to get one.'' 

MORE CARTER:  He empowered Newark parents to fight for their children's education | Carter

The pardon does that. It recognizes his work, that he is worth having his transgressions wiped from the record.

That's what Oscar James, his friend and former Newark South Ward councilman, told him when he encouraged Frazier to apply.

"Why not you?'' James said.

He had a story to tell, and he did so in 2008, when I first wrote about him.

Last year was the second time. This is the third, a trifecta worth every sentence.

Frazier gets the final word, in the form of another text message, which he sent to me at 12:53 a.m. Saturday. It contained a digital copy of the pardon.

"It's official, my brother,'' he wrote.  

Barry Carter: (973) 836-4925 or bcarter@starledger.com or 

nj.com/carter or follow him on Twitter @BarryCarterSL


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        