Gallery: Planned Parenthood attack suspect in court


    
        
            By Thomas Moriarty

tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

As Gov. Phil Murphy on Wednesday signed into law legislation restoring $7.5 million in grants for Planned Parenthood, a judge in Newark postponed until Friday a hearing to determine whether a man accused of intentionally crashing a truck into one of the organization's clinics last week remains jailed pending trial.

Marckles Alcius' defense attorney, Alexandra Briggs of the state Public Defender's Office, told Superior Court Judge Michael L. Ravin she had only just received discovery materials the Essex County Prosecutor's Office was required to turn over under a state Supreme Court decision. 

Briggs' request for an adjournment came approximately six hours after Alcius' detention hearing was scheduled to start at the Veterans Courthouse in Newark, where it had originally been slated to be heard by Judge Peter Ryan.

Alcius, 31, of Lowell, Massacheusetts, has been held in the Essex County Correctional Facility since Friday, when the prosecutor's office announced he had been charged with intentionally injuring three people two days prior when he allegedly crashed a stolen bakery delivery truck into the clinic, on Martin Luther King Boulevard in East Orange.

Briggs cited a February 2017 decision in which the state Supreme Court ruled defendants facing pre-trial detention are entitled to review all reports and statements relied upon by prosecutors in their initial charging documents.

The defense attorney said she had not had sufficient time to review the documents under that ruling.

Assistant Prosecutor Adam Wells, who is representing the state, told the court he had already offered earlier in the day to adjourn the hearing and had no basis to oppose the defense request.

"I think it's very unfortunate that there were people associated with this case who have been here all day, but as a legal matter, I don't (think) there is any legal basis to deny the request for the adjournment," Ravin said.

The prosecutor's office, which has not publicly specified an alleged motive for the attack, said one clinic staff member and two patients -- one of them a pregnant woman -- received minor injuries as a result of the crash.

Ravin indicated Alcius will remain jailed until the detention hearing.

Thomas Moriarty may be reached at tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at @ThomasDMoriarty. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        