Gallery: Man charged in Newark triple homicide 


    
        
            By Thomas Moriarty

tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

What prosecutors expect will be a lengthy trial for the Newark man accused of killing a 23-year-old woman and two children in November 2016 is now tentatively set to take place this fall.

Superior Court Judge Ronald D. Wigler, the presiding judge of the court's criminal division in Newark, told attorneys Tuesday that he will be transferring Jeremy Arrington's triple murder case to another judge with the expectation of the case going to trial after Labor Day.

Arrington, represented in court by defense attorney Bukie Adetula, is charged with murder and other offenses in the Nov. 5, 2016 slayings of siblings Aerial Little Whitehurst, 8, and Al-Jahon Whitehurst, 11, and Syasia McBurroughs, a friend of the Whitehursts' family.

Essex County Assistant Prosecutor Justin Edwab, who is handling the homicide case, told Wigler the prosecution's phase of the trial alone will require numerous witnesses.

"Ballpark -- and I can only speak for the prosecution's case -- three to four weeks," Edwab said.

Arrington, 27, previously pleaded guilty to attacking an ex-girlfriend in two separate incidents in the summer of 2015. He has yet to be sentenced in connection with that case.

The Essex County Prosecutor's Office has said the Whitehursts and McBurroughs, a student at New Jersey City University, were killed during an attack in which Arrington tied up and stabbed or shot numerous people inside a home on Hedden Terrace. 

Investigators have said Arrington -- who was wanted in connection with a sexual assault and shooting at the time of the slayings -- had been angered by a Facebook post shared by someone inside the home, in which authorities announced his wanted status.

He was arrested in Newark the day after the stabbings by city police, prosecutor's office investigators and the U.S. Marshals Service, following what authorities described as a brief standoff at a house on Pomona Avenue.

A motion by the prosecutor's office to admit Arrington's statements to investigators as evidence at trial remains pending before the court.

The attorneys are next scheduled to appear in front of Judge James W. Donohue on Feb. 5 to receive a briefing schedule and a date for a hearing on the prosecution's motion.

Arrington, who has pleaded not guilty to the charges, remains jailed in the Essex County Correctional Facility.

Thomas Moriarty may be reached at tmoriarty@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at @ThomasDMoriarty. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        