A mix of clouds and sun with the chance of an isolated thunderstorm in the afternoon. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

A few clouds from time to time. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


 

SAN DIEGO — As the fans populating the lower bowl of Petco Park rose for the seventh-inning stretch, a pair of Los Angeles Dodgers pitchers were in motion. The bullpen door opened as Erik Goeddel jogged to the mound looking to protect an eventual 8-2 victory over the San Diego Padres. Weavin…

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

The Texas Rangers plan to charge a Pharr man with attempted capital murder of a police officer following an officer-involved shooting Thursday night, according to a news release from the Texas Department of Public Safety.


The announcement did not specify when he would be arraigned on those charges.


At about 11:50 p.m. Thursday a DPS trooper attempted to stop the driver of a Ford Explorer for a traffic violation near U.S. Highway 281 and Anaya Road on the south side of Pharr, according to a news release from Texas DPS officials.

Authorities said the driver refused to stop and evaded the trooper until he lost control of his vehicle at the intersection of Anaya Road and Mould Street, where he crashed into a chain link fence.


The man, later identified as Oscar Peña-Lopez, fled his vehicle, and at some point gunfire was exchanged between the man and the trooper, the release states.


No injuries were reported.

Peña-Lopez, 30, a resident of Pharr, was detained at a nearby residence in the 800 block of Zavala Avenue, DPS officials said.


Peña-Lopez was transported and initially booked into the Hidalgo County jail Friday morning on charges of driving while intoxicated, evading arrest or detention, and fail to identify fugitive from justice, the release states.


DPS spokeswoman Sgt. Maria Montalvo said the investigation remains ongoing.

