A mix of clouds and sun during the morning will give way to cloudy skies this afternoon. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 8:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


McALLEN — A pair of roommates were sentenced to five years each in connection with a marijuana conspiracy. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

PHARR — The man found dead inside a home here Friday was identified Tuesday as 32-year-old Arnulfo Gaitan.


A suspect in Gaitan’s murder was arrested Friday night and remains in Hidalgo County jail on a $1.4 million bond.


According to the criminal complaint tied to the arrest of 29-year-old Gregory Alexander Ortega, Ortega and Gaitan were roommates. The victim’s family told investigators that Ortega “portrayed himself as a brother to the victim.”

It’s unknown when Gaitan died, and the criminal complaint indicates Ortega fatally shot him in the head at some point between March 28 and March 30. It noted that when “people would walk up to the house he would crack the front door slightly and when asked about the victim he would tell them that the victim was not at home and then closed the door.”


After Ortega was taken into custody, he waived his right to remain silent and “provided a statement of the accused implicating himself in shooting the victim causing murder,” the complaint states.


He told investigators that after the shooting he “got scared and hid the body and began to clean up evidence in the house.”

In addition to murder, Ortega faces evidence tampering, engaging in organized criminal activity and unlawful possession of a firearm charges. The gun used in the shooting belonged to the victim.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.