Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 11:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) — Opponents of an initiative to split California into three states asked the state Supreme Court on Monday to pull the measure from the ballot, arguing it's too drastic a change to state government to go through the normal initiative process. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

PHARR — Two men were arraigned Saturday for their role in a fatal Friday morning shooting that occurred in the 800 block of West Coyote Trail.


Santiago Alonso Aguirre was charged with murder in the shooting death of 20-year-old Jonathan Alcala, in addition to tampering/fabricating physical evidence with the intent to impair.


Aguirre is also facing a charge of organized criminal activity, two counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, and possession with the intent to manufacture a controlled substance greater than 4 grams but less than 200. The 20-year-old’s bond was set at a combined sum of $2.75 million.

Omar Perez Garcia was also charged with murder and faces additional charges of engaging in criminal activity and possession of a controlled substance amounting to less than 28 grams. The 26-year-old’s bond was set at a combined $2.5 million.


Both men remain detained at the Hidalgo County jail.


The Pharr Municipal Court did not immediately release copies of Aguirre nor Garcia’s criminal complaints.

A third suspect was arrested Friday but will not be arraigned until he is released from the hospital.


 

