A mix of clouds and sun with the chance of an isolated thunderstorm in the afternoon. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

A few clouds from time to time. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


 

SAN DIEGO — As the fans populating the lower bowl of Petco Park rose for the seventh-inning stretch, a pair of Los Angeles Dodgers pitchers were in motion. The bullpen door opened as Erik Goeddel jogged to the mound looking to protect an eventual 8-2 victory over the San Diego Padres. Weavin…

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

Gregory Alexander Ortega

Gregory Alexander Ortega

Gregory Alexander Ortega leaves the Pharr Municipal Courtroom after being read the charges against him, which include murder.

PHARR — A man was arraigned on multiple charges Sunday in connection with the murder of a man a few days before who police have yet to identify.


Gregory Alexander Ortega, 29, appeared before Pharr Municipal Court Judge Marissa Hernandez who read the four charges against him, which include murder, evidence tampering, unlawful possession of a firearm and engaging in organized criminal activity.


Hernandez set Ortega’s total bond at $1.4 million, and he was transferred to the Hidalgo County jail shortly after the arraignment.

Few details have been released about the circumstances surrounding Ortega’s charges.


Police responded Friday afternoon to a call regarding an unresponsive male inside a residence in the 1000 block of Tulip Drive. Police subsequently launched a criminal death investigation after it was discovered that the man had “sustained injuries to his body,” according to Sgt. Michael Mendoza, spokesman for the Pharr Police Department.


It is unknown how long the man had been dead.

If convicted of murder — the most serious charge — Ortega could face up to 99 years in prison.


msmith@themonitor.com



Gregory Alexander Ortega


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.