Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) — Opponents of an initiative to split California into three states asked the state Supreme Court on Monday to pull the measure from the ballot, arguing it's too drastic a change to state government to go through the normal initiative process. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Elizabeth Guerrero

Elizabeth Guerrero

This post was updated at 9:30 p.m. with information from Child Protective Services.


A 2-year-old girl believed abducted in rural Mission Thursday morning is now in the custody of Child Protective Services in Nueces County.


The toddler was believed to be in a vehicle with Elizabeth Guerrero, 68, and Elizabeth Morales, 22, who were persons of interest in a homicide case.

“The child was dropped off with family members in Corpus Christi,” said Jena Palacios, spokeswoman for the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office.


John Lennan, CPS spokesman for the South Texas sector, said the state is filing in court to have the toddler placed in temporary foster care on an emergency basis. A hearing will be held within two weeks of the filing to determine whether she will remain in foster care or be able to be placed with relatives, Lennan added.


After an arrest warrant for murder was issued for Guerrero, she and Morales turned themselves in to authorities Friday morning and were booked into Hidalgo County jail.

Investigators believe Guerrero fatally struck Gilberto Gaytan, 20, with her SUV after a custody battle between the victim and Morales took a fatal turn.


Palacios said the victim was the former common-law spouse of Guerrero’s granddaughter, Morales.


Guerrero will be charged with murder Saturday afternoon, at which point her bond will be set.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.