Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 11:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) — Opponents of an initiative to split California into three states asked the state Supreme Court on Monday to pull the measure from the ballot, arguing it's too drastic a change to state government to go through the normal initiative process. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Hidalgo County Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza talks with family members of Irene Garza before the start of the sentencing phase of John Bernard Feit's trial for the 1960 murder of Garza in the 92nd state District Court Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

Hidalgo County District Attorney Ricardo Rodriguez hugs Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza following the guilty verdict in John Bernard Feit's trial for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza in the 92nd state District Court Thursday, December 7, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

Hidalgo County Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza gives his opening statement in John Bernard Feit's trial for the murder of Irene Garza in the 92nd state District Court Thursday, November 30, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

Hidalgo County Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza, right, talks with Nick Cavazos, left, center, and Lynda de la Viña with fellows ADA Krystine Ramon, behind right, after John Bernard Feit was sentenced to life imprisonment for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza in the 92nd state District Court Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

Hidalgo County Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza holds a photograph of Irene Garza that he kept with him during the trial of John Feit. Feit was convicted of the murder of Irene Garza and sentence to life imprisonment 57 years after her death.

EDINBURG — Nearly a week removed from getting a conviction in a historic trial, even exhaling proved challenging.


After all, securing a conviction in what was arguably the region’s biggest trial proved much more complicated for the lead prosecutor on the case, a devout Catholic, considering that the person he was trying to convict was a former man of the cloth.


Michael J. Garza, an assistant district attorney for Hidalgo County and the man responsible for finally bringing ex-priest John Feit to justice, felt uneasy days after a jury found Feit guilty of murdering Irene Garza during the 1960 Holy Week.

The case was 57 years in the making and produced a trial that included evidence and testimony of a church-led cover-up to avoid bad publicity. But even in the days after state District Judge Luis Singleterry hammered the gavel for the final time during trial, Garza still struggled to pinpoint the uneasiness.


“I was proud and happy inside, but I felt this sort of presence — some kind of ... maybe I didn’t want it to be over,” Garza said Wednesday of the case that consumed nearly three years of his time. “(The Irene Garza case) had been a big part of my life.”


Hidalgo County Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza gives his opening statement in John Bernard Feit's trial for the murder of Irene Garza in the 92nd state District Court Thursday, November 30, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

While seated in his office in the county annex building located near the courthouse, the 51-year-old prosecutor said he felt awkward about going to church — Our Lady of Sorrows in McAllen — where he’s given the sacrament.


Appearing subdued, a reflective Garza recounted the endless nights of pouring over evidence, speaking to witnesses and unfurling a conspiracy into Irene’s death that would eventually point right at the very institution Garza and Irene held so dear — the church.


Assigned to reopen and reinvestigate the decades-old cold case, Garza was resolute during the investigation and didn’t allow his faith to undermine the work he had labored over since February 2015, when District Attorney Ricardo Rodriguez tasked him with leading the investigation, and eventually the prosecution of the former priest.


“(Rick) said take a look at it; see what you see there; don’t leave a stone unturned,” Garza said. “And with a Texas Ranger by my side, we set out and we did that. We talked to every living witness; took the file apart; we tested evidence; we did a complete investigation all over.”


Just days after successfully prosecuting the case against Feit, Garza said he was anxious upon entering his church last Sunday morning because he didn’t know whether he would be well-received. He considered how the hierarchy in the Catholic Church had helped shield Feit from prosecution, and eventually aided in whisking him away from the Rio Grande Valley.


It was the allegations against the church that made the case a delicate one for Garza, and especially for those who remember how much power the church wielded in 1960s McAllen.


People who know Garza even asked whether the church could conspire with law enforcement and other authorities to cover-up a murder.


Hidalgo County Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza talks with family members of Irene Garza before the start of the sentencing phase of John Bernard Feit's trial for the 1960 murder of Garza in the 92nd state District Court Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

“I’d like to think people in my inner circle are all biased and that they all support me in anything I do, but I think I had some words of caution, and people know (that) I don’t normally tip-toe when I take something on,” Garza said. “I’m going to plow through it, but I got some words of caution and some words of disbelief.


“Maybe (it’s) that 1960-kinda-way of thinking: Do you really think the church could have done this? Some of that came from people in my inner circle, and so I knew what I was taking on, and I knew what I had to do.”


Such uncertainty extended beyond his friends, but even his family and people in the community.


“That anxiety may have started Saturday night — how was I going to walk into the church; were people going to look at me; were they going to look at me any different,” Garza recalled days after Feit was sentenced to life in prison. “And I prayed quite a bit. I tried to get rid of the bad feeling, and I went in there with my head up — proud of what I had done but maybe a little more suspicious of who was looking at me than normal. After about five minutes, when I realized that everything was fine, I got some peace.”


His faith was strong but he wasn’t immune to self-doubt, and as the hours of deliberations added up, Garza said he began questioning everything.


“The longer it took the jury to deliberate, there were moments when I had doubts in faith,” Garza said. “I had some doubts. I thought what if, in fact, I went home at one point to take a shower and to pray about it to get that feeling back.”


Hidalgo County District Attorney Ricardo Rodriguez hugs Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza following the guilty verdict in John Bernard Feit's trial for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza in the 92nd state District Court Thursday, December 7, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

The emotions were notable in the courtroom Dec. 7 as the sense of relief washed over those present in the immediate aftermath of Feit’s guilty verdict.


Garza, and many who were invested in the trial, sensed the emotional release that came with the finality of the jurors’ decision, as he embraced members of Irene’s family as well as Rodriguez.


“When (the verdict was read), my first feeling was that I was sorry that I doubted,” Garza said. “I think I put my hands over my face because I felt like I wanted to cry. I’m sorry I doubted God, and then after that it was just joy. I was seeing the looks of happy tears on people’s faces (and) lots of hugs.”


Despite the praise heaped upon the DA’s office and Garza since the verdict, he said he owes much to his faith.


“I was just the bus driver; God was driving the bus and I was behind the wheel,” Garza said. “Knowing in my heart that I put a guilty man in jail, I hope I restored some integrity to law enforcement and the authorities. I think there was a lot of good that was done, but that’s my job.”

Now a week removed from the case, the attention and the bright lights that come with working such a high-profile trial, Garza said he hopes to get back to his normal routine and reconnect with his family — specifically his kids, who he says have been supportive of him during these nearly three years.


“(The case) has taken me away in a lot of different ways,” Garza said. “I think maybe in the weeks, and months leading up to the trial I was physically not present, and there were a lot of times where the lights were on but no one was home. I was there and I was present but I was thinking about something else.”


Hidalgo County Assistant District Attorney Michael Garza, right, talks with Nick Cavazos, left, center, and Lynda de la Viña with fellows ADA Krystine Ramon, behind right, after John Bernard Feit was sentenced to life imprisonment for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza in the 92nd state District Court Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

The grueling schedule associated with the Feit trial even separated the prosecutor from his sons. Upon successfully closing the case, Garza said he’s now able to participate in their lives, as well as exchanging his courtroom attire for casual wear.


But it wasn’t just trading in his suits and ties for T-shirts and tennis shoes that changed. During the trial, he joked that his boys missed their TV, which was used for presentations during the trial, more than their dad.


“I know it took its toll,” Garza said with a laugh. “I know my boys are proud of me. I think it was worth it, but there hadn’t been groceries in the house for three weeks.”


Even with the sacrifices he made, Garza said he was grateful for the opportunity and felt content he finished the job.


“I’m proud that God chose me to do this, and I think this office has helped,” Garza said. “We’ve helped bring a lot of good, like we’re supposed to. So I’m satisfied with the job. I think we showed the standard of what the Hidalgo County DA’s office can do, even on a 57-year-old case.”


Asked if he feels any reservations about going up against the church, Garza paused but was confident that he did what he felt was best.


“The way I looked at it, if the church wants us to forgive then they need to acknowledge and forgive as well, and be forgiven (themselves) for these sins and atrocities,” Garza said. “I thought I was doing a good thing.”


lzazueta@themonitor.com


Staff writer Daniel Flores contributed to this report.



The murder trial against John Feit began Nov. 30, 2017. He's accused of killing Irene Garza in April 1960. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Lorenzo Zazueta posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.