A mix of clouds and sun during the morning will give way to cloudy skies this afternoon. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 8:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


McALLEN — A pair of roommates were sentenced to five years each in connection with a marijuana conspiracy. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Ramon Aguilar Jr.

Ramon Aguilar Jr.

EDINBURG — Ramon Aguilar Jr. was sentenced to 28 years in prison Monday morning after pleading guilty to murder in October for his role in a double homicide that took place in rural Mission in December 2015.


As part of the plea agreement between Aguilar’s attorneys and the Hidalgo County District Attorney’s Office, Aguilar faced a sentence of no less than 25 years and no more than 30 for the first-degree felony.


Neither the defendant nor victims’ families were present in the courtroom, and only those awaiting their own cases were on hand to witness the sentencing.

“I ask the families for their forgiveness even though they’re not here,” Aguilar told state District Judge L. “Keno” Vasquez through the court interpreter.


“The only thing that I want to say is that the only error that I committed was to give a ride to a person who I really didn’t know,” Aguilar said, which Assistant District Attorneys Michelle Puig and Mauricio Martinez said conflicted with an earlier statement in which Aguilar admitted to participating in robberies of local stash houses with the other suspects.


The Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office investigation found more than 400 pounds of marijuana at the property where the shooting took place in addition to more than $50,000 in cash.

“When you’re trying to minimize your role, that offends the court,” the judge told Aguilar. “I can only help you get the minimum if you’re truthful… I understand your role was not that of carrying a weapon, but your role was taking them there. Under the law of parties and what happened, I don’t believe you’re totally truthful with me.”


Aguilar, who has been in jail since March 2016, will receive credit for time served and be eligible for a parole review.


The other two suspects in the case, Alberto Garcia Ocanas and Guillermo Peña, remain at large, and sheriff’s investigators believe they fled to Mexico.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.