Partly cloudy. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph..

Partly cloudy. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 4:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


HOUSTON (AP) — Officials in the Texas county hardest hit by Hurricane Harvey said Monday that $5 billion in federal funding that's been awarded to Texas in the wake of last year's deadly storm will finally help them finish major flood control projects, some of which have been under construct…

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

John Feit walks out of the 92nd state District Court during a break in his trial for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. Feit was found guilty of Garza's murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.

John Feit walks out of the 92nd state District Court during a break in his trial for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. Feit was found guilty of Garza's murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.

EDINBURG — In what can be seen as a procedural move, John Feit's defense attorney filed a notice of appeal earlier this week, according to court records. 


O. Rene Flores filed the notice Tuesday with the 92nd state District Court nearly a month after a jury found his client guilty of murdering Irene Garza, a McAllen schoolteacher, in April 1960.


The move is quite common; in fact, The Monitor spoke to several attorneys who noted that a defendant who goes to trial and is convicted is expected to appeal the conviction. An appeal, however, is less common when a plea agreement is involved.

Jurors sentenced Feit, 85, who elected to not testify in his defense, to a life sentence after five days of testimony in the trial that was nearly 60 years in the making.


The Dec. 8 conviction closed the chapter on the longest cold case in the state’s history that had garnered attention nationally and around the world. 


The former priest was transferred to the Texas Department of Criminal Justice’s Byrd Unit in Huntsville in mid-December following his conviction, and after spending more than 20 months at the Hidalgo County jail in Edinburg following his arrest in connection with Garza’s death.

Flores did not return requests for comment as of presstime. 


lzazueta@themonitor.com 




                                    
                                        Whenever Lorenzo Zazueta posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.