Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 6:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


News organizations are pushing for the public release of data detailing the distribution of prescription opioids throughout the U.S., information that could show how drug manufacturers and distributors contributed to the nation's addiction and overdose crisis. 

LONDON — It’s Serena Williams … and everybody else. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

Nanette Yvonne Alejandre, 42, was arrested Wednesday on an intoxication manslaughter charge for her role in a fatal accident earlier this month that occurred after her car veered into oncoming traffic and struck a semitrailer in Progreso.


Alejandre was released from jail the same day after posting $10,000 bond, according to Hidalgo County jail records.

The Feb. 1 accident occurred on U.S. Highway 281 one mile east of Farm-to-Market 1015 around 6 p.m., according to her arrest warrant affidavit. She told Texas Department of Public Safety troopers she “lost control of the vehicle” while arguing with her passenger, 44-year-old Heliodoro Alejandre, who was killed when her car struck a tractor trailer.


She also told investigators she had previously drank two margaritas in Nuevo Progreso, Mexico, and that at one point during the argument, Heliodoro “attempted to exit the vehicle by opening the front passenger door,” which caused her to brake hard and ultimately lose control of the car.

Her blood alcohol level measured .100 an hour after the crash, the affidavit stated. The legal limit is .08.


If convicted of the intoxication manslaughter charge, a second-degree felony, Alejandre faces up to 20 years in prison and up to a $10,000 fine.

