Generally clear. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 4:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


HOUSTON (AP) — Officials in the Texas county hardest hit by Hurricane Harvey said Monday that $5 billion in federal funding that's been awarded to Texas in the wake of last year's deadly storm will finally help them finish major flood control projects, some of which have been under construct…

Their offense has been teetering for a month. And on a day like Sunday, when the Detroit Tigers roll out a limited lineup and manage four hits — all singles — and no runs, well, it’s up to the ace of the staff to do everything. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

Sandy Lutz Rodriguez

Sandy Lutz Rodriguez

EDINBURG — Hidalgo County Sheriff J.E. “Eddie” Guerra said he is not anticipating additional arrests in the death of Jose Angel Martinez, news which comes after a woman was arraigned at the Hidalgo County jail Tuesday morning on a capital murder charge.


The 32-year-old and his 55-year-old roommate Ricardo Moreno were first reported missing Nov. 8 after neighbors discovered blood outside their home on Monmack Road, located just north of Monte Cristo Road.

Moreno was found alive Nov. 10 and Martinez’s remains were discovered on an Alton ranch Nov. 15.


Sandy Lutz Rodriguez, 27, was arrested Monday for her role in the murder.

The sheriff said she went into hiding after three other suspects — Gabino Salinas, Benjamin Chavez Sanchez and Hector Ruben Guerra — were arrested in the days leading up to the discovery of Martinez’s body.


Guerra said Lutz have been accused of playing “an active role” and was present during the planning, the kidnapping of Moreno, and the dismembering and burial of Martinez’s body.


After Justice of the Peace Bobby Contreras set her bond at $1 million, Lutz said she was forced to participate in these activities.



Sandy Lutz Rodriguez


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.