Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN LEON, Texas (AP) — Crews are putting millions of pounds of Kentucky limestone on the floor of a Texas bay for a 21-acre oyster reef on a private lease. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Gabino Salinas

Benjamin Chavez Sanchez

Gabino Salinas

Benjamin Chavez Sanchez

Two men were booked into the Hidalgo County jail in the early morning hours Friday on capital murder charges, according to Hidalgo County jail records released Monday morning.


Gabino Salinas, 32, of Edinburg and Benjamin Chavez Sanchez, 21, were arrested for capital murder of multiple persons and capital murder by terroristic threat, respectively. Salinas was booked into jail at approximately 3 a.m. and Sanchez at 7:30 a.m.

Few details are known about the circumstances surrounding their arrests, other than that each man was also arrested on possession of a controlled substance charge of under a gram.


“It’s still an ongoing investigation and we are not disclosing any information on this case at this time,” said Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office spokeswoman Jena Palacios. HCSO was the arresting agency in this case.

Salinas has a criminal history, with arrests in Hidalgo County dating back to 2004 for charges including aggravated robbery, burglary and aggravated assault.


As of Monday late afternoon, both men remained in the Hidalgo County jail. Their bonds were each set at $1 million for capital murder and $10,000 for possession.

