Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 4:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


News organizations are pushing for the public release of data detailing the distribution of prescription opioids throughout the U.S., information that could show how drug manufacturers and distributors contributed to the nation's addiction and overdose crisis. 

LONDON — It’s Serena Williams … and everybody else. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

Adelina Briseno

Alejandra Melendez

Adelina Briseno

Alejandra Melendez

The owners of a local construction firm accused of targeting Spanish-speaking customers in a home building scam are facing a new criminal theft charge.


Adelina Briseño and her daughter Alejandra Melendez were charged with third-degree property theft stemming from an October 2016 sale of a home that was to be built by their Mission-based company, Briseño Construction.


The buyer contacted investigators with the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office last month, telling them he paid $40,000 toward the $65,500 home and has allegedly not heard from either woman since December 2016, according to the criminal complaint tied to the theft charge.

Melendez, 22, was released from jail on a $10,000 bond.


Briseño, 40, remains in custody, having been unable to post the $1.8 million bond from her previous six theft charges, which her daughter also faces. It’s because Melendez’s initial bond was set substantially lower at $100,000 that she was able to bond out of jail.


The six charges are tied to incidents dating from November 2014 to June 2016, all which involve prospective homeowners who accuse the women of failing to build their homes in a timely manner or at all. Grand juries indicted the women on these charges in July and December 2017 and they are tentatively set to go to trial in June. Each theft count carries a possible prison sentence of two to 10 years and a fine of up to $10,000.


Their trial has been delayed as more alleged victims of their home building scam have come forward to authorities after the Texas Attorney General’s Office filed a civil lawsuit and secured a restraining order against Briseño Construction in February 2017.


The AG’s office said the company claimed in ads targeting Spanish-speaking consumers that it could complete a new home in five months with no financing and no interest. Prospective homeowners were required to make deposits of up to 60 percent of the asking price before the company would start construction, and the company would often delay or fail to complete the homes, according to an investigation.

Some customers were also fined because their homes were built without proper permits.


A hearing in this civil case is scheduled for early August.


msmith@themonitor.com



Adelina Briseno

Alejandra Melendez


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.