Partly cloudy. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph..

Partly cloudy. Low 77F. ESE winds at 15 to 25 mph, decreasing to 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 3:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


HOUSTON (AP) — Officials in the Texas county hardest hit by Hurricane Harvey say $5 billion in federal funding that's been awarded to Texas in the wake of last year's deadly storm will help them finish major flood-control projects. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr.

Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr.

Authorities have identified the woman whose body was dumped outside Mission Regional Medical Center early Saturday morning by a man believed to be her boyfriend.


Palmview Police Chief Chris Barrera said charges against 39-year-old Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr., which are related to the death of 28-year-old Cydnie Lauren Herrera, are pending. They include tampering with evidence and possible abuse of a corpse charge.


Treviño was arrested by Mission police Saturday on a warrant on an outstanding criminal trespass charge.

Preliminary autopsy results suggest Herrera died from an overdose, Barrera said, and police are working to obtain a search warrant for Treviño’s vehicle. It’s unknown whether drugs will be found inside the car.


The pair was at the Palmview Inn Motel at the time of Herrera’s death, according to the chief.


Treviño remains in Hidalgo County jail and his bond has yet to be set.

msmith@themonitor.com


This story has been updated to reflect the correct date of the incident and arresting agency.



Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr.


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.