Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 8:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


WASHINGTON — Businesses advertised fewer jobs in May than the previous month, but the tally of open positions outnumbered the ranks of the unemployed for only the second time in the past two decades. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Kristine Silva Dimas

Janette Loera

Kristine Silva Dimas

Janette Loera

Investigators with the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office believe that two Mid-Valley women arrested Saturday after allegedly assaulting and robbing a man may have previously used social media to “lure males to rob them,” according to a sheriff’s office news release.


Janette Loera, 24, of Edcouch, and Kristine Silva Dimas, 23, of Weslaco, were arraigned Sunday on attempted capital murder charges.


A man contacted authorities Friday morning after a meeting with a woman he met on Facebook did not go as planned. He told investigators he met the woman at a home on Milanos Road, located south of Mile 6 Road North, and that he knew her only as “Kayy Loera.”

When he arrived at the house he saw her there in addition to another woman. That woman “pulled a gun on him and walked him over to another residence,” according to Loera and Dimas’ criminal complaint.


The man said both women then hit him in the face multiple times with a shovel before robbing him. He also alleged that “the females shot at his vehicle as he tried to leave the property,” according to the complaint. Investigators discovered his truck had four bullet holes.


The man was robbed of approximately $500, said Deputy Jena Palacios Pacheco, spokesperson for the sheriff’s office.

The woman he knew as “Kayy Loera” matched a photo shown to him of Dimas and he identified Loera through a photo lineup, according to the criminal complaint.


Both Loera and Dimas remain in Hidalgo County jail as of this writing. Each of their bonds were set at $250,000.


The sheriff’s office asks anyone with information about this ongoing investigation to call its criminal investigation division at (956) 383-8114 or the anonymous Hidalgo County Crime Stoppers Hotline at (956) 668-8477.


msmith@themonitor.com



Kristine Silva Dimas

Janette Loera


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.