Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) — Opponents of an initiative to split California into three states asked the state Supreme Court on Monday to pull the measure from the ballot, arguing it's too drastic a change to state government to go through the normal initiative process. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Former Hidalgo County district clerk, Omar Guerrero, appears at the Hidalgo County Jail courtroom to face charges of possession of a controlled substance and tampering with identificaiton numbers on a firearm at an  arraignment hearing May 4, 2013 in Edinburg. photo by joel martinez/jmartinez@themonitor.com

Former Hidalgo County district clerk, Omar Guerrero, appears at the Hidalgo County Jail courtroom to face charges of possession of a controlled substance and tampering with identificaiton numbers on a firearm at an  arraignment hearing May 4, 2013 in Edinburg. photo by joel martinez/jmartinez@themonitor.com

EDINBURG — The $1 million bond for former Hidalgo County District Clerk Omar Guerrero has yet to be collected after a Tuesday morning bond forfeiture hearing was reset for late December.


County Court-at-Law No. 5 Judge Rodolfo Gonzalez reset the hearing for Dec. 27, telling attorneys for the state and bondsmen that “it needs to be resolved.”

Guerrero is believed to have fled to Mexico in 2013 after he was released from jail on bond for cocaine possession and tampering with the identification of an assault rifle.


An arrest warrant for sexual assault of a minor was subsequently issued for the disgraced clerk.

“We’re hoping somehow, some way (Guerrero) is found and arrested and brought in,” said Hidalgo County District Attorney Ricardo Rodriguez, who emphasized his office would like to proceed on the criminal cases against Guerrero.


The bond forfeiture process began in 2016 after Guerrero failed to appear for his arraignment.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.