Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 94F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSOULA, Mont. — A man told investigators he left a 5-month-old baby boy in the woods after a weekend car crash because the baby was very heavy, court records said. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

WESLACO — Undercover investigators with the Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office executed a search warrant Tuesday at 6308 N. Mile 6 West Road in Weslaco and discovered more than 80 eight-liner gambling machines, also known as maquinitas.


As part of the sting, investigators played the machines and received cash payouts. More than 30 patrons were in the establishment at the time, according to the criminal complaints charging five people with engaging in organized criminal activity, possession of gambling devices, gambling promotion and keeping a gambling place.

Those charged include Christopher Escobar of Elsa, Juan Rojas-Garza of Rio Grande City, Bernardino Cruz-Castan of Reynosa, Alec Orozco of Edinburg and Jimmy Eduard Cuellar of Donna.


All five remained in the Hidalgo County jail as of press time. Justice of the Peace Gilberto Saenz set a $15,000 bond for engaging in organized criminal activity, and $5,000 bonds for each of the remaining charges — all of which are Class A misdemeanors.

If convicted, the men could face one year in jail and/or a fine amounting to no more than $4,000.




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.