A mix of clouds and sun during the morning will give way to cloudy skies this afternoon. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — A former New York state Senate leader and his son got business executives to arrange no-show jobs for the son in a brazen "family shakedown" that corrupted the senator's office, a federal prosecutor said Tuesday at the retrial of the pair on bribery and extortion charges. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

MISSION — A 17-year-old student was arrested Tuesday morning after sending his friends an alarming message Friday.


The Mission High School student was arraigned later Tuesday on a false alarm or report charge, a state jail felony, according to Mission police spokesman Lt. Jody Tittle.


The teen, who police are not identifying at this time, was subsequently booked into the Hidalgo County jail under a $10,000 bond.

Tittle said the teen posted to a Snapchat group between his friends that there was going to be a gun at school and for everyone to leave and that it was not a joke.


“It freaked out and it scared some people; some were in tears and some called their parents,” Tittle said of the recipients’ reaction.


Regarding the arrest, Tittle added, “This has taken up a lot of students’ time, teachers’ time, administrators’ time and law enforcement’s time. There are days I have to send out half my investigative team to make sure everything is safe. A kid just thinks he’s being funny, but you can’t do that anymore.”

If indicted for the state jail felony, the student faces between 180 days and two years in jail.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.