A mix of clouds and sun during the morning will give way to cloudy skies this afternoon. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 8:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


McALLEN — The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley landed third place among the top-10 institutions offering the most affordable doctoral in education technology across the nation according to the ranking site Grad School Hub. 

PHARR — David Reyes is only 12 years old, but he looks up when he dribbles the ball and can facilitate like a player years beyond his actual age. The young midfielder from Alamo has been playing at Golazo in Pharr since he was 4 years old, but he says this has been his best season yet. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

John Bernard Feit exits the 92nd state District Court after he was sentenced to life imprisonment for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

John Bernard Feit exits the 92nd state District Court after he was sentenced to life imprisonment for the 1960 murder of Irene Garza Friday, December 8, 2017, at the Hidalgo County Courthouse in Edinburg. (Nathan Lambrecht/The Monitor/Pool)

The former priest convicted of a local schoolteacher’s 1960 murder was transferred from the Hidalgo County jail Monday morning to the Texas Department of Criminal Justice’s Byrd Unit in Huntsville.


John Feit, 85, was transported to the facility from the Rio Grande Valley at 3:30 a.m., according to Hidalgo County District Attorney Ricardo Rodriguez.

Feit was sentenced to life in prison on Dec. 8 after a jury found him guilty of the murder of Irene Garza, who died by asphyxiation likely by suffocation.


The Byrd Unit is an all-male facility that can house approximately 1,300 offenders, according to TDCJ’s website.

Feit’s attorneys have yet to file a motion for a new trial, but have 30 days to do so upon the verdict and sentence being entered into record. If filed, this would be the first step in appealing the conviction, which is expected.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.