A mix of clouds and sun with the chance of an isolated thunderstorm in the afternoon. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

A few clouds from time to time. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court. 

A look at what's happening around the majors Tuesday: 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

WESLACO — Police here arrested a Sullivan City woman accused of drunkenly crashing into a parked vehicle, killing a passenger, early Wednesday morning.


Franshely Ahaida Salinas, 28, was charged with intoxication manslaughter and intoxication assault with a motor vehicle. A municipal judge set her bond at $250,000 for both charges and she was booked into the Hidalgo County jail Wednesday evening.

Salinas swerved out of her lane at approximately 1:30 a.m. and struck a vehicle parked on the shoulder in the 800 block of Interstate 2, according to officer Eric Hernandez.


The 28-year-old passenger of the parked vehicle, who was not wearing his seatbelt, was ejected and died at the scene. Police had not released his identity as of Wednesday night. The driver was transported to a hospital with unknown injuries, Hernandez said.

The parked vehicle did not have its lights on and police do not yet know why the driver had pulled over to the shoulder.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.