Some clouds. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Some clouds. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 2:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN DIEGO — A U.S. government attorney says authorities will release roughly half the immigrant children under age 5 who are still in custody after reunifying them with their families under a court-ordered deadline. 

LONDON (AP) — Not for the first time at Wimbledon, Dominika Cibulkova was left agitated by a decision that went against her. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

Jose Roberto Dominguez Mena, 34, of Weslaco

Jose Roberto Dominguez Mena, 34, of Weslaco

An arrest has been made in the murder investigation of a 49-year-old Elsa resident.


Jose Roberto Dominguez, 34, was charged Friday with capital murder in the Sept. 8 killing of 49-year-old Sandra Beltran, according to a news release from the Texas Department of Public Safety.


The arrest comes a week after Beltran was found dead at her apartment on Ciro Caceres Avenue near Mario Leal Drive in Elsa.

Beltran was a longtime resident of Elsa having graduated from Edcouch-Elsa High School in 1986. She was buried at Val Verde Memorial Gardens cemetery in Donna on Friday.


The Elsa Police Department and Texas Rangers closed in on her home as well as a canal to the north during the investigation.


In 2002, Dominguez was convicted of possession of a controlled substance with intent to distribute, a state jail felony, and served a deferred sentence of five years probation.

Most recently, in 2014, Dominguez pleaded guilty to a felony drug charge for the manufacture/delivery of a controlled substance, for which he received no jail time. He was placed on 10 years probation for the charge.


Dominguez was still on probation for the 2014 charge when he was jailed again on a warrant earlier this week, according to public court records.


Texas Rangers served the warrant for Dominguez who remains in the Hidalgo County jail, according to the news release.



Jose Roberto Dominguez Mena, 34, of Weslaco

The Elsa Police Department and the Texas Rangers continue the investigation into the death o…

ELSA — As Texas Rangers and local police were investigating a homicide, about 100 yards away…