A mix of clouds and sun during the morning will give way to cloudy skies this afternoon. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


McALLEN — The owner of a Houston-based Chicago-style pizzeria may have played a role in drug trafficking and money laundering, according to an indictment unsealed last month. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Angel Serrata

Angel Serrata

MERCEDES — A Texas Department of Public Safety trooper arrested a Mercedes police officer last week on suspicion of driving while intoxicated.


Angel Serrata, 27, was arrested at about 2:33 a.m. Tuesday, Nov. 28.


A trooper stopped Serrata for driving 11 miles per hour over the speed limit on Farm-to-Market 88 near Mile 14 North Road south of Elsa, according to a criminal complaint.

Serrata “showed signs of intoxication” and performed standard field sobriety tests “poorly,” according to the complaint.


When asked to provide a blood sample for testing, Serrata refused, the complaint reads.


A judge charged Serrata with driving while intoxicated, a Class B misdemeanor. It’s his first offense.


Serrata began his career in law enforcement when he was hired by the Mercedes Police Department in 2013, according to Texas Commission on Law Enforcement records.


Police Chief Olga Maldonado said he has since resigned from the department.

“We’re all human,” Maldonado said. “We want people to move forward.”


Justice of the Peace Bobby Contreras set his bond at $1,000.


Serrata posted bond and was released from the Hidalgo County Jail the same day as his arrest.


cgarcia@themonitor.com



Angel Serrata


                                    
                                        Whenever Cristina Garcia posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.