Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN LEON, Texas (AP) — Crews are putting millions of pounds of Kentucky limestone on the floor of a Texas bay for a 21-acre oyster reef on a private lease. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

McALLEN — The Hidalgo County Sheriff’s Office executed a search warrant Friday at an alleged illegal gambling operation on Bentsen Road, located south of 6 Mile Line, which resulted in five arrests.

HCSO investigators observed approximately 85 eight-liner machines in the building, according to the criminal complaints, and those arrested were “placed participating in the earnings of U.S. currency (cash) from the winnings of the eight-liner operation.”

McAllen residents Miguel Antonio Velez and Noe Eduardo Valdez, along with San Benito resident Antonio Hernandez Jr., Sullivan City resident Alain Adrian Guerrero and Gilbert Cano of Harlingen were arrested on charges of engaging in organized criminal activity, possession of gambling devices, gambling promotion and keeping a gambling place.


These were all Class A misdemeanors carrying up to a year in jail and/or a fine of up to $4,000 if convicted.




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.