

By Maggie Gordon and Monica Rhor

Caption


Close

Law enforcement surrounds a home in Galveston County hours after a mass shooter shot and killed several individuals at Santa Fe High School in southeast Texas.

Law enforcement surrounds a home in Galveston County hours after a mass shooter shot and killed several individuals at Santa Fe High School in southeast Texas.

Law enforcement officers shut down traffic near Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots had been fired at the campus.

Law enforcement officers shut down traffic near Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots had been fired at the campus.

A medical helicopter lands at Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots had been fired at the campus.

A medical helicopter lands at Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots had been fired at the campus.

Law enforcement officers shut down traffic near Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots had been fired at the campus.

Law enforcement officers shut down traffic near Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots had been fired at the campus.

Law enforcement officers surround Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots were fired at the campus.

Law enforcement officers surround Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots were fired at the campus.

Law enforcement officers surround Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots were fired at the campus.

Law enforcement officers surround Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas on May 18, 2018. Officials confirmed shots were fired at the campus.

In this image taken from video law enforcement officers respond to a high school near Houston after an active shooter was reported on campus, Friday, May 18, 2018, in Santa Fe, Texas. The Santa Fe school district issued an alert Friday morning saying Santa Fe High School has been placed on lockdown. (KTRK-TV ABC13 via AP)


In this image taken from video law enforcement officers respond to a high school near Houston after an active shooter was reported on campus, Friday, May 18, 2018, in Santa Fe, Texas. The Santa Fe school


FILE - An undated screenshot of a zoomed-out Google Maps image of Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas. Friday, a mass shooting claimed multiple lives at the campus.

FILE - An undated screenshot of a zoomed-out Google Maps image of Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas. Friday, a mass shooting claimed multiple lives at the campus.

FILE - A screenshot of a Google Maps image of Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas. Friday, officials reported an active shooter in the area.

FILE - A screenshot of a Google Maps image of Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas. Friday, officials reported an active shooter in the area.

Rome Shubert was sitting in his first-period art class shortly before 7:30 a.m. Friday when another student barged in and threw something on the desks behind him. Rome heard three loud pops and dropped to the ground, flipping his desk in front of him to shield himself.

Here's what we know about the Santa Fe victims so far

Then, he said, he ran for his life. Out of the art room. Out of the building. Up over a wall, and into a Santa Fe High School parking lot. The loud blare of fire alarms swirled in the air around him as his classmates flooded out back, hurrying to a nearby gas station. Adrenaline coursed through his veins.

As he ran, he didn’t notice blood pouring onto his shirt. Or the wound on the back of his head where he’d been shot.

Santa Fe High School Shooting

The Friday morning routine of the Galveston County school — a week after prom and just two weeks from graduation — had been shattered by a gunman who opened fire with a shotgun and a .38 caliber revolver. Police said 17-year-old Dimitrios Pagourtzis killed 10 and injured 10 others.

One shot had broken fellow student Clayton Horn’s arm above the elbow; another went clean through Clayton’s upper thigh. The 17-year-old managed to flee the art room and jump a fence before calling his mom from the back of an ambulance to tell her he’d been shot but expected to survive, relatives said.

“Mom? I’m fine,” he told her. “I got shot.”

Trenton Beazley, who plays on the varsity baseball team with Rome, was struck in the back by bullet fragments.

Several families spent hours waiting for word about their children — unsure if they had survived or were lying injured in a hospital. By late evening, the names of those killed had started to filter out, news spreading in pain-filled Facebook posts and texts:

Cynthia Tisdale, a teacher’s aide in an art class, remembered in a Facebook message by a niece, who wrote “I love you aunt Cynthia you’ll never be forgotten.”

Shana Fisher, a "beautiful, smart, funny and talented" girl who just turned 16 on May 9, and "loved life and her dog Kallie. She was shy and sweet," her mother said. "She had a lot of love in her heart."

Angelique Ramirez, a 15-year-old with “fire-red hair.”

Chris Stone, a 17-year-old, described by a friend on Twitter as “such a sweet and funny boy (who) always knew how to make anyone laugh.”

Jared Black, who was 17 and loved anime and art, video games and sci-fi, wrestling and wolves.

Sabika Sheikh, an exchange student from Pakistan who was here through the U.S. State Department-sponsored Kennedy-Lugar Youth Exchange and Study program, shown in a photo wearing a bright smile and a Texas t-shirt.

Tisdale, who was 67 and married, had three children and several grandchildren, is “now safe in the arms of Jesus,” a niece wrote. Another family friend said they were told she died while trying to safely get students out of the art room.

John Barnes, a 49-year-old Santa Fe ISD police officer who’d just joined joined the district in January after more than 20 years in the Houston Police Department, suffered a shotgun wound in both arms while confronting the shooter. After a Friday afternoon surgery, medical officials said he showed “good signs at this point.”

For Rome and Clayton, Friday was supposed to be a big day — a chance for the baseball team to redeem itself after a big loss Thursday in the opening game of a playoff series against Kingwood Park.

That night, before Santa Fe High School became the worst mass shooting in the country since February’s shooting in Parkland, Fla., Rome had stood in his favorite spot: The pitcher’s mound, slinging balls in the first game of regionals. At 16, Rome is only a sophomore, but his 0.84 ERA — and his skill with a fastball — have already earned him a reputation throughout the greater Houston area. Earlier this year, he committed to play at the University of Houston.

The game started off great. Then a series of errors at the top of the third led Santa Fe High School’s opponent, Kingwood Park, to a 3-0 lead that Santa Fe just couldn’t catch. They lost 4-0, but hoped to win Friday night and force a third game this weekend.

Many of Rome’s teammates were so upset after their post-game dinner that they slept in on Friday. Several missed first period altogether. But not Rome. And not Trenton.

Trenton, a sophomore and catcher on the baseball team, was also at school when the assault began. Trenton, who played in Thursday night’s game, was hit in the back by a bullet ricochet. Doctors later found a blood clot near the wound, according to a Facebook post by Trenton’s older brother, but he is believed to be OK.

Friday’s game was, of course, postponed as news began trickling out of the campus of 1,447 students.

And by 1 p.m., Rome and his family posted on social media that he was one of six students treated and released from the emergency room at Clear Lake Regional Medical Center. The teenager said he felt grateful and blessed that God spared his life: “Today I was shot in the back of the head but I am completely OK and stable.”

He had a neck wound that had just missed his spine, his father Mike Shubert wrote on Facebook, notifying friends and family that his son “was very lucky.”

Soon the Shuberts were home with their son.

At the same hospital, Jay Mann said he watched as his brother, Clayton, was wheeled into surgery, acting braver than he felt.

“Shake and bake,” he called to his brother, giving him a fist bump. Jay, 17, who had stayed home from school Friday, also murmured “good luck.”

Later in recovery, Clayton was awake but groggy.

“You alright?” asked Jay.

“Obviously not.”

Jay wrapped him arms around his mother and said, “Everything is going to be alright.”

Other families weren’t as lucky.

Shortly after 3 p.m., one mother posted a trio of photos on her Facebook page. “My daughter was in first period art class at Santa Fe high school today. There was a shooter. I have not found her. Pass this along,” she wrote above the collage of smiling family photos.

Throughout the day, the death toll climbed from eight to nine, and eventually landed at 10, as details solidified.

Travis and Pamela Stanich spent all day Friday at the Alamo Gym, where the district gathered parents, awaiting word about their son, Jared Black.

At 6 a.m., Jared had said goodbye to Travis, his step-father, and hopped on the bus. Two hours later, Pamela first heard the news and rushed to the school.

For the next 11 hours, they waited and wept.

Around 7 p.m., Travis sent a text: “Jared didn’t make it.”

Houston Chronicle reporters Jenny Deam, Robert Downen, David Hunn, Lomi Kriel and Mike Morris contributed to this report.