Sunny. High 94F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:54 pm

Hampton Roads Regional Jail in Portsmouth.

Jamycheal Mitchell

Jamycheal Mitchell

Thanks for subscribing to the Richmond Times-Dispatch and supporting local journalism. As a subscriber, you have exclusive access to articles that carry the Subscriber Plus logo (left).

Hampton Roads Regional Jail in Portsmouth.

A new state jail death investigator reviewing cases back to July 1 has closed 17 while 36 remain pending, including the death of an 18-year-old on Tuesday in the Hampton Roads Regional Jail.

The Board of Corrections, a panel of citizens appointed by the governor, has discussed the cases in closed sessions. No information about any of the closed cases has been made public.

“Any policies on this will be set by the board itself,” Michael Kelly, a spokesman for the Virginia Attorney General’s Office, said by email. “We will of course advise the board on its obligations, responsibilities and authorities under the law, but ultimately, it will be up to the board to decide how they want to handle these situations.”

T. Stephen Goff, the investigator, was hired part time with funding approved by the General Assembly after the controversial death of Jamycheal Mitchell, 24, in the Hampton Roads Regional Jail in 2015.

Mitchell, who had mental health problems, was being held on allegations of stealing snacks from a convenience store. He died after losing significant weight during 101 days in custody. Numerous state agencies said they were legally restricted from investigating.

Goff started in November, as did a second part-time employee who handles administrative duties.

Twenty-one inmates have died in Virginia jail custody this year, according to Board of Corrections data.

Those cases include deaths in which an inmate with a medical emergency was rushed to a hospital and died there.

The inmate who died in the Hampton Roads Regional Jail on Tuesday was Davageah K. Jones, 18, who was being held on allegations of breaking and entering and possession of marijuana in Chesapeake.

An inmate died, apparently of natural causes, in the Henrico County Jail on Tuesday as well. Wayne Burnett Marshall, 45, was watching TV in a pod when he appeared to have a stroke, said Sheriff Mike Wade.

Jail staff members treated him immediately and he was taken to a hospital where he died, the sheriff said. He was being held on sex trafficking charges.

Of the 36 pending jail death cases in Virginia, 22 appeared to be from natural causes, Goff said Wednesday after a meeting of the Board of Corrections. One case is considered to have an unknown cause, two were homicides and 11 were suicides, he said.

Bruce Cruser, executive director of the advocacy group Mental Health America of Virginia, questions why the board isn’t sharing more information with the public, wants to know how many deaths involved mental health or substance abuse, and said the board should explain what it means when a case is “closed.”

A committee of the board met in closed session Wednesday for 2½ hours to discuss jail deaths.

Later, Chairwoman Phyllis Randall said she was leaving the board because the time commitment of handling that and her duties as chairwoman of the Loudoun County Board of Supervisors was too much.

“I am only leaving because my schedule is just so busy that I cannot do this as well as I’d like to, and if I don’t do it well I won’t do it at all,” she said.

pwilson@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6061


Twitter: @patrickmwilson

Jamycheal Mitchell

Virginia jails have reported 21 custody deaths so far in 2018.


1/05/18 – Danville City Jail - death in custody – medical furlough


1/08/18 – Virginia Beach City Jail – death in custody


1/17/18 – Hampton Roads Regional Jail – death in custody - pneumonia/cardiac arrest


1/18/18 – Portsmouth City Jail – death in custody – apparent suicide


1/20/2018 – Northern Neck Regional Jail – death in custody – apparent pneumonia


1/22/18 – Rappahannock Regional Jail – death in custody – hospital/cancer


1/29/18 – Southwest Virginia Regional Jail Authority-Haysi – death in custody


2/13/18 – Southside Regional Jail – death in custody


3/11/18 – Martinsville City Jail – death in custody – in hospital following medical emergency


3/20/18 – Southwest Virginia Regional Jail Authority- Abingdon – death in custody


3/21/18 – Richmond City Jail – death in custody following hospitalization 3/19


3/29/18 – Culpeper County Jail – death in custody 3/31 following apparent suicide attempt on 3/29


4/10/18 – Prince William/Manassas Regional Jail – death in custody


4/10/18 – Hampton City Jail – death in custody – suicide by hanging


4/12/18 – Southwest Virginia Regional Jail Authority – Tazewell – death in custody – suicide by hanging


4/13/18 – Chesterfield County Jail – death in custody


4/14/18 – Riverside Regional Jail – death in custody – suicide by hanging


4/15/18 – Hampton Roads Regional Jail – death in custody following brief hospital stay


4/24/18 – Southwest Virginia Regional Jail - Duffield - death in custody


5/15/18 - Hampton Roads Regional Jail - death in custody


5/15/18 - Henrico County Jail - death in custody following hospitalization


Source: Virginia Board of Corrections

A Virginia Department of Corrections employee picked to boost oversight of Virginia’s local and regional jails in the wake of high-profile dea…

Although 109 days have passed since the state Board of Corrections became legally responsible for overseeing jail death investigations, the ne…


                                    
                                        Whenever Patrick Wilson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

As tax payers it is a big insult not to be transparent,as if we can't handle the truth !


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.


