Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 9:54 pm

Delegate Matthew James (D-Portsmouth) hugs Sonia Adams whose son Jamycheal Mitchell died in Hampton Roads Regional Jail. On right (L-R) Sonia's nephew Troy Adams Jr., brother-in-law Troy Adams Sr., and sister Roxanne Adams joined her Wednesday, January 18, 2017. Legislators spoke on bills to prevent deaths like Jamycheal's from happening in Virginia jails.

Delegate Matthew James (D-Portsmouth) hugs Sonia Adams whose son Jamycheal Mitchell died in Hampton Roads Regional Jail. On right (L-R) Sonia's nephew Troy Adams Jr., brother-in-law Troy Adams Sr., and sister Roxanne Adams joined her Wednesday, January 18, 2017. Legislators spoke on bills to prevent deaths like Jamycheal's from happening in Virginia jails.

A Virginia Department of Corrections employee picked to boost oversight of Virginia’s local and regional jails in the wake of high-profile deaths said Wednesday that his reviews of critical incidents will also look “for what’s being done right.”

The state hired T. Stephen Goff and former Department of Corrections employee Brian Sutherland to fill slots envisioned under a reform measure that took effect July 1.

The picks — announced a month after Board of Corrections members questioned the state’s hiring timeline and called for action — have decades of experience in law enforcement and corrections.

Goff, a nearly 34-year veteran of the Virginia State Police, and Sutherland, formerly acting deputy superintendent of the now-defunct Peumansend Creek Regional Jail, started their new positions Monday.

“It’s going to be challenging, but it fits my education, training and background,” said Goff, who for the past two years has conducted background checks for the Department of Corrections.

The exact details of how Goff will review deaths and other significant issues that arise in local and regional jails remained unclear Wednesday as the gubernatorial appointees he reports to convened their first closed-door analysis of the incidents.

Also unclear was the extent to which the board’s findings would be revealed to the public after a review is complete.

A reporter was ejected from the inaugural meeting of the board committee tasked with reviewing critical incidents once talk turned to individual cases. The board cited an exemption to state open meeting laws that deals with consideration of medical and mental health records.

Bruce Cruser, executive director of Mental Health America of Virginia, asked the board on Wednesday to release as much information as possible.

“There are a lot of people wondering what’s going on with this effort,” he said. “The public is interested and wants to be kept informed.”

Cruser noted that Gov. Terry McAuliffe overhauled the board this summer for the express purpose of drawing in expertise needed to examine complex cases and help shed light on what happened.

“All of this is information we need to know (and) my understanding is that is why you all are here,” he said.

More than two years have passed and questions remain in the death of a 24-year-old man at Hampton Roads Regional Jail whose case prompted lawmakers to pursue reform.

As their questions mounted following investigations that failed to explain how Jamycheal Mitchell wasted away during 101 days in custody for allegedly stealing $5 in snacks, policymakers realized no one entity had responsibility for reviewing deaths in jail.

Many assumed the job belonged to the Office of the State Inspector General, but the state’s top watchdog has said the agency lacks sufficient authority to scrutinize cases such as Mitchell’s.

A Department of Corrections count lists 41 in-custody deaths across Virginia’s jails as of the end of October, which includes two people who died while on furlough and another who died at Eastern State Hospital.

Goff, a Vietnam War veteran who also spent about eight years working as the lead investigator for the law firm Allen, Allen, Allen &amp; Allen, said he and Sutherland had taken a quick look at reports for all of the significant incidents that occurred in jails so far in 2017.

“It appeared many of them were pretty cut and dried, but they didn’t have a bunch of information,” he said.

Asked later whether his reviews would include interviews with family members of the deceased, other inmates or sources outside of officialdom, Goff said he was unsure and deferred to the board.

“We’re still trying to work out office space and computers,” he said. “Our position is merely to review the circumstances of what happened, and also to look for what’s being done right.”

Sutherland has been tasked with reviewing existing jail policies and supporting Goff’s reviews. Both are in part-time roles that lawmakers initially conceived of as full-time jobs.

Board of Corrections chairwoman Phyllis Randall said Wednesday that she planned to lobby the General Assembly for money next year to make at least one of the positions full time.

“We said (last fall) that we didn’t ask for this responsibility, but if we were going to take it, we needed the staff,” Randall said.

The Board of Corrections’ jail review committee is scheduled to meet again at 11 a.m. Dec. 4 at the Department of Corrections headquarters.

kevans@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6922


Twitter: @kburnellevans

A new state jail death investigator reviewing cases back to July 1 has closed 17 while 36 remain pending, including the death of an 18-year-ol…


                                    
                                        Whenever Katy Evans posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




