Sunny. High 93F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:54 pm

Hampton Roads Regional Jail in Portsmouth.

Hampton Roads Regional Jail in Portsmouth.

PORTSMOUTH — Authorities at the Hampton Roads Regional Jail say they’re investigating the death of an 18-year-old inmate.

Davageah K. Jones was pronounced dead shortly before 5 a.m. at the jail in Portsmouth, The Daily Press reported Tuesday.

The jail said in a statement that Jones was found unresponsive in his cell.

The statement said jail staff immediately began lifesaving measures until paramedics arrived.

Jones arrived at the jail April 26.

He had been arrested in Chesapeake on charges of breaking and entering and marijuana possession.

The jail said it is conducting an administrative review of what happened.

Hampton Roads Regional Jail has come under intense state scrutiny in recent years over the quality of its medical care after other inmate deaths, including that of 24-year-old Jamycheal Mitchell’s in 2015.

The state medical examiner found that Mitchell, who was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, essentially wasted away in plain sight over a 101-day stay at the facility.

He had been arrested after being accused of stealing $5 worth of snack food from a convenience store.

This is the second time  this has happened in recent memory.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




