Sunny. High 94F. Winds light and variable..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:54 pm

The jail in Portsmouth has come under state scrutiny.

The jail in Portsmouth has come under state scrutiny.

PORTSMOUTH — A female inmate at the Hampton Roads Regional Jail has died while being treated at a hospital.

Jail officials said Tameka Simpson, 25, of Norfolk died Wednesday at Bon Secours Maryview Medical Center in Portsmouth.

Jail spokeswoman Zakkiyya Anderson told The Virginian-Pilot that Simpson was taken to the jail with pre-existing medical conditions in July.

Anderson said the regional jail often receives transfer inmates from local jails who have a mental illness or acute medical issues.

Citing confidentiality laws, jail officials said they cannot release any details on the conditions.

The medical examiner will determine Simpson’s cause of death. Portsmouth police are investigating.

Hampton Roads Regional has come under intense state scrutiny in recent years for the quality of the jail’s medical care after two highly publicized inmate deaths, including Jamycheal Mitchell’s in 2015.

The state medical examiner found that Mitchell, who was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, essentially wasted away in plain sight over a 101-day stay at the facility. He had been arrested after being accused of stealing $5 worth of snack food from a convenience store.

— The Associated Press


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




