Sunny. High 93F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:54 pm

Sonia Adams held a picture of her son, Jamycheal Mitchell, who died in Hampton Roads Regional Jail. The Office of the State Inspector General was criticized for failing to shed light on Mitchell’s death.

Sonia Adams held a picture of her son, Jamycheal Mitchell, who died in Hampton Roads Regional Jail. The Office of the State Inspector General was criticized for failing to shed light on Mitchell’s death.

Lawmakers dissatisfied with answers about whether the state’s top watchdog agency should be able to investigate jail deaths have requested a top-to-bottom review of the Office of the State Inspector General.

Members of the General Assembly’s own watchdog, the Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission, on Tuesday added the executive branch agency to a list of entities awaiting scrutiny with the passage of a resolution stressing the need to clarify the office’s role and authority.

The decision follows a tumultuous year for the office that saw the effective ouster of former Inspector General June Jennings over fallout from the still-unexplained death two years ago of Jamycheal Mitchell, a mentally ill man, at Hampton Roads Regional Jail.

“This isn’t the only reason we are taking a look,” said state Sen. Ryan T. McDougle, R-Hanover. “Certainly, there have been questions about whether the (agency) is performing its job to the extent we would like for it to.”

Under terms of the study approved Tuesday, the review commission staff must analyze the agency’s role and authority in inspecting jails and state facilities where people are being held, as well as its ability to investigate significant incidents at the facilities.

The review also will evaluate the “effectiveness, efficiency and independence” of the office, which was created five years ago by consolidating the functions of smaller oversight entities that previously existed in other agencies.

McDougle said the agency was picked among several others from a group of 20 to 40 options presented to lawmakers for consideration over the summer.

“It would be normal for us to review any agency within the first 10 years of its existence for its effectiveness,” McDougle said.

Jennings maintained after Mitchell’s death that her office lacked the authority to get records from jail officials. Her office’s review was roundly criticized by lawmakers and some of Jennings’ own employees for not getting to the bottom of how Mitchell, 24, wasted away under nearly constant supervision.

The agency is relying on an interpretation from the Virginia Attorney General’s Office, which determined that the right to review deaths in jails is not included among the explicitly stated powers and duties afforded the agency under state code.

“In light of this, it is clear OSIG’s authority to investigate local jails is not just limited, but prohibited,” agency spokeswoman Kathleen Shaw wrote in an email.

Several other agencies also reviewed the circumstances surrounding Mitchell’s death and the failure to provide him court-ordered mental health services. But those reports have not answered basic questions about why and how he was allowed to deteriorate.

“You could make an argument that it is the inspector general’s job,” Del. Robert B. Bell, R-Albemarle, said during the 2017 legislative session. “All I know is they didn’t do it, they don’t want to do it, and they’re continuing to maintain that unless we change things, they won’t do it.”

Bell championed a legislative push to close a major gap in oversight exposed by Mitchell’s death. Virginia’s 60 local and regional jail facilities previously policed themselves unless a crime had obviously been committed, and the agencies aren’t required to release their internal investigations to the public. The responsibility now lies with the State Board of Corrections.

The language governing what the agency can and should do is in need of further interpretation, said JLARC’s director, Hal Greer.

“Historically, the statute has made it difficult to discern what exactly their role should be,” Greer said.

The review likely will involve three or four commission staff members and occur in 2019, Greer said. A report is due to state lawmakers by Dec. 10 of that year.

Shaw said OSIG would welcome any recommendations that help the agency better fulfill its mandate.

“OSIG looks forward to the results of JLARC’s review — and any recommendations as to whether its role should expand, narrow or remain the same in all areas mentioned in the study resolution, as it strives to improve efficiency and effectiveness of operations in executive branch state agencies and this office,” she stated.

Del. R. Steven Landes, R-Augusta, the lawmaker who sponsored the bid to create the consolidated office, has been openly critical of the agency’s past performance, but on Tuesday he stressed that this study is not intended as a punishment.

“It’s just — after five years — it’s time to ask questions about how things are going,” Landes said.

Among the questions Landes would like to see answered: Does the agency have the independence it needs to conduct reviews and investigations objectively?

“The idea at the time was to take the entities out from under the thumb of individual agency heads,” Landes said.

The legislation establishing the office directs it to report findings of concern to Cabinet-level appointees whose portfolios include the agency in question and to the governor’s chief of staff.

“Notwithstanding any other provisions of law,” agency reports are sent to the governor’s chief of staff and the General Assembly.

“The legislation was a compromise,” Landes said.

The inspector general’s office had a $6.7 million budget allocated last year and employed the equivalent of 33 full-time staff members, according to an analysis that Greer’s staff prepared for lawmakers to consider before authorizing the review. The agency reports that it has responded to more than 6,000 calls to its waste, fraud and abuse hotline since its inception, as well as more than 1,070 citizen inquiries.

The bulk of the agency’s staff members are tasked with conducting performance reviews and audits, and the second-largest function is conducting investigations, according to background prepared by the review commission.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe appointed Jennings’ deputy, Michael C. Westfall, as her acting replacement after the General Assembly’s surprise decision not to reappoint her. McAuliffe then named Jennings the state’s deputy secretary of finance.

McAuliffe also reconstituted the nine-member Board of Corrections, which welcomed five new members in July and still is grappling with how to begin resuming its enhanced duties.

Efforts to understand what happened in Mitchell’s case also are ongoing. Portsmouth Commonwealth’s Attorney Stephanie N. Morales assigned an investigator in her office to interview current and former employees of Alabama-based NaphCare, which was the jail’s medical provider at the time. Those interviews, which include people who had not been interviewed by Virginia State Police or any state agency, are still underway.

kevans@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6922


Twitter: @kburnellevans


Staff writer Patrick Wilson contributed to this report.


                                    
                                        Whenever Katy Evans posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




