
    
        
            By Star-Ledger Editorial Board

eletters@starledger.com

The departing governor is not a progressive thinker on most issues, but history should remember that Chris Christie made an exception on matters related to criminal justice and moved the state forward in significant ways.

Sensing attitudes shifting as early as 2012, when voluntary drug courts were already prevalent throughout the U.S., he made New Jersey the first state to make drug court mandatory for first-time, non-violent offenders.

He helped overhaul our bail system by virtually eliminating the cash-bail arrangement so that freedom was not based on the size of your wallet, effectively reducing the pre-trial jail population by 20 percent in Year 1. 

He transformed Mid-State Correctional Facility into the nation's first licensed drug treatment center for inmates.

He finally saw the light on prison re-entry reform, largely through the efforts of people like former governor Jim McGreevey and former U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman.

And Christie transformed law enforcement in Camden by turning it over to a county-run force and building a model of community policing.

As he makes his exit, he took another pragmatic and compassionate step by focusing on post-incarceration last week - not by pardoning former campaign donors, but by signing three pieces of legislation that expand eligibility for the expungement of criminal convictions.

Christie's call to revisit expungement a worthy idea | Editorial

One new law expands the 2014 "ban the box" rule, which prevented employers from asking about an applicant's criminal record: Now they are also prohibited from making online inquiries about a past record on websites with names like "Dirtsearch" and "Instantcheckmate," which even store expunged records.

A second new law reduces the wait period for expungement eligibility from 10 years to six, and permits the elimination of the crime of marijuana possession with the intent to sell up to an ounce.

And a third law reduces the waiting period to expunge an entire juvenile record from five to three years. Consider: Each year, 1.5 million kids are arrested in the U.S., and the resulting police record could interfere with opportunities for the rest of their lives. Eliminate a nonviolent juvenile offense from a young person's record, and it could be the difference between one bad choice and a lifetime of bad choices.

But no matter what age or background, the key to reentry is finding a job, because recidivism is far higher among those who are unemployed. And expungement is a lifeline for past offenders: A criminal record reduces their chance of getting a job callback by 50 percent if they are white; and 65 percent if they are black.

That's bad for everybody. Put it in GDP terms, as the Center for Economic and Policy Research does: Because a felony conviction lowers the job prospects of ex-offenders, the reduction in employment for that population costs the U.S. economy up to $65 billion in lost output annually.

Or consider our state's heroin crisis: Addicts often run afoul of the law a there were 52,000 drug arrests in New Jersey in 2014 a and that record can follow them around forever if there is no expungement opportunity. 

As Christie put it, "People are going to eventually come out of jail and what do we want them to be when they come out? What do we want them to have an opportunity to do? Do we want them to have hope in their lives?"

If they are continuously turned away from jobs, housing, and other services because of past convictions, sometimes expungement restores the hope.

Now they have a chance. Fortunately, the perseverance of lawmakers like Sen. Sandra Cunningham, D-Hudson, has stretched the limits of our moral imagination, and the governor's signature affirms that New Jersey's criminal justice system does not end with incarceration, but with restoration.

Bookmark NJ.com/Opinion. Follow on Twitter @NJ_Opinion and find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        