
    
        
            By Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

Public lands occupier Ken Medenbach, who called the Bundys his heroes on the witness stand last fall, is urging a judge to allow him to attend their federal criminal trial in Nevada next month.

Medenbach's probation officer already rejected the request. On Tuesday, Medenbach's defense lawyer filed a motion asking U.S. District Judge Michael J. McShane to overrule the denial.

Medenbach is on probation after a 2016 conviction for illegal camping in Josephine County, a federal misdemeanor. He was acquitted last year of all federal charges stemming from his participation in the occupation of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in eastern Oregon.

Attorney Matthew Schindler argues that no justification exists to bar Medenbach from exercising his fundamental right to attend a public trial in a highly secure federal court. Medenbach poses no threat to public safety, he said.

"Because of Mr. Medenbach's personal and spiritual relationship with the Bundy family,'' Schindler wrote, "he believes it is a moral imperative to be there providing support.''

Medenbach, Schindler noted, isn't some random person who wants to attend a trial, but someone who spent months in jail with Cliven Bundy's sons, Ammon Bundy and Ryan Bundy, in early 2016. He described them as Medenbach's "friends and brothers.''

Medenbach was on trial last fall in Portland with Ammon Bundy and Ryan Bundy. Medenbach was acquitted of  conspiracy and theft of government property charges in the 41-day refuge occupation. The Bundy brothers also were acquitted of conspiracy and weapons charges in the armed takeover.

Jury selection is scheduled to start Oct. 10 in the federal trial in Las Vegas against Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy, accused of conspiring to thwart the government's roundup of roughly 1,000 cows from public land near Bunkerville, Nevada, in April 2014. Ryan Bundy and Ammon Bundy, as well as Ryan Payne and Pete Santilli, are also set to go to trial next month in Nevada.

The five are accused of leading a conspiracy to enlist self-styled militia members to prevent federal agents from enforcing court orders to remove the Bundy cattle from what is now Gold Butte National Monument. They each face 15 charges including conspiracy, assault and threats against federal officers, firearms counts, obstruction and extortion.

Two other co-defendants in the Bunkerville case will also be on trial.

"The Nevada federal criminal trial and the events at Bunkerville are deeply personal to Mr. Medenbach,'' Schindler wrote. "Because hundreds of people who had no connection to him supported him during his crucible in Portland, he felt a powerful responsibility to attend the trials in Nevada.''

Medenbach is appealing his April 2016 conviction and sentence for occupying federal land in Josephine County as part of a mining protest. He set up an illegal cabin on U.S. Bureau of Land Management property near Galice and was sentenced to six months in jail, time served, plus five years of probation. As a condition of probation, he must seek permission before traveling out of state. 

Earlier this year, he asked a probation officer for permission to attend the Nevada trial of other Bundy co-defendants but was denied. Medenbach went anyway and was arrested April 12 outside the federal courthouse in Las Vegas.

Medenbach spent a week in custody in Nevada before McShane ordered his release on May 4 over prosecutors' objections. He was placed on electronic monitoring once he returned to Oregon. In May, the judge also ordered Medenbach to remain on home detention and electronic monitoring for another two months at his home in Crescent.

-- Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com 503-221-8212 @maxoregonian


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        