One night in October, Lamar Odom stands up, straightens his 6-foot-10 frame and strides to a podium inside Bryant Park Grill on W. 40th St. Dressed in a black suit and tie with white polka dots, Odom is sober, two years removed from a cocaine binge at a Nevada brothel that left him in a coma and breathing through a ventilator. Odom, 38, looks around the room. The occasion is the New York City Basketball Hall of Fame Dinner, and he is about to be inducted. To his right is Tom "Satch" Sanders, a retired Celtic in a bow tie. To his left is "Jumpin'" Jackie Jackson, an old Boys High Kangaroo who used to hand out business cards with four words on them: "Have Converse, Will Jump." Sneaker laces remain the ties that bind many in the city game. In the back sits Gary Charles, a 5-foot-5 businessman who wears a black three-piece suit and matching fedora. Charles coached Odom with the Long Island Panthers, an AAU program sponsored by Adidas, when Odom was the nation's top prospect with Christ the King High in 1996. Odom leans in to the microphone.

"I never thought I would be received as a great New York City basketball player after I left Christ the King," Odom says before turning his attention to Charles. "My AAU coach is here. You can ask him questions about that."

Charles, 58, is known as "Short Riley." He no longer works in systems programming for Bank of New York, but still wields influence as a power broker on the grassroots basketball scene. He guffaws at the finger pointing. On the dais, Odom outlines his path: a father addicted to heroin, a mother lost to colon cancer when he was 12 and his attendance at three schools in two states as a high school senior in search of academic eligibility. His recruitment is in the record books for having triggered three college investigations that landed two NCAA programs on probation in his wake. Famous since 16, Odom, a southpaw from South Jamaica, recalls coaches, sneaker company operatives and runners for agents circling the scene.

"I learned the game," he says. "I learned life."

It is not lost on Odom that he is being enshrined at a time of reckoning for college basketball. He knows 10 men are under arrest in a corruption sweep that included predawn roundups one week ago. Four assistant coaches, two Adidas executives, an AAU coach, a middleman, a financier and a runner for an agent face federal charges. Fifty blocks south, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York examines the unregulated commerce long conducted to secure top players. Odom testifies about the choreography, as well as the code of silence in a multi-billion dollar war between sneaker makers for the soles of America's youth.

"Hell no, I'm not surprised," Odom says after receiving a standing ovation that lasted 30 seconds. "The coaches all know what they do. It seems a little weird with all the FBI and s--t involved, but it is what it is."

New York is at the nexus of the probe into bribery and fraud regarding recruiting arrangements. Several of the accused parties trace their roots to city bandboxes. One is a former director of the Gauchos AAU program in the Bronx; another is the son of a legendary CHSAA coach. One N.Y.C. Basketball Hall of Fame member — Jim Larranaga, Class of '09 — is linked to a conspiracy to route $150,000 from Adidas to a recruit, yet still is employed at the University of Miami. Another enshrined coach — Rick Pitino, Class of '06 — was fired by the University of Louisville for his alleged part in a plot to channel $100,000 from Adidas to a recruit's family. Andy Miller, who was representing Knicks star forward Kristaps Porzingis, has had his office raided across the Hudson. The center is not holding.

"The easiest solution is to pay the kids," Odom says. "It is so funny because I don't know why they feel they shouldn't. If you had to buy tickets to take a science test or something, then I'd say, 'F--k it,' then it is the same, but yeah, you should pay them. The school makes money off them. It seems fair. Why not?" Looking at the market of finders' fees, extra benefits and corporate enticements, Odom weighs his worth. "The going rate for me, if I had took money, would have been like $200,000," he says. "Know what I'm saying? I also wouldn't want anybody to touch my money that I wasn't supposed to be getting anyway. I would want it straight from the man."

Greg Vetrone, another old friend, sits stage left. Vetrone, who goes by "Shoes," is now the director of player development for Rutgers, but is best remembered for his role in the Odom sweepstakes. As an assistant at UNLV, Vetrone convinced Odom to commit to the Runnin' Rebels, but Odom's ACT score was later questioned and the NCAA deemed a gift of $5,600 from a booster improper. When faced with a UNLV probe, Odom refused to cooperate and left the school.

"I remember the words my grandmother said as she spoke to me in my bed," Odom says. "She told me, 'What you do in the dark comes out in the light.' Those words hold true to me because everything I've done in darkness came out in light."

He sat out a year, took Rhode Island to the NCAA tournament and went on to the NBA as the No. 4 pick. Vetrone was effectively banned from Division I for a decade, and regenerated on the sneaker-camp circuit. In 14 NBA seasons, Odom won two titles and made over $100 million. Odom and Vetrone pose for photos.

"I will always cry for New York," Odom says. "I've walked a long mile."

He readies to depart, and plans to return to Christ the King the next day.

"G, you out?" Odom says.

Charles tips his hat, and goes off to catch his LIRR train home to Baldwin. He notes that he no longer coaches. He holds more of a management role now.

"You can't separate New Yorkers from New Yorkers," Odom says. "That's life, and that's a bond. I am New York."

***

Gauchos Gym, a renovated warehouse on Gerard Ave. in the Bronx, remains a basketball proving ground as zoning law changes bring new construction to the block. The floorboards inside are from the Garden, hand-me-down hardwood donated by the Knicks. Jamal Mashburn, Rod Strickland, Stephon Marbury and Kemba Walker all played for "The Choz," their names stitched into white banners that hang from the rafters. Elders keep an eye out for new blood. There is a house rule: Winners stay on.

The latest, greatest attraction to pin an opponent's shot to the backboard on site is Moussa Cisse. He stands 6-foot-10, wears size-15 sneakers and tips the scales at 200 pounds. Guinea is home, but he has been stateside almost a year. He arrived from West Africa last December, and enrolled at Christ the King. He lives in Jersey City with B.J. McFarlan, a Queens product who played overseas and is announced as "Beast" in local parks. Cisse boards a PATH train each day before transferring to the L train and then the M to get to school. Right now, Cisse is running express. Nine of his 10 shot attempts are dunks in the Sharette Dixon Classic's underclassman game.

"Little Ticket!" shouts Raheem Wiggins, who coached McFarlan with the Sean Bell All Stars at West Fourth St. and Rucker Park. "Little Ticket!"

The reference is to Kevin "The Big Ticket" Garnett, a future NBA Hall of Famer who leapt from high school to the NBA in 1995. Garnett made millions with Andy Miller as his agent and Adidas as his lifetime sponsor. On a Sunday in October, Cisse is two months away from suiting up for his first varsity high school game. Kenny Satterfield, who was a McDonald's All American guard at the late Rice High in 1999, chimes in. He chides Wiggins for comparing a tenderfoot to an all-time talent.

"That's why these kids around you confused," Satterfield says.

At Gauchos Gym, hype springs eternal. By 5 years old, aspiring Gauchos pump fake, stutter step and crossover. They grow hip to an insolent body language on court, and gauge how much they can get away with, honing Euro steps and reaching for rim. The process is tried and true, from biddies to NBA All-Stars.

Emanuel Richardson knows the system. He came up battling Gauchos as a point guard with the rival Riverside Church. In 1991, he helped St. Raymond's High win a city title. He went by "Book," short for "Pocketbook," a nickname he picked up as an 8-month-old when he rummaged through his grandmother's possessions. Former St. Ray's coach Gary DeCesare says, "Emanuel's hands were so quick no pocket was safe," on the court when he played defense. Richardson played for the University of Pittsburgh at Johnstown, and then got into coaching, first at Johnstown, then at Monroe College in the Bronx. He jumped to Marist College for a year before returning back to the borough to direct the Gauchos.

At the time, four guards — Kemba Walker, Chris Fouch, Jordan Theodore and Darryl Bryant — ran the floor. They were outfitted in Nike swooshes and swarmed all ball handlers. They pushed the pace on offense to win tournaments in South Carolina, Arizona and Las Vegas. When Walker, dubbed "E-Z Pass" for his speed, drove the lane, Richardson cautioned his star prospect about going too fast.

"You've got the keys to the car," Richardson said. "Do not crash the Escalade."

While Walker went on to UConn, where he won the NCAA national title in 2011, and his teammates spread out to Drexel, Seton Hall and West Virginia, Richardson parlayed his charges' success into an assistant coaching job at Xavier University. When his boss, Sean Miller, left for Arizona, Richardson followed with his Rolodex. In Richardson's eight years at Arizona, he brought three recruits across the country from New York — Lamont (Momo) Jones, Kevin Parrom and Rawle Alkins — to be Wildcats. He distinguished himself in a cutthroat world, and remembers Bobby Gonzalez, a former coach at Seton Hall, branding him as a predator in the talent pool.

"You're a shark, but I'm a great white," Gonzalez told him.

Richardson, 44, eventually swam into a net cast by the FBI. On Sept. 26, 2017, Richardson, who was making $250,000 per year, was roused from his sleep in Arizona and arrested on charges of bribery conspiracy, honest services fraud, conspiracy to commit wire fraud and travel act conspiracy. Prosecutors say he accepted $20,000 in bribes that were paid by undercover agents over a seven-month span in 2017. The government alleges that Richardson steered players under his control to retain Christian Dawkins, a businessman who was operating on behalf of Andy Miller, and Munish Sood as advisers if and when they reached the NBA. Richardson allegedly said he could "insulate" a prospect from competing agents.

"We talked all the time about Emanuel being on the verge of a head job, and I'd be right there with him," says DeCesare, who is willing to help with Richardson's legal fees. "I don't think any different of him. I'd let him babysit my kids. Unfortunately all these guys' reputations are ruined."

At halftime of the upperclassman game at the Dixon Classic, Jahvon Quinerly, a guard from Hackensack who plays for Hudson Catholic and committed to Arizona in August, walks in late due to traffic on the George Washington Bridge. The indictment says Richardson intended to lure Quinerly west with money. In July, Richardson met with Sood in his New Jersey office. Sood gave Richardson $15,000, and Richardson said Quinerly's mother asked for money because "she didn't know what I was already doing for her son." Documents also note Dawkins is heard saying on a wiretap regarding Quinerly's commitment to Arizona: "That deal got done."

Following the indictment, Quinerly's family retained legal counsel, and a day before the Dixon Classic, he de-committed from Arizona. The event's organizers award him a plaque that reads "ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE," but he does not play. Tom Gustus, a spectator from Staten Island, complains about the on-court product. "I paid $10 for two games. I got one," he says. "I want my money back."

***

Visitors to Daniel Patrick Moynihan Courthouse on Pearl St. must hand over their cell phones to officers in blue blazers after making their way past metal detectors in the lobby, but one person in attendance for a hearing in the case of the United States of America v. James Gatto comes sans cell phone. His name is Tom Konchalski, a 71-year-old technophobe, who is also the editor and publisher of "High School Basketball Illustrated." He obsessively observes the city's hoops scene, but his only form of communication is a land-line phone with no answering machine. Pitino likes to say Konchalski is "the single toughest person in the world to reach." The scout gets off the elevator on the fifth floor and eyes a pay phone on the wall.

"I like this courthouse already," he says.

Phones are fraught with peril in the NCAA case. Wiretaps intercepted 4,000 calls during over 330 days of FBI monitoring. Some of the calls involved Gatto, the head of global sports marketing for basketball at Adidas, a $7.9 billion corporation. In a September conversation with Merl Code, an Adidas consultant who previously was Nike's Director of Elite Youth Basketball, Gatto allegedly discussed funneling $100,000 to the father of Brian Bowen, a recruit from Saginaw, Mich. Both Gatto and Code knew Bowen's commitment to Louisville, a university that had signed a 10-year contract extension with Adidas worth $160 million a month earlier, would help business. Code discussed circumvention of corporate accounting "for cleanliness and lack of questions," with Sood and an undercover agent, per the complaint. Code later added, "This is kind of one of those instances where we needed to step up and help one of our flagship schools, you know, secure a five-star caliber kid."

Code and Gatto also talked about timing installments in September.

"When's the next uhh payment for uhh (Bowen)?" Gatto asked.

"Probably November," Code said.

"It's probably going to take a month, haha, in our system," Gatto said. "Let's just get that out of the way now."

Gatto added that they would "figure out the other fifty in '18."

Gatto never figured his 2018 would be dotted with court dates. He stands accused of wire fraud conspiracy, two counts of wire fraud and money laundering conspiracy. His bond hearing doubles as a homecoming. His father, also Jim, coached at Mater Christi, which later became St. John's Prep, in Astoria. Senior won over 500 games in his career, and coached a range of players, from Vern Fleming, who went on to play 12 seasons in the NBA, to Taliek Brown, who won the 2004 NCAA championship with UConn. The elder Gatto sits alongside his wife and children, as his son's attorney, Michael S. Schachter, paints a picture of Gatto as a family man with a "meaningful mortgage" back in Oregon. His salary is $139,000. His wife works at Ann Taylor as a sales associate. They have two kids — ages 16 and 13 — and "Coach," a white Labrador.

"I submit that he is zero, absolutely zero risk of flight," Schachter says.

Konchalski, the scout, is with the family. He goes back with the father, and offers support. The rest of his day involves attending Mass and visiting a friend in a city hospital. Pitino, who is not in court and has not been charged with a criminal act in the case, used to joke about Konchalski's penchant to run in the same circles as the city's Runyon-esque figures while keeping rosary beads in his pants pocket.

"He loved to be like the good cop kicking around with the mob," Pitino says.

Konchalski knows this is simply the newest chapter in the city's affiliation with basketball's underbelly. At the courthouse, he holds a worn copy of "Foul!" The book tells the story of the late Connie Hawkins, the Bed-Stuy ballplayer who was semiliterate and All City at Boys High before going to the University of Iowa in 1961. Konchalski tracked Hawkins from schoolyard to schoolyard during his rise. He knows the Hawkins story by heart, from the $200 loan Hawkins took from Jack Molinas, a Stuyvesant High and Columbia University grad who was kicked out of the NBA for betting on his own games, to Hawkins being blacklisted. The ban was due to unsubstantiated suspicions that Hawkins was involved in a collegiate point-shaving operation headed by Molinas, a playground regular from the Bronx. It took eight years and an antitrust lawsuit to clear Hawkins and get him in the NBA. He suited up for the Suns, Lakers and Hawks en route to the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame.

"People used to say if I wanted to be a mugger, I could be the greatest in the world cause my hands were so big," Hawkins says in the book. "But I stayed out of crime because of my back. It had a yellow streak down the middle."

"The Hawk" is dead, having passed away five days earlier at 75. Hustlers keep on. Gatto wins his hearing; he does not have to pay bond. To exit, he walks in lockstep with his lawyer. They pass "Justice," a statue in the lobby. She is bronzed, blindfolded, balancing on one foot and holding scales of justice. Most notably, regarding the case of a man being prosecuted for peddling shoes, she is barefoot.

***

"We Need Leaders," is spray-painted on the double doors that open up to Terminal 23 on W. 32 St. in Manhattan. It is a gymnasium on the ground floor of what used to be Café Rouge, the main restaurant in Hotel Pennsylvania. A half block from the Garden, it is now a basketball court, renovated by Nike for the likes of Carmelo Anthony. Highlight reels of Michael Jordan dunking, hitting game winners and admiring sneakers play on an endless loop by the front desk. On Nov. 19, Oklahoma State's Cowboys, in town to play in the Legends Classic at Barclays Center the next two days, practice. Sharpshooter Thomas Dziagwa hits a corner 3-pointer.

"Outlaw basketball!" he says. "Outlaw basketball!"

"Steady Mike" is the man with the whistle. He is Mike Boynton, a former point guard at Bishop Loughlin in Fort Greene and the current coach of the Cowboys. He is a veteran of Brooklyn hoops, having kept his dribble alive from P.S. 21 to Tillary St. as a kid. He went on to play at South Carolina, and made the NCAA tournament as a senior. His first coaching job came as a graduate assistant at Furman University in Greenville, S.C. It paid no salary. For $100 a month, Boynton slept in a bed at a former Furman player's basement a mile off campus. He ate meals at the cafeteria.

"I went from being the starting point guard on an NCAA tournament team in the SEC to washing the laundry of the walk-ons at Furman," he says.

Boynton coached at Furman, Coastal Carolina and Wofford before returning to South Carolina and then moving on to Stephen F. Austin. As an assistant for the Lumberjacks, Boynton returned to the NCAA tourney in 2016. When coach Brad Underwood left for Oklahoma State, Boynton interviewed for the SFA job. He did not get it for reasons he couldn't understand, and followed Underwood. After one season, Underwood hopped to Illinois in a lateral move, and Boynton replaced him.

"Before I moved there, I couldn't exactly tell you where Stillwater was on the map," he says. "I know how precious these opportunities are."

At 35, he became one of 351 head coaches in Division I men's basketball. Six months later, Boynton was on an airplane when he learned his lead assistant, Lamont Evans, was arrested by FBI agents. Boynton landed in Dallas, read about the probe online and button hooked back to campus. He was not implicated in any crime. Evans, also in his second season at Oklahoma State, was pinched for allegedly accepting at least $22,000 to "exert his influence over certain student athletes," both in Stillwater and in his previous job at South Carolina. The indictment outlined his association with Christian Dawkins. Prosecutors say Evans touted financial planner Munish Sood as "my guy." Boynton denies any knowledge of wrongdoing.

At Terminal 23, Boynton monitors back-and-forth action. His top player, Jeffrey Carroll, the leading returning scorer in the Big 12, tested his NBA stock after last season, opted to come back, and was withheld from three games at the beginning of the season during an investigation into his amateur status. He allegedly took a meeting with Evans and a financial adviser. Now Carroll is clear to play. Boynton watches him curl around a screen.

"The true mission of my job was tested," Boynton says. "I'm going to kind of form how these 18-22 year olds think, the way they react to things in life."

His father, also Mike, idles by the bench. He was a post-trade processer on the New York Stock Exchange floor with Charles Schwab for 18-and-a-half years. He judged whether trades were done the right way.

"Sometimes I had good news," Mike Sr. says. "Sometimes I had bad news."

Bob Leckie, Boynton's coach at Loughlin, walks over. Leckie commends Boynton on his crisis management.

"It's not hard when you're telling the truth," Boynton says.

***

Behold Rick Pitino, a coach in exile. It is Black Friday in November, and Pitino, wearing a scarf and overcoat, arrives just before tipoff of a game between his alma mater, UMass, and Minnesota, where his son, Richard, is the coach. The event is called the Barclays Center Classic, but the Nets are playing a day game, so L.I.U. hosts the matinee game in a gym that fits a capacity of 2,500 fans. Pitino dons a Minnesota sweatshirt, and is catered to by a student manager who hands him a box score during timeouts. Pitino watches the ball move. An Adidas logo is emblazoned on the pebbled leather. At halftime, a fan approaches him to have a book authored by Pitino signed. Another poses for a photograph. After the Gophers win, a manager gives Pitino a squirt of Advanced Purell to clean his hands. His former player, John Pelphrey, is coaching Alabama as an assistant in the next game. He hugs Pitino.

"I'm a cheerleader," Pitino says. "Every possession."

It is 700 miles northeast of Louisville, where his old Kentucky home is already up for sale and his former player, David Padgett, now coaches the Cardinals. Pitino is suing Louisville for breach of contract and Adidas for deliberately damaging his reputation, and maintains complete innocence. The Moynihan Courthouse is two miles away, across the East River, but Pitino watches his son work the officials.

"He has a legitimate big-time team," Rick says.

Pitino is the biggest name leveled by the investigation so far. In the documents, he is referenced as Coach-2. His demise started July 27 when one of his assistants, a cooperating witness, an undercover agent and an AAU coach walked into a Las Vegas hotel room. Federal agents placed video recorders in the room prior to the group's arrival. The AAU coach was Jonathan Brad Augustine of Florida. Christian Dawkins, the advisor who has his initials sewn into dress shirt cuffs and three phones at the ready, was also present. Dawkins spoke specifically of a recruit in the high school class of 2019 and how money would be relayed to his family in order to get him to attend Louisville. To emphasize the level of influence Pitino possessed, Augustine said, "no one swings a bigger d--- than [PITINO]" at Adidas.

Pitino's reach has since receded. Once the head coach of the Knicks, he passes his days between an apartment on Park Ave. and a house in Miami. His program was already on probation for a scandal involving hookers being brought in a side door at Billy Minardi Hall, the dormitory named for Pitino's late brother-in-law who worked at Cantor Fitzgerald and was killed on Sept. 11, 2001. Prior to being fired, Pitino was suspended five ACC games for the hooker parties arranged by an assistant coach. Now without a team, he plans to attend more of his son's games.

"He'll be tired of me pretty soon," Pitino says.

There is one post-game request that Pitino makes to his son's staff. The coach with 647 career wins wants to go over a point of emphasis with center Bakary Konate, who stands 6-foot-11 and hails from Mali. Minnesota assistant Kimani Young beckons Konate from the locker room. The old coach goes to work, harping on footwork. He reviews the finer points of defending the pick and roll as a big man.

"Move your feet," he says. "Move your feet."

***

No. 5 in white for Hudson Catholic is Player-5 in the federal indictment. It is Jan. 26, and Jahvon Quinerly is back in the city for a nightcap vs. Cardinal Hayes, the reigning Catholic league champions. He is a nifty ball handler, able to negotiate tight spaces to get to the rim or pull up for three after a power dribble. He starts his scoring with a three from the top of the key, and another triple from the left diagonal, putting up 11 points in the opening period. But he also picks up three fouls, and takes a seat after a perfect first quarter -- 3 of 3 from three, 4 for 4 from the field. The Hayes student section grows vocal. It doubles as a Greek chorus.

Yo, JQ! You suck!

F--k that Jersey boy!

Quinerly sits the entire second quarter. Hayes surges to take a halftime lead.

You not like your mixtape

F--kin' bum

The scandal follows Quinerly into games. Inside Nat Holman Gym at the City College of New York, in Harlem, where tonight's contest is being played, one stairway leading to the basement gym has a black-and-white photo of CCNY's 1949-50 team on the wall. Behind a basket, two banners celebrate that unit's NCAA and NIT titles. The Beavers are in the annals as the only team to win both tournaments in the same year, but there is no asterisk or mention that seven players on the roster were named in a nationwide point-shaving scandal then. The college de-emphasized basketball afterward, and the Beavers are now relegated to Division III. Still, there is a timeless echo of scandal in the city game. Quinerly inspires more taunts.

Arizona wants its money

Give Arizona its money back

Quinerly makes the heckling an interactive experience. He puts his finger to his lips after he scores one basket. After another, he stares into the crowd. He mouths, "Shut the f--- up," and runs the court, stealing the ball before breaking out for a basket. He executes a finger roll, and hustles the Hawks back into the game. His running mate is a McDonald's All American, just like him. His name is Lou King, a forward headed to Oregon. Both are active on the sneaker circuit in the summer. King, who has played at three high schools in Jersey, says that he met Phil Knight, Nike's co-founder and an Oregon alumnus, on a visit to the University of Oregon in the fall. "Got him in my back pocket so that's great for me," King says. King struggles to find any rhythm while Quinerly hits another three. He smiles at the crowd.

Go get your mother, JQ

Go get your mother

Knight cannot help a Hudson Catholic squad plagued by foul trouble, though. It is up to Quinerly, a thousand-point scorer, member of the National Honor Society and son of a Bergen County Sheriff's Department officer. He boasts 275,000 followers on Instagram, and he influences the game in the second half, going right at and through the Cardinals' defense. He knocks down six 3-pointers and finishes with 27 points. Still, his efforts come up short. The Hawks lose; Hayes students storm the court. Quinerly hurries off to the locker room, past the old CCNY banners.

"They chanting stuff about my family," he says in a back hallway. "That's why sometimes you'll catch me chanting back. It is very hard to control. I'm not going to lie. I definitely have to prepare for the next level, just keeping my mouth shut."

He is bound for Villanova, having moved on from Arizona and satisfied Villanova's compliance office questions about his amateurism. Quinerly insists his focus is trained on preparing for the next level and the level beyond that.

"I feel like once you make the NBA, and it really becomes your job, you're in the gym 24-7, and there's so much more you can add to your game," he says. "I can't wait to have that opportunity: work on my game, not have to worry about school."

***

A documentary crew from Heart &amp; Hustle Productions has come to The Jack Curran Gymnasium at Archbishop Molloy High in Briarwood to shoot footage for a full-length feature on the Elite Youth Basketball League. EYBL is a Nike operation that showcases high school players in non-scholastic basketball contests across the country during the spring and summer. Seasons blur for the teens. At the front door, a sign says: "FILMING IN PROGRESS." A second sign reads: "SOLD OUT." There is not a seat to be had on set, as spectators occupy every inch, from the windowsills to the stage that abuts the far baseline. Cole Anthony, the point guard for Molloy, is the reason for the cameras on this Friday night in February. His father, Greg, played the point for the Knicks. Like dad, Cole wears No. 50. Rashad Floyd, the director, wants to "introduce Cole as a human being." Cole, who plays with the PSA Cardinals in EYBL, warms up on the right side of the rim by bouncing the ball to himself and dunking. On the left side, he throws the ball off of the brick wall, runs, catches it, switches it from hand to hand between his legs while in the air and dunks.

"People were calling all day long," Molloy coach Mike McCleary says. "Two Knicks called, wanted to come."

Kyle O'Quinn, a Knicks reserve from Queens, sits on a chair in the corner. The cameras chronicle Anthony's every move. His co-stars are teammates Moses Brown, a seven-footer headed to UCLA, and Khalid Moore, a 6-foot-7 wing committed to Georgia Tech. The villain is Christ the King, whose Royals boast a frontcourt of Cisse, the freshman from Guinea, and Kofi Cockburn, a 6-foot-10, 250-pound center from the country of Jamaica. It is a rematch of the previous Friday. The Royals took that one in their gym with ESPNU broadcasting and four courtside seats reserved for Broadridge Capitol. Anthony stands 6-2, 180 pounds. He is ranked nationally as the No. 4 recruit in the class of 2019, per Rivals.com, and carries confidence in bulk.

"I see dudes like Trae Young and Steph Curry," he says. "I know I can shoot as good as them, if not better."

There is a long lineage of Stanners who used Curran's court as a launching pad, including Kenny Anderson and Kenny Smith. A back hallway features framed sketches of alumni like former NYPD commissioner Ray Kelly and Governor Andrew Cuomo, along with an alumnus who is under FBI scrutiny. Jim Larranaga, class of 1967, is 68, a half century removed from his commute to Molloy from the Bronx. He earned a scholarship to Providence before becoming a coach, and his career highlight was taking George Mason from the CAA to the Final Four in 2006 before jumping to the ACC with Miami in 2011. Even on a larger stage, Larranaga kept certain principles: his teams are not allowed to curse, as Curran's weren't. When Curran died in the middle of March in 2013, a friend who has a private jet flew Larranaga, his wife and Miami assistant Chris Caputo up for the funeral in New York.

But in the FBI probe, Larranaga is Coach-3. The government asserts that Gatto and Code discussed payments to a recruit or his family "at the request of" Larranaga. During one exchange picked up on the wiretap, Augustine, the AAU coach, tells Code and Gatto that Larranaga "knows everything." Larranaga denies it all. He has met with FBI agents, and continues to coach his team in Coral Gables.

Back at Curran Gym, his alma mater is now rallying against the Royals. Trailing by as many as 13 points with 4:20 remaining in regulation, Molloy is led back by Anthony and Moore, who combine for a 13-0 run. The ball is in Anthony's hands on the Stanners' final possession when he loses control. A jump ball is called, and Christ the King takes possession. What was "The Cole Anthony Show" ends with CTK's Quaran McPherson beating the buzzer with a 3-pointer to win the game.

"Mind-set like LeBron," McPherson says.

A college recruiter waits at the gym door as Anthony emerges from the locker room. There is a crowd to get past for a team dinner down the hall. Oregon assistant Mike Mennenga commends Anthony, who wears a Canada Goose coat. A credential that reads "Top 100 Camp" dangles from his Team USA book bag.

"Hell of a battle, my man," Mennenga says. "We'll be in touch."

***

"They're f---ing cheating!" shouts "Smitty," the scoreboard operator at Abraham Lincoln High in Coney Island. His allegation is aimed at the referees on court as the Railsplitters lead by 20 points in the first half of a playoff game against Wings Academy. Lincoln loyalists echo the charge as he shouts, "F---ing cheaters!"

This is coach Tiny Morton's fiefdom. Boys Gym is decorated with Adidas logos. One adorns the door. The three stripes are also stamped atop the square on each of the eight backboards, including the two fiberglass game backboards. One cannot take a free throw without seeing the product placement. There are Adidas logos on each Railsplitter's jersey, shorts, socks and sneakers. Morton, a math teacher at P.S. 90 and Adidas ambassador for the city, wears an Adidas hoodie and stomps his feet in Adidas sneakers. His athletic director, Renan Ebeid, holds her daughter, not yet a year old, in her arms by the doorway. The child's feet sport Adidas sneakers, as well. They are emblazoned: "Superstar."

"I'm no more important to the company than a coach in Iowa," Morton says.

Morton knows Adidas wants to move product. That is why they outfit his teams, to gain a foothold in the gym where Marbury, Sebastian Telfair, Lance Stephenson and Isaiah Whitehead all learned their wiles en route to the NBA. Telfair is remembered as the tipping point in Morton's tenure, his No. 31 retired alongside Stephenson's No. 1 and Whitehead's No. 15 in the rafters. Gym rats like George Packer, a community man who attends every game, still tell about Telfair's smile and smoothness in winning three PSAL titles in the 2000s. Derek Jeter and Jay-Z attended games, Telfair attracted college recruiters from all over and he became familiar with a number of the players in the FBI probe. By the August before Telfair's senior year, Morton had become a paid consultant for Adidas. He has told The Daily News the deal was worth around $200,000. His Lincoln team and his A.A.U. program -- Juice All Stars — were provided uniforms and sneakers by Adidas. During his senior year, Telfair committed to Pitino at Louisville, an Adidas school, before declaring for the NBA draft in May instead. When he went pro, his agent was Miller. He signed a deal worth $10 million with Adidas before the draft. He was 18.

"Sports is the way we move on in our neighborhoods," Morton says. "That's how a lot of people see it."

Morton knows what it means to be investigated. He has long faced allegations of illegal recruiting, and was once suspended one game by the Board of Education. A number of his transfers were ruled ineligible down the stretch this year. He complains about bureaucracy, and considers the decision "a personal attack."

"Nothing new here," he says.

There is a fresh set of questions, though. A Yahoo report shows Morton's name next to an amount of $9,500 in a loan ledger from Miller's agency, ASM Sports, obtained during the FBI probe. No date is listed. Also in the ledger are amounts of $26,136 and $37,657 next to the name of Whitehead, the city's top player and a McDonald's All American in 2014.

As colleges recruited Whitehead, Seton Hall coach Kevin Willard, the old Louisville assistant who had recruited Telfair, was 49-49 in three years as the Hall's head coach, and knew he needed commitments from top talent in the area if he was to keep his job. At the time, Seton Hall was sponsored by Adidas, and Lincoln was sponsored by Under Armour. Willard landed Whitehead in September 2013, and then gained a commitment from his Lincoln teammate, Desi Rodriguez, two months later. In April 2014, Under Armour and Seton Hall announced a deal making the company the school's exclusive outfitter for all 14 varsity sports beginning July 1. Five months later, Willard announced Morton's hiring as an assistant coach on his staff. Family followed, too. Morton's son, Trevonn, walked on at Seton Hall.

Whitehead stayed at Seton Hall for two years, leading the Pirates to a Big East tourney title and NCAA appearance before the Jazz selected him in the second round of the 2016 NBA Draft. He was traded to his current team, the Brooklyn Nets, that night. His agent was Miller. In December, three months after the FBI raided Miller's office, Whitehead switched to Roc Nation's representation.

Morton only lasted a year in South Orange before returning to Ocean Parkway and claiming his ninth city title last season. Lincoln had gone 25-4 without him, but Morton maintains that he felt a pull to "save Lincoln." Every day he walks by a bulletin board dedicated to articles about Whitehead's commitment. It reads:

"Congratulations Isaiah!"

There are 12 school safety officers in a gym that fits 115 fans for Lincoln's home finale in March. Whitehead's successes are framed next to Telfair's in the hallway, but Telfair crossed over to cautionary tale status recently. After ten seasons in the NBA, with eight different teams, Telfair left the league in 2015. Last June, he was pulled over for a traffic violation on Atlantic Ave. in Brooklyn when police discovered three loaded guns, a semiautomatic rifle and a bulletproof vest in his pickup truck. He now faces three felony charges, and as his case progresses, two words commence each hearing in Brooklyn Supreme Court, as well as each hearing in the FBI's ongoing investigation — two words that also appear as a marketing slogan on the Adidas banners that hang from the railings above the Lincoln court: "All Rise."