Advertisement

Supported by

Books News


By Peter Libbey

Five novels, including “The English Patient” and “Wolf Hall,” have been named to a short list of former Man Booker Prize winners eligible for a special award to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the prize.


The public will be invited to vote for the winner of the Golden Man Booker Prize. The short list was culled from among the 51 previous winners of the Man Booker, which honors the best novels written in English and published in United Kingdom or Ireland.


Five judges, responsible for one decade of prize winners, made the short list decisions.


Robert McCrum, a writer and editor, selected “In a Free State” by V.S. Naipaul, the 1971 winner. The poet Lemn Sissay chose “Moon Tiger” by Penelope Lively, which won the prize in 1987. Michael Ondaatje’s “The English Patient” was singled out by Kamila Shamsie, a novelist, to represent the 1990s.


Simon Mayo, a novelist and broadcaster, selected the 2009 prize winner “Wolf Hall” by Hilary Mantel. And the poet Hollie McNish picked last year’s winner, “Lincoln in the Bardo,” by George Saunders.

Three of the shortlisted books hail from the United Kingdom, with Mr. Ondaatje’s coming from Canada and Mr. Saunders’s from the United States.


The short list “showcases what the Man Booker Prize is all about: fiction of the highest quality,” said Baroness Helena Kennedy, the chair of the Booker Prize Foundation, in a statement.


A public vote, conducted through the Man Booker Prize website, will determine which of the five novels wins the one-time Golden Man Booker award. Voting continues through June 25, with the winner announced on July 8 at the closing event of the Man Book 50 Festival.


This is not the first time the Booker has celebrated its history. Salman Rushdie’s “Midnight’s Children,” the winner in 1981, was chosen as the best of the previous prize winners and awarded the Booker of Bookers prize in 1993. It was also chosen, by a public vote, for the Best of the Booker prize in 2008.

Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter (@nytimesbooks), sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.







Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS