Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Zach Braziller


		
		
		
		
	


									March 3, 2018 | 12:31am
												

Senior Day has been a frequent topic of discussion among the Seton Hall veterans. Their final game at Prudential Center after four years comes Saturday, and they haven’t avoided the topic. 

Nostalgia will be in the air in Newark, when the careers of Angel Delgado, Ismael Sanogo, Khadeen Carrington and Desi Rodriguez are celebrated. Expect tears to be shed. 

“We just spoke about who is going to cry or not,” Carrington said jokingly. “Angel is probably going to cry. And probably ‘Ish.’ He’s probably going to cry, too.” 

They won’t be alone, though. 

“I cried at the end of ‘Die Hard,’ ” Seton Hall coach Kevin Willard said with a laugh. “I try not think about it, because I get emotional.” 

Fans are encouraged to arrive at 7:30 p.m. for the ceremony, in which a video tribute of the Seton Hall seniors will be presented. Then, there is a game to be played, a big one at that, against Butler. With a win, the Pirates (20-10, 9-8) could finish as high as third in the Big East, but with a loss as low as seventh, and be forced to play in the out-bracket round of the conference tournament Wednesday night.

The quartet, along with redshirt junior Michael Nzei and former star and current Nets guard Isaiah Whitehead, formed Willard’s blockbuster 2014 recruiting class that changed the program, returning it to relevance. 

They’re headed to a third straight NCAA Tournament, having won at least 20 games each year. They also won the 2016 Big East Tournament title, the school’s first in 23 years. 

The group includes three 1,000-point scorer (Delgado, Carrington and Rodriguez), the Big East’s all-time leading rebounder (Delgado), two Haggerty Award winners (Whitehead in 2016, Delgado 2017), and the 10th all-time scorer in Seton Hall history (Carrington). 

“I will remember the fact they went out and they battled every night, no matter what the circumstances were, no matter what time of year,” Willard said. “They brought it in practice, they brought it in individual [workouts], they brought it in games.” 

(Whitehead, it should be noted, was alleged in a Yahoo Sports report to have received $26,136 from Christian Dawkins, a former employer for the sports agency ASM Sports, during his freshman year, and being given $37,657 at an undetermined date, according to documents the FBI recovered as part of its investigation into college basketball corruption. 

Dwayne “Tiny” Morton, Whitehead’s Lincoln High School coach who came with him to Seton Hall in a package deal, was also listed in the documents for receiving a $9,500 loan, which he has denied receiving. Seton Hall has hired New York City law firm Jackson Lewis P.C. to head up an internal investigation into its program.)

The group is very close. They all live in the same off-campus building, and all attended high school in the area. Delgado and Carrington played AAU together before arriving at Seton Hall, Whitehead and Rodriguez went to high school together at Lincoln, and were familiar with everyone but Sanogo. Whitehead still frequently visits them and has attended several games. Carrington remembers them all playing “Call of Duty” every day after practice sophomore year. 

“We’re together 24-7,” Carrington said. “It’s going to be hard leaving those guys. We became brothers.”

Unfortunately, they won’t all be on the court together Saturday. Willard ruled Sanogo out for Saturday’s game after he hurt his ankle late against Villanova, while the status of Rodriguez, who is also nursing an ankle injury and has missed the last two games, is uncertain. He will be a game-time decision. 

“It’s disappointing they don’t get to experience their last home game,” Willard said, sounding ominous about Rodriguez. “It just sucks, to be honest with you.” 

But, obviously, there are more important objectives remaining, starting with next week’s Big East Tournament and the NCAA Tournament to follow. Their health is the priority. The one thing the seniors are missing is a victory in the dance, after losing in the opening round each of the last two years. 

“We got a chance to build on our legacy,” Carrington said.


			Read Next
		


			
				Penn State star sealed win over OSU by doing the unexpecte...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Penn State star sealed win over OSU by doing the unexpecte...			
		

Share Selection

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						