Ashlie Fee heard the sound of crunching metal Thursday as she crossed the street in Lower Manhattan a few blocks from City Hall.

A livery cab driver in a Lincoln Town Car slammed into a Ford Explorer, a Mercedes and a bicyclist before hitting Fee, on her lunch break, and two other pedestrians at Broadway and Liberty St. about 12:45 p.m. Thursday.

"The guy next to me and I starting running and I got hit," Fee, 31, told the Daily News. "It was all very scary."

All six victims survived.

The 68-year-old cabbie, Gil Villamar, was speeding and driving aggressively when he crashed, cops say. He complained of chest pains after the smash up.

Cops are investigating whether he was suffering a sudden medical problem — or just a fit of road rage because the Explorer in front of him was slow to move through the intersection.

He was being treated at Lower Manhattan Hospital Friday and has not been charged.

"I heard tire, like the driver was hitting the gas," she said. "It happened so fast."

"I jumped out of the way and fell," she said of the moment she was struck. "I started screaming and a bunch of people came over asking how I was doing."

She went into shock. "People put coats on me because they thought I was cold," she said. "An off-duty ER doctor and another doctor came over to check on me and then EMTs and police came. It was very surreal."

Medics took Fee, who works in a bone marrow donor center, to Lower Manhattan Hospital with leg and ankle injuries.

On Friday, she was recuperating at her Brooklyn home with ice and ibuprofen binge-watching "The Crown" on Netflix.

"My ankle is very swollen and bruised and where the tire hit me on the leg I have road rash and the skin is gone," she said. "Walking is super uncomfortable."

She is still reeling from the experience.

"It was just the craziest thing. I try and be very safe. I know New York drivers can be kind of unhinged," she said. "People rallied around me. It was one of those times when you really love New York and appreciate New Yorkers."

A 69-year-old woman crossing the street was knocked unconscious and cut her back in the crash. Another pedestrian, a 36-year-old man, hurt his right leg.

The 39-year-old woman driving the Explorer went into shock. The 62-year-old man driving the Mercedes suffered a cut on his forehead. And the 29-year-old cyclist had a cut finger and pain to his right foot.

They were all taken to local hospitals.