Advertisement

Supported by

On Washington


By Carl Hulse

WASHINGTON — In terms of rip-roaring debates, it certainly didn’t rival Calhoun versus Webster. It definitely was not in the pantheon with Lincoln and Douglas. In fact, it really didn’t even measure up to Biden meets Palin.


The promised freewheeling, take-on-all-comers Senate showdown over immigration policy never really materialized before it all collapsed Thursday with the defeat of four proposals, including President Trump’s, which suffered the worst loss of them all. After raising expectations of an elevated, old-school clash of ideas, the Senate delivered a dud, a major disappointment to those hoping to see a revived Senate confront the tough, politically charged issues by hashing them out on the floor.


Over four days of what was supposed to be a rare, open-ended fight, the Senate chamber was often empty, save the lone Republican forced to preside over the inactivity. In the end, the showdown came down to a series of votes on four doomed proposals rather than a daily competition between lawmakers offering a series of defining amendments as in the past. In the run-up to the final decision, the number of dramatic votes on such amendments reached exactly zero.


“I think it’s safe to say this has been a disappointing week,” Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, said in the aftermath of the legislative failure.

For much of the week, the marble hallways were quiet. The C-Span screen noted frequently that there were “no votes scheduled.” Congressional reporters who had heard legends of gripping floor debates from the turn of the century (the 20th, that is) were bemoaning the missed opportunity. The real work — what there was of it — went on behind closed doors as varying groups of lawmakers tried to put together something that could attract the required 60 votes.

Lawmakers are working to extend legal protections for undocumented immigrants who were brought to the United States as children, but the discussion is complicated by other issues on the table.


Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican, said the necessary pieces were in place for a full-throated debate except for a Democratic willingness to get started under a framework set by Republicans.


“We’ve got the hall,” he said Wednesday of the chamber. “We’ve got the people,” he said of his colleagues. “We just can’t get them to debate,” he said of the Democrats. “I’m just sort of at a loss.”


Democrats said many Republicans were most interested in making sure nothing at all passed the Senate. They said Mr. McConnell and others were determined to lure them into votes on issues beyond efforts to protect 700,000 undocumented immigrants brought into the United States as children — the “Dreamers” who are the top priority for Democrats.

Mr. McConnell’s opening bid was to call a vote on a Republican plan to punish so-called sanctuary cities, jurisdictions where local agencies do not cooperate with federal immigration officials in rounding up undocumented immigrants. That issue could be a political problem for those Democrats up for re-election in conservative states.


Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, initially blocked that effort, saying Mr. McConnell was starting off on the wrong foot.


“The majority leader’s desire to vote on an unrelated, partisan immigration bill — legislation that is not only silent on Dreamers, but is silent on border security as well — is not a productive way to begin debate,” Mr. Schumer said.


Mr. Schumer, instead, wanted to begin with a vote on President Trump’s conservative immigration plan to show that it lacked bipartisan support in an outcome meant to embarrass the president and build momentum for an alternative. Republicans were not interested in the Democratic maneuver.


The standoff left the Senate right where it has been for years — frozen by a deep reluctance on the part of leaders of both parties to force vulnerable incumbents to take politically challenging votes. That thinking has dried up floor debate and put tight restrictions on the movement of legislation, making it a central cause of congressional gridlock.


In 2014, Republicans could not get enough of pointing out that Senator Mark Begich, a first-term Democrat from Alaska, never had a single amendment he wrote voted on by the Senate, a fact they said highlighted a lack of influence. He lost his re-election bid.

The refusal to battle it out over amendments has frustrated lawmakers in both parties and left some strategists scratching their heads because they see little evidence that such votes are all that damaging in an environment where charges and countercharges fly freely.


“What I came here to do is vote,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. “And I am chagrined that we are in a time when both sides seem in trepidation of voting because our political process has become so polarized.”


This fight was supposed to be different. After provoking a brief government shutdown last month, Democrats agreed to support the necessary spending to reopen federal agencies in exchange for a promise from Mr. McConnell that he would allow a no-holds-barred debate on immigration policy. It fell short of the demand by Democrats for a solution to the Dreamer issue but offered the party hope that, because of bipartisan sympathy for the immigrants, it could push through a bill and pressure the House to pass it.

But while Mr. McConnell might have promised the debate, he did not promise to make it easy for Democrats. As could have readily been predicted, he backed the most conservative option presented on behalf of the president while trying to ensnare Democrats in tough votes to help preserve his majority in November’s elections.


“My Democratic colleagues have spent months demanding the Senate take up this issue,” Mr. McConnell said Wednesday. “They even shut down the government — unnecessarily, I might add — in order to secure this very week of debate. But now that the time has come to make law instead of just making points, they’re stalling.”


Nearly all Democrats and eight Republicans ultimately got behind a compromise plan that would protect Dreamers but prevent parents who brought them into the country from gaining citizenship while diverting $25 billion to border security. It fell six votes short after the White House fought it tooth and nail, leaving the fate of the Dreamers as uncertain as the Senate’s ability to get things done.

What was certain was that the debate many anticipated never occurred in a Senate that hosted storied fights between John C. Calhoun and Daniel Webster over slavery. Stephen A. Douglas and Abraham Lincoln later clashed in a series of remarkable showdowns as they sought the Senate seat from Illinois in 1858, setting Mr. Lincoln up for his presidential election despite his Senate loss.


And in October 2008, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware and Gov. Sarah Palin of Alaska squared off for the right to preside over the Senate as vice president of the United States. “Can I call you Joe?” Ms. Palin asked in a more memorable moment.


The confrontation this week loomed as a test of whether the Senate could regain its debate footing and find answers on an issue all agree desperately needs resolution. The institution failed.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS