Critic’s Notebook


In honor of Leonard Bernstein’s centennial, the New York Philharmonic is revisiting his three symphonies, which were often criticized in his lifetime.

Leonard Bernstein in 1959.CreditAssociated Press

Supported by

By Anthony Tommasini

Leonard Bernstein is having the last laugh, the conductor Leon Botstein said recently from the stage of Carnegie Hall.


Mr. Botstein was at Carnegie to lead his American Symphony Orchestra in Bernstein’s “Kaddish” Symphony, one of the ambitious concert works that earned him much snobbish criticism in his lifetime. But Mr. Botstein argued that these pieces, including three symphonies, have been steadily gaining respect and even entering the standard repertory.


Though I love these scores, I wouldn’t go that far: Condescension endures toward Bernstein’s unabashedly theatrical symphonies. But there will be new chances to hear them, as international celebrations of what would have been Bernstein’s 100th birthday in August are already underway. (He died, at 72, in 1990.)


The festivities include Bernstein’s Philharmonic, the New York Philharmonic’s three-week celebration of its beloved onetime music director, which starts on Wednesday. The symphonies are the centerpieces of the programs, conducted by Alan Gilbert and Leonard Slatkin; this will be one of the centennial’s most valuable opportunities to revisit these underappreciated works.

Bernstein was clearly stung by the persistent criticism of his “serious” music by those who valued him as the composer of “Wonderful Town” and “West Side Story.” For all the anecdotes attesting to his substantial ego, he was also plagued by insecurity, something I got a glimpse of when I interviewed him in 1987 at Tanglewood.


Bernstein was rehearsing a youth orchestra in Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring.” I attended every one of the exacting sessions and badly wanted to speak with him. But a salacious biography of him had recently been released and he was loath to meet with journalists. Thanks to the intercession of his longtime publicist, he warily allowed me backstage during a break.

I thought that if he knew I was also a pianist, he might trust me more. So I mentioned having studied with Leonard Shure, with whom Bernstein had given a colossal performance of Brahms’s First Concerto on a Philharmonic program in 1960.


It worked. “Ah, my old friend Leonard,” Bernstein said, relaxing.


Then, looking at me a little suspiciously, he said: “You know, pianists don’t think I’m a real pianist.” Of course, he added, “conductors don’t think I’m a real conductor, and composers don’t think I’m a real composer.”

It’s true that some thought the multifaceted Bernstein was a dilettante. And his insecurity about his compositions, which seemed genuine, was understandable: They were beaten up by critics, ignored by most orchestras and never really embraced by audiences.


The Symphony No. 1, “Jeremiah,” completed in 1942 when he was just 24, was the best received of the three. The first movement, “Prophecy,” shows an impressionable Bernstein in thrall to Aaron Copland. But the precision and sting of the music, the steely blasts heaving with dissonance, display a feisty new voice eager to say something important. The second movement, “Profanation,” is a turbulent scherzo with hints of jazzy intensity. The symphony ends with a sternly anguished setting for mezzo-soprano of a Hebrew text from the Book of Lamentations.

So far, so good. But Bernstein took a risky leap with his Symphony No. 2, “The Age of Anxiety,” a de facto piano concerto with a blazingly difficult solo part, written in 1949 (and revised in 1965). The title comes from the Auden poem about four lonely friends, a woman and three men, who convene at a New York bar and have an all-night rap session about life.


The premise may seem pretentious for a composer to take on, and some said so. But Bernstein, already a Mahler devotee, was enamored of symphonic works that addressed cosmic questions and explored identity.

Besides, you can listen to “The Age of Anxiety” knowing nothing about the narrative subtext (the piece is wholly instrumental) and be swept into this audacious symphony. A quizzical prologue sets up two long sets of intricate variations in myriad styles, with echoes of Neo-Classical Stravinsky and ironic Shostakovich. Eventually, a plunked-out piano theme leads into an angry dirge that breaks into an unabashed jazz romp, before the piece ends in a sweeping, cinematic epilogue. A bit much? Maybe. But it’s a voluble, big-hearted symphony.

The “Kaddish” Symphony remains the most debated of the three. As he composed it during the early 1960s, Bernstein was alarmed by what seemed a looming threat of nuclear war.


The core of this 42-minute work, scored for orchestra, chorus, children’s chorus and soprano soloist, is a setting of passages from the Jewish hymn of praise that is recited while mourning the dead. Yet the music is run through with a spoken text written by Bernstein in the confrontational manner of the Book of Job.


Addressing God as “angry, wrinkled old majesty,” a speaker issues challenges with, he says, “respectful” fury to “you who make peace in the high places”: “Surely you can cause and command a touch of order here below.” Whole stretches of the text are spoken against backdrops that range from atmospheric choral humming to heated orchestra outbursts.


Just as Bernstein was putting the final touches on the orchestration, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated. The shaken composer dedicated the piece to the fallen president. In places this darkly brooding score juxtaposes strands of 12-tone writing with crushingly poignant tonality, which raised hackles among modernist composers at the time. Many critics found the text preachy and embarrassing.

Today, when tweets from the White House once again raise the specter of nuclear war, Bernstein’s text has new relevance. I was riveted by the performance Mr. Botstein led at Carnegie Hall. (Bernstein’s recordings of the symphonies with the New York Philharmonic, which he led from 1958 to 1969, are available as part of Sony’s 25-disc set “Bernstein the Composer,” released in March.)

I’ve been thinking lately about my encounter with Bernstein at Tanglewood. I wish I’d told him that hearing him conduct the Philharmonic in “The Rite of Spring” in 1966, with Stravinsky in the audience, was a formative experience of my early musical life. And that in the realm of operetta, nothing, for me, tops “Candide.”


And how much I admired his concert works — especially, as I’ve now come to realize, the “Kaddish.”

Bernstein’s PhilharmonicRuns from Wednesday through Nov. 14 at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org










Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS