Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Mike Vaccaro


		
		
		
		
	


									February 24, 2018 | 1:39am
												

The whole system has been sitting there, festering, waiting for its day of reckoning to come, and it hadn’t yet come. Until now. Until the Feds came knocking on the door of college athletics. Until the NCAA was once again exposed as a batch of toothless mall cops in the shadow of an operation where “Investigation” is actually a part of the name.

Of course the NCAA has been desperate for reform for decades, maybe from the start. Every once in a while through the years, it would try to send a message — shuttering SMU football once, nearly wrecking Kentucky basketball once — and there would be solemn nods and wrung hands and a gaggle of solemn pledges that this could all be done better, run cleaner.

Which has always been delusional.

And we’ve always known it. It just hits home now, as more and more of this FBI probe sees the light. Friday, some of college basketball’s most regal names — Duke, North Carolina, Kentucky, Kansas, among others, though they are the bluest of the sport’s blue bloods, by reputation as well as by uniform color — found themselves engaged in the first round of FBI sneak previews, delivered by the fine, dogged journalists at Yahoo Sports. Locally, Seton Hall also has been dipped in the mud and so has the former Lincoln High pairing of Isaiah Whitehead and coach Tiny Morton.

This time, the investigators come with subpoena power, not simply a winking commitment to nudging schools back on a straight and narrow pathway that so many rarely keep to in the first place. And this time, there is a growing sense that college basketball as we know it — and football, too, eventually; don’t worry, its turn is coming — may well be irreversibly altered by what’s coming. 

But what, exactly, can be done?

The knee-jerk reaction to these scandals is always the same: Pay the players! And that’s a fine principle in a vacuum. There was a time when tuition, room and board were fair compensation for an athlete’s services — and as anyone who has spent years paying off a student loan can attest: a full ride is certainly not nothing — but that time coincided with coaches making $15,000 a year (rather than per day, as a growing number now do) and games that were played in front of a few thousand interested classmates, not television cameras belonging to network suits who pay billions of dollars to academic suits who never make a tackle, a dunk or a goal.

Once it reached this level, it’s not just appalling the players don’t receive any of the pie, it’s damn near criminal. So, yes: Pay the players. It’s hard to see any logic in doing anything else.

But understand something else:

That alone won’t stop the cheating. Do you really expect boosters to vanish, sneaker companies to disappear, agents to walk away from golden geese just because the price went up? Also: Who gets paid? It’s easy to say just football and basketball players — the “revenue generating” sports at most schools — but what about Title IX implications? Those 60 or 70 football players now getting paid? Women don’t play football. So there are 60 or 70 swimmers, soccer players and tennis players who are also going to need to be paid under gender-equity guidelines (and almost all of those sports are already run at a loss).

OK, so why don’t the richest of the rich simply break away, form their own 50-team super-conference, outside NCAA purview, and let the free market reign? Another fine thought in principle. Until you realize that while basketball in Kansas or football in Alabama may seem like secular religions that every citizen in those states crave endlessly, most do not. And good luck when taxpayers already exhausted at underwriting a state university’s fundamental mission are now in the business of funding linebackers and power forwards. The tweedy geniuses who run these schools may choose to look the other way at boosters and agents; it’s something else entirely to have those payoffs as an actual part of a budget.

The basic problem is this: As a sporting society, we have enabled and grown to adopt the notion of the colleges serving as a free minor league. If Carolina and Kentucky play in an NCAA Tournament game, there is intense interest; if those same players were instead the Chapel Hill Rams and Lexington Lions playing for a minor league title, it would be bereft of eyes and interest. Don’t believe me? When was the last Pacific Coast League baseball playoff game you watched on TV?

No, there are no simple answers, just a simple reckoning about to land like an anvil on the heads of college athletics royalty. Changes are coming. The NCAA couldn’t last forever and now it almost certainly won’t, not in its present form. Maybe that’s for the best. Or maybe it will make all of us wish it could have kept its house in order, back when it may have been salvageable.


			Read Next
		


			
				Analyzing how scandal will affect NCAA tourney, coaches			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Analyzing how scandal will affect NCAA tourney, coaches			
		

Share Selection

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						