Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Chris Perez


		
		
		
		
	


									March 7, 2018 | 9:52pm
											| Updated March 8, 2018 | 10:22am
												

A Rider sophomore has been hit by a snow plow right outside of Lincoln Hall. The student is currently in stable condition and was taken in ambulance to be treated for her injuries. pic.twitter.com/8j4hqrOwMe

— Mary-Lyn Buckley (@ml_buckley) March 7, 2018



A New Jersey college student was struck by a snow plow — and then run over two more times by said snow plow — as it attempted to back up out of the way, a report says.

Rithika Ramasubbu, a sophomore marketing major at Rider University, was walking on campus during Wednesday’s nor’easter when the accident happened around 2 p.m., according to The Rider News.

Public Safety officials and witnesses told the school newspaper that she was near Lincoln Hall when the vehicle plowed into her and she became trapped underneath.

“I was opening up my shades to see the snow, and I watched a snowplow back up and hit [Ramasubbu],” recalled Isabella Garra, a sophomore international business major who stays in a nearby dorm.

“I watched the person plowing drive forward and run over [Ramasubbu] again,” she said. “The driver then backed up and hit [Ramasubbu] for the third time. Two or three people ran over while [Ramasubbu] remained under the truck.”

A school spokesperson told the Rider News that the snow plow was a university vehicle.

Ramasubbu was rushed to a local hospital with multiple injuries and was said to be in stable condition.

“She has a shoulder blade or back injury and is being treated,” explained Public Safety Sgt. Donald Edwards.

Day and evening classes at Rider were canceled Wednesday due to Winter Storm Quinn. Plows had been cleaning up campus throughout the day.


			Read Next
		


			
				NASA wants to blast your name into the sun			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				NASA wants to blast your name into the sun			
		

Share Selection

145,843

65,946

51,227

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters