Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Entertainment
					

By Barbara Hoffman


		
		
		
		
	


									April 5, 2018 | 5:24pm
											| Updated April 6, 2018 | 9:47am
												

It was nominated for 53 awards and won 40, including eight Oscars, one for Best Picture. So it’s high time “Amadeus” — the 1984 (fictionalized) bio of Mozart and the man who may have murdered him — gets the “Art of the Score” treatment, unspooling as the New York Philharmonic and the Musica Sacra chorus perform its soundtrack, live.

And what a score: bits and pieces from “Don Giovanni,” “The Magic Flute” and the “Requiem” Mozart feverishly tried to finish before dying, at 35, so destitute he was laid in a pauper’s grave.

Tom Hulce, the film’s Mozart, will introduce the first of five performances of “Amadeus: Live” alongside Alec Baldwin, the program’s artistic adviser and the Phil’s biggest celebrity booster.

Until he was cast, Hulce tells The Post, “I didn’t know hardly anything about Mozart. I had to read everything I could find. The biggest challenge was making sense out of all the contradictions — the degree to which he was so childlike, and yet such a genius … and how he’d work incredibly long hours and then drink and dance and carouse.”

Before “Amadeus” was a Milos Forman film, however, it was a Peter Shaffer play. Opening on Broadway in 1980, it starred Tim Curry as Mozart. And while Curry, Kenneth Branagh, David Bowie and Mikhail Baryshnikov reportedly vied for the film role, Forman preferred casting a relative unknown — “relative” being the operative word: Just six years before, Hulce played Pinto, the wide-eyed pledge of “Animal House,” with John Belushi. Not that the two hung out together, the 64-year-old says: While he, Peter Riegert, Karen Allen and the others lived in a motel during the filming, Belushi lived “somewhere else, someplace nice.”

“Amadeus” was filmed in Prague, where Hulce had another challenge: learning to fake playing the piano. “I worked hours every day for six months,” he says, “playing un-bear-ably slowly until I could put my fingers on the right keys.” Pianist Ivan Moravec and others recorded the film’s soundtrack, which won the 1985 Grammy for Best Classical Album and hit No. 1 on Billboard’s classical chart.

Hulce was nominated for an Oscar, only to lose to his co-star, F. Murray Abraham, as Mozart’s poisonous rival, Salieri. Hulce says they bump into each other now and then in the Village, where they live across the street from one another. But whatever favorite moments he has of them making “Amadeus” together, Hulce prefers, at least until the performance, to keep it to himself.

“I think I’ll talk about it on the 11th,” he says.

“Amadeus: Live” will be performed April 11-14 and 17 at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; tickets, $69–$165, NYPhil.org




			Read Next
		


			
				'Chappaquiddick' is a long-overdue dismantling of the Kenn...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				'Chappaquiddick' is a long-overdue dismantling of the Kenn...			
		

Share Selection

150,047

66,678

49,844

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters