Advertisement

Supported by

On DVD


By J. Hoberman

John Ford’s “Young Mr. Lincoln,” released in 1939 and now on Blu-ray in a new 4K digital restoration from Criterion, is a prime example of American mythmaking. It can hardly be coincidental that — wearing his trademark stovepipe hat — the nation’s destined savior, Abraham Lincoln (Henry Fonda, given a prosthetic nose), arrives in the rowdy western town of Springfield, Ill., like Jesus, riding on a mule.


The movie, which has a script by Lamar Trotti (a Southerner who would win an Oscar for writing another presidential biopic, “Wilson”), opens after a few bars of “Rally ’Round the Flag” in 1832 in bucolic New Salem, Ill. There the future president is introduced as a gentle force of nature, rehearsing a political speech for a group of giggling kids, studying his law books beneath a tree and shyly courting Ann Rutledge (Pauline Moore, later to play opposite Roy Rogers in Republic Pictures B-westerns). Ann’s death, handled with masterly tact, is the catalyst that sends Lincoln to practice law in Springfield.


Both salty and sentimental, “Young Mr. Lincoln” establishes its subject as a folk hero. Fonda, a 20th Century Fox contract player known mainly for portraying juveniles, evidently hesitated to take the role. His diffidence blends well with his shambling characterization and Ford’s unhurried tempo. Not unlike the political humorist Will Rogers, who appeared in three films for Ford, Fonda’s homespun Lincoln uses reason and humor — as well as knowledge of Scripture — to make his case. (The climactic trial is loosely based on the Duff Armstrong case in which Lincoln, then a defense attorney, made strategic use of an almanac to discredit a witness.) He also persuades by asserting his physical strength and even employs sleight of hand, cheating to win a Fourth of July tug of war.


As modest as it seems, “Young Mr. Lincoln” was generally overlooked when it was released during a year that also brought “Gone With the Wind,” “The Wizard of Oz,” “Wuthering Heights,” “Ninotchka,” “Mr. Smith Goes to Washington” and Ford’s own “Stagecoach,” as well as the outbreak of war in Europe. (The lone Oscar nomination went to Trotti.) Still, “Young Mr. Lincoln” had its defenders. Fonda’s performance made it “a moving unity, at once gentle and quizzically comic,” wrote the New York Times critic Frank Nugent (later to collaborate with Ford), declaring the film one “which indisputably has the right be to called Americana.” In an essay included in Criterion’s notes, the Soviet director Sergei Eisenstein praised the movie’s “national spirit” and “genuine beauty,” calling it the American film he most wished he had made.

Some years later, the French film journal Cahiers du Cinéma subjected “Young Mr. Lincoln” to an extensive semiotic cum ideological analysis. The essay, which was required reading in the cinema studies classes of the 1970s, argued that the movie was designed to inscribe the Lincoln of legend into the world of 1939, cast as the progressive forebear of Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal.


Ford’s youthful Lincoln is already a monument. To that end, “Young Mr. Lincoln” practices a selective form of predestination. Lincoln’s future bride, Mary Todd, and eventual political rival, Stephen Douglas, are both on hand and Ford shot a scene, cut from the movie by the producer Darryl F. Zanuck, in which the presidential assassin John Wilkes Booth passes through Springfield. Lincoln does single-handedly prevent two white men from being lynched, but issues of race and slavery never arise.


“The Battle Hymn of the Republic” wells up in the movie’s final minutes, as Lincoln walks off alone into a rising storm. The flash-forward to the Lincoln Memorial was prescient. Five weeks before “Young Mr. Lincoln” opened, the contralto Marian Anderson, who had been forbidden to perform at Constitution Hall, sang instead at the Lincoln Memorial, crystallizing the monument’s association with freedom and civil rights. She consequently appeared at the movie’s world premiere in Springfield.


A different Lincoln is invoked as an honest prairie reformer in “The Washington Masquerade,” a 1932 MGM political melodrama (newly available from Warner Archive), in which Jeff Keane (Lionel Barrymore), a novice politician running a good-government campaign for the Senate is ballyhooed as “the new Abraham Lincoln.”


Keane is elected on a progressive platform to establish federal stewardship of the nation’s natural resources. But once in Washington, he sinks into a morass of lobbyists, conspiracies and corruption, ultimately taking a bribe to resign his seat. In the congressional inquiry that follows Keane wrings his hands, summons Valley Forge, and apparently suffers a nervous breakdown while denouncing all politicians save for the current occupant of the White House (Herbert Hoover, then running for re-election with the support of MGM’s boss, Louis B. Mayer), “whose heart is broken because we’re traitors.”

An irrepressible ham, Barrymore was born to play the bushwa-spouting politician. “He can even deliver the speeches about the Flag and the People so that they don’t sound quite so bad as, say, in the Senate,” a New York Times critic wrote in an amused review. Barrymore is equally convincing when succumbing to the wiles of an assured and charming femme fatale (Karen Morley).


Ms. Morley, who played Paul Muni’s moll in “Scarface” (1932) and was next cast as the corrupt president’s mistress in the 1933 political melodrama “Gabriel Over the White House,” was a prominent Hollywood activist. Her movie career stalled during the blacklist period; her political career was capped in 1954 when she ran unsuccessfully as the American Labor Party candidate for lieutenant governor of New York.


THE APARTMENT Billy Wilder’s 1960 comedy, in which Jack Lemmon plays a salaryman who lends his home to his superiors for trysts with, among others, Shirley MacLaine, gets the deluxe treatment in this 4K digital restoration that comes complete with hardcover notes. It’s “a gleeful, tender and even sentimental film,” the New York Times critic Bosley Crowther wrote in his review. (Arrow Academy)


DETROIT Kathryn Bigelow brings her action chops to bear on a grim instance of police malfeasance during the 1967 Detroit uprising. A. O. Scott’s Times review from July 2017 declares that “the film’s struggle against simplification — against the sentimentality, wishful thinking and outright denial that defines most Hollywood considerations of America’s racial past — is palpable, almost heroic, even if it is not always successful.” Available on Blu-ray, DVD and Amazon Video. (20th Century Fox)


ELECTION A hilariously annoying go-getter (Reese Witherspoon) runs for class president, driving her irate teacher (Matthew Broderick) to undermine her campaign in Alexander Payne’s 1999 satire of politics and political dirty tricks. The Times critic Janet Maslin called “Election” “a deft dark comedy,” adding that “it’s smart no matter what.” On Blu-ray and DVD. (Criterion Collection)


T-MEN A pair of treasury agents take on a murderous counterfeiting ring in Anthony Mann’s tough, terse documentary-style procedural. Reviewing the movie in 1948, Mr. Crowther took note of the style: “Anthony Mann has directed the action, of which there is more than enough, with a fine sense of melodramatic timing and a good eye for sharp, severe effects.” Blu-ray and DVD. (Classic Flix)


TIME TO DIE Arturo Ripstein, the dean of Mexican filmmakers, began his career in 1966 with this abstract western written by Gabriel García Márquez, with an assist from Carlos Fuentes. Reviewing the movie in The Times on its belated premiere in September 2017, Ben Kenigsberg wrote that, even in his first film, Mr. Ripstein “already showed a flair for dynamic staging and long takes.” Blu-ray and DVD (Film Movement)




Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS