Advertisement

Supported by

By Sewell Chan

LONDON — Novels by three American and three British authors made the shortlist for this year’s Man Booker Prize for Fiction, one of the world’s most prestigious literary accolades, the prize committee announced on Wednesday.


That half of the writers on shortlist this year are American — Paul Auster, Emily Fridlund and George Saunders — immediately revived anxieties about the 2013 decision to open the prize to any novel written in English and published in Britain, regardless of the author’s nationality, rather than restricting it to writers from Britain, Ireland, Zimbabwe and the Commonwealth.


“All we can say is that we judge the books that are submitted to us,” Lola Young, chairwoman of the 2017 judging panel, said at a news conference announcing the list. “We make our judgment based not on anyone’s nationality or their gender or anything else other than what is written on those pages.”


Last year, Paul Beatty became the first American to win the prize, for “The Sellout.”


Asked at a news conference about the fear that Americans might dominate the prize, Ms. Young said, “One could say that time will tell — we’ve done the job that we were asked to do with the texts that were submitted to us.”

Another judge, the scholar Lila Azam Zanganeh, noted that less than 30 percent of the 144 books submitted for consideration this year were by American authors, a smaller proportion than in previous years.


Like the Turner Prize for visual art, the Man Booker, which was first awarded in 1969, is watched closely in Britain. Betting parlors like Ladbrokes set odds and accept bets on the shortlist and the winner.


Three widely discussed books on the 13-book longlist, announced July 27 — Colson Whitehead’s “The Underground Railroad,” which won the National Book Award and the Pulitzer Prize in the United States, Arundhati Roy’s “The Ministry of Utmost Happiness” and Zadie Smith’s “Swing Time” — did not make the cut on Wednesday.


The authors on the shortlist are:


• Mr. Auster for “4 3 2 1,” which tells the story of a young American, Ferguson, across much of the 20th century, in four different versions. Events like the Vietnam War and the Civil Rights Movement “reverberate around and through what’s happening in Ferguson’s life,” Ms. Young said, calling the novel “an ambitious, complex, epic narrative.”


• Ms. Fridlund for her debut novel, “History of Wolves,” about a wild adolescent, Linda, who lives on a commune in the Midwest and is changed by the arrival of a young family. “The novels plays with mystery and thriller genres and classic coming-of-age tales and at its heart is a deeply sophisticated, intelligent and realist version of these,” said Sarah Hall, a novelist on the 2017 judging panel.

• The Pakistani-British writer Mohsin Hamid for “Exit West,” about a couple uprooted by turmoil, in an unnamed city swollen by the arrival of refugees. “Rather than deploying a documentary of realist narrative, Hamid goes for the human element, the depiction of an emotional landscape,” Ms. Young said, calling the novel “a subtle, compact piece of writing.”


• The British writer Fiona Mozley for her debut novel, “Elmet,” about an English child’s struggle to survive and his memories of Daddy, a moody, bare-knuckle fighter who defies rural social norms. “The tale is told in vivid language whose poetry survives even its last dark catastrophe, with no punches pulled,” said one judge, the artist Tom Phillips.


• Mr. Saunders, a famed writer of short stories, for his first novel, “Lincoln in the Bardo,” which conjures the American president’s thoughts and feelings about the burial of his 11-year-old son, Willie, who died of typhoid fever in 1862. “At the book’s center remains the heartbreaking figure of Lincoln himself, visiting the graveyard in solitude, unaware of the spirits that populate it,” said one judge, Colin Thubron, a travel writer and novelist.


• The British writer Ali Smith for “Autumn,” which has been described as the first great novel about Britain as it plans to depart the European Union. “Looming on the horizon is not just political but environmental doom,” said Ms. Azam Zanganeh. “‘Autumn’ is an elegy for lost time, squandered beauty, but also for the loss of connections. It deftly questions what it means to be displaced in one’s own country and surveys the extant possibility for wonder, for storytelling, for transformation.”


The winner of the prize — 50,000 pounds, or about $66,200 — will be announced on Oct. 17.

Follow Sewell Chan on Twitter @sewellchan.













Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS