In a city known for its basketball prowess and countless weekend tournaments throughout the season, the SNY Invitational has managed to carve out a special place in New York City hoops lore.

Starting in 2008 with a victory by traditional PSAL power Abraham Lincoln, the Invitational's list of winners includes some of the elite teams not only in the Big Apple but also the tri-state area and the entire country: Along with the Railsplitters, Christ the King, Cardozo, Mount Vernon, St. Anthony and Loughlin have all won the SNY trophy. In 2010, it was Rice, a Manhattan powerhouse program that is no longer around but produced some of the greatest CHSAA teams in the city's history.

In anticipation of tonight's tipoff of the 10th SNY Invitational, here is a year-by-year look back at each SNY championship:

Before he made it to the NBA, Lance Stephenson took his place among Lincoln legends like Stephon Marbury and Sebastian Telfair by leading the Railsplitters to the first-ever SNY Invitational title.

With then-Mets GM Omar Minaya sitting courtside a day after completing a deal to bring Johan Santana to Queens, Stephenson poured in 28 points and grabbed 13 rebounds in Lincoln's 86-55 win over PSAL powerhouse Cardozo. He was named MVP of the tournament and has since played for six teams in six seasons in the NBA.

Over the years, Mount Vernon had often struggled to earn the respect that most of its Big Apple brethren received. But the Knights took matters into their own hands this time, winning the tournament with a convincing 70-54 victory over CHSAA contender St. Raymond one day after knocking off PSAL heavyweight Jefferson in the SNY semis.

Mount Vernon used its impressive size to outrebound the Ravens 27-15 on the offensive glass, taking the trophy back to the outskirts of the city.

"I think this says that we're up near the top, but there's a lot of good teams in the area," coach Bob Cimmino said. "There's Lincoln, Rice and Jefferson, but we can be competitive with anyone in the area."

Holding a 19-point lead with 2:15 left in the third quarter, Cardozo was destined to win its first SNY Invitational championship. The only thing that stood in its way was a pesky and talented Rice team that had gotten used to hard-fought battles in the CHSAA.

Exposure to that kind of adversity certainly came in handy for Rice — a now-defunct school that will go down as one of the greatest in CHSAA basketball history.

Capping a comeback from that double-digit deficit with a 63-58 overtime win certainly goes down as one of the Raiders' most impressive over the years. Doing it against one of the PSAL's best teams, and in the final of the SNY Invitational, certainly helps.

St. Anthony of Jersey City was the No. 2 team in the country at the time but the Boys &amp; Girls Kangaroos had them on the ropes. Up by eight heading into the fourth quarter, the 'Roos were on the verge of pulling off what would have been the biggest upset in SNY Invitational history.

But coach Bob Hurley's team wasn't ranked that high for nothing, and St. Anthony came charging back with a big fourth quarter in which they held Boys &amp; Girls to just three points over the final eight minutes on its way to a 43-38 win.

"We just gave them the game," Boys &amp; Girls' Rutgers-bound guard Mike Taylor said.

"They're the No. 2 team in the country," said Kangaroos' coach Ruth Lovelace, whose Kangaroos were ranked 22nd in the country entering the game. "It would (have been) a great win for the program."

Instead, it was the Friars who put their name into the SNY history books.

Following an unexpected one-year hiatus due to a controversy involving NCAA rules, the SNY Invitational tipped off again with a doozy of a title game matchup.

Though neither St. Anthony nor Long Island Lutheran plays within the five boroughs, they had both earned the respect of the NYC basketball community with championship-caliber play year after year. And the Friars became the Invitational's first-ever repeat champ, beating LuHi, 52-45. Hallice Cooke, a 6-3 shooting guard, earned MVP honors after scoring 22 points in the final, including six 3-pointers.

The title game win was the 81st consecutive victory for St. Anthony, a program no longer in existence after the school shuttered its doors last spring.

It's not easy standing out in the CHSAA, perhaps the most competitive league in the country. But Bishop Loughlin made a name for itself with a decisive 69-55 win over two-time defending champ St. Anthony.

Khadeen Carrington, the Seton Hall-bound star for the Lions, carried his team to the title with 20 points and 10 rebounds and took home the Invitational's MVP award.

"It's a big plus in my career," Carrington said. "We played a great, legendary coach (in Bob Hurley). Now we know where we're at and what we can do."

Loughlin closed the game with an overwhelming 26-2 run.

Cardozo vs. Wings would have been a great PSAL city championship game matchup, and just less than two months later, it was. But on this afternoon, the SNY title was up for grabs, and the Judges were the ones who grabbed it.

After a rough first half, Cardozo finally made a game of it in the third quarter and into the fourth before closing out Wings with a 12-0 run that capped a 50-47 victory.

"I don't know how the hell we won that game," Cardozo's emotional coach Ron Naclerio said.

Three straight 3-pointers in the final minutes helped, including one by Monmouth-bound guard Ray Salnave, who scored six of his nine points in the final 1:46 to earn MVP honors.

Wings got revenge in March, beating Cardozo at Madison Square Garden in the PSAL city title game.

At this point, Cardozo had long established itself as a city powerhouse, but a victory over CHSAA counterpart and Queens rival Christ the King helped.

The 66-63 win gave the Judges their second straight SNY crown.

The Judges were led by Invitational MVP Aaron Walker, who had 20 points and eight rebounds and hit two clutch free throws to seal the victory. Tareq Coburn had 21 points, including Cardozo's first 8 points to start the third quarter.

This Invitational nail-bitter was won by Christ the King when 6-11 center Kofi Cockburn grabbed a rebound, put it in to tie the score and then drained a foul shot to give the Royals a 67-66 victory over CHSAA rival St. Raymond.

Cockburn capped his afternoon by grabbing the SNY's MVP honors after a title game performance in which he scored 20 points and grabbed 15 boards. "I couldn't be more proud of my guys," Christ the King head Joe Arbitello said.