Bob Costas was at home in New York when his phone started ringing.

Glancing at the number he noticed the area code was for upstate New York.

This surely couldn't be bad, right? They don't call you to say you just missed, nice try pal, he thought to himself.

No, it wasn't bad, the call was from Cooperstown and it was indeed good, really good.

Jeff Idelson, President of the Baseball Hall Of Fame was calling to say Costas had won the Ford C. Frick Award for broadcasting and would be enshrined in Cooperstown.

"I got goose bumps," said Costas a day later. "Of all these things I've done, this is at the top of the list."

Costas' thoughts immediately flashed to his son, Keith, who was in Orlando for baseball's Winter Meetings.

"I thought about his first trip to Cooperstown when he was seven," Costas told the News. "We began sending each other texts within seconds, overlapping texts that were almost identical."

The calls started flooding in, folks noting he'd be in the same Hall of Fame as his childhood idol Mickey Mantle, a notion he quickly downplayed.

"People have pointed that out," said Costas. "But I don't consider this on the level of the ballplayers, but I do think about the broadcasters that I grew up with like Red Barber, Vin Scully, Jack Buck ... my gosh, goose bumps.

"If someone asks for my autograph and they want me to write HOF under it, I'll do it, but only if they ask for it," said Costas.

Costas, whose career dates back to the early '70s when he called games for the ABA's St. Louis Spirit before doing MLB play-by-play at NBC, will be inducted with Alan Trammell, Jack Morris, and the Baseball Writers Association of America's selections which will be announced on Jan. 24, with the ceremony being held on July 29.

Now as for his speech, Costas says he has a few thoughts in his head but won't start writing until after the holidays.

"Abraham Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address on the back of an envelope while on a train," said Costas. "I'm sure I can write one over a couple months."