Manhattan: How is it that the reprehensible actions of politicians, actors, directors, etc., are now fodder for media, but Bill Clinton still gets a pass? If the mere accusations of criminal or moral wrongdoings are enough to put so many in the harsh spotlight, many deservedly so, how can Clinton be regarded with anything but scorn and contempt from now on? Kevin Kent

Manhattan: Sen. Al Franken should tell President Trump he will resign from the Senate if Trump resigns from the presidency and Roy Moore drops out of the Senate race. I'm surprised that the evangelical Christians who had such problems with Bill Clinton have no problem at all with Trump, who cheated on his wives and grabs women by their p---ies, and Roy Moore, who molests kids. Talk about hypocrisy. Edward Drossman

Yardley, Pa.: During the campaign, President Trump said he was going to "drain the swamp." What he did not say was that he was going to turn it into a cesspool. James B. Marinnie

Manhattan: In light of the exposure of the open secret about Harvey Weinstein et al., Trump's candor on the "Access Hollywood" tape amounts to whistleblowing. The locker room language made the point dramatically. Diane Moriarty

Brooklyn: To Ivanka Trump: You recently said in the wake of the Roy Moore scandal that there should be a special place in hell for child molesters. I totally agree. By the same token, there should also be a special place in hell for your two big-game-hunting brothers. The photo of them posing with their latest kill is sickening beyond words. Nancy D. Bennett

Wallingford, Conn.: I am not, not, not a fan of our new President, but if he had saved my son from spending 10 years in a Chinese prison, you can bet I would have at least thanked him. I realize this would feed the President's need for recognition, but I would not care, as long as I got my child home. LaVar Ball: I suggest you put out a simple, one-line thank you and move on with your life with your son. Barbara Boucher

Long Beach, L.I.: Did LaVar Ball ever hear the adage "You are a product of your home?" He taught his son well! Condoning stealing. Setting a wonderful example for our youth. Did he forget the life lesson: Thou shalt not steal? People will always remember your son for stealing. Very sad! Father of the year you are not. Carole A. Michelman

New Hartford, N.Y.: As another New York winter approaches, the season will be a little longer without Mike Francesa to entertain us. I have listened to his show for many years. Sometimes I would get so mad at something he said that I would tune him out for a day or two. Then I would wonder, what's he talking about? Who's on the show? I'm back again. In an age when so much on the radio is liberals vs. conservatives, Mike is very refreshing. What is so unique about Mike is the way he did his show by himself. It gets a bit too much to listen to two or three voices bantering for three hours. I hope the Baseball Hall of Fame can find a place for him. Goodbye, Mike, goodbye. Richard Hatfield

Bronx: To anyone who takes a knee while the national anthem is sung, your message does not come through. Be a man, stand up and take your grievances to a platform where you can articulate your reason for taking a knee. Show some backbone and try to achieve what you are seeking without invoking the privileges given you in this country and disrespecting our flag and national anthem. Linda Ranallo

Brooklyn: The Daily News and all the news media in the U.S. should speak out against the Republican tax cut for the rich and a tax increase for the hard-working middle class. Charles R. Clouden

Bronx: Thank you, thank you, thank you, Harold Holzer ("The great generosity of Abe at Gettysburg," Nov. 19). Your Op-Ed on Abraham Lincoln should be required reading in every history class in every school, together with the Gettysburg Address itself. They reveal the mind, heart and soul of a man whose "eloquent simplicity" has endured to define us as a nation. Lincoln's self-effacing tribute to those who sacrificed their lives to preserve the union speaks to us powerfully today as Americans continue to battle forces that seek to divide us. His voice can still be heard. Our elected leaders need to listen. Paulette Sorg

Bronx: Please add me to the current parade of bimbos coming out against men of wealth and power. I was sexually harassed by the following: Amelia Earhart, Sojourner Truth, Moms Mabley, Mary Todd Lincoln, Fanny Brice and last, but not least, Bela Lugosi. Robert Abrams

Staten Island: It is a darn shame what they are doing to Eric Bolling ("Creeps in chief are given pass," Oct. 29). We are friends with Eric and Adrienne, and know these people as great human beings. Knowing his character, we do not believe he would do vulgar things like they are saying he did. I hope he wins the $52 million, as this is nothing compared to the loss of their son. Nothing is more hurtful than losing a child. May God bless them both. Grace Lutrario

New Rochelle, N.Y.: Some black, some white, maybe some blue, some green and many colors in between, but the differences among people should never be negated. They should always be celebrated. Maggie Radtke

Manhattan: How to stop Muslim terrorists: When the good Muslims take the questionable statements out of their religious book and change their name to the "good Muslims." Throughout history, organizations, including religious organizations, have done it. The evil Muslims are just using the good Muslims for their evil ways. It is written in the beginning: the evil ones and their followers when they expire may never go to the next universe. They will remain on Earth as ants, termites or roaches. John-Ed Croft

Manhattan: The morning of the New York City Marathon, I went to the supermarket to get a few things. Who knew it would take three and a half hours to get across the street. I asked several police officers for help to get me across the street at 87th St. and First Ave. And did I mention it was pouring rain outside and that I'm 60 years old? I walked up and down for hours trying to get across to the opposite side of the street. So I tried once more. I asked another officer, and lo and behold, there he was — Officer Hoppinthal, Badge No. 11457. Thank you, Officer Hoppinthal, for helping me get across the street. May God bless you and keep you safe. Gwendolyn Barco

Staten Island: Once again, the idiot New Yorkers voted for the idiot de Blasio — the same people who said they'd move if Donald Trump became President. Well, I said if this idiot de Blasio became mayor again, I would move. Well, I'm packing my bags and moving out of New York. See you in four years. Glenn Matthews

Staten Island: Taking down statues is a big problem. You can make some people happy and some people angry. It's a shame. This country is only a little over 200 years old and we have nothing else to do but take down statues. There's a lot more history coming, so leave this one alone. The American Indian community would like to take down the statue of Columbus. Indians were put in reservations throughout this country. If they fought back, they were killed. The cavalry moved Indians by the thousands and in a hundred years moved a million or more Indians to reservations. Since 1790 to after 1900, there were about 26 Presidents. I guess their statues are going to have to come down. All this was going on under their watch. Stop this nonsense and get a life. Louis Maiello

Leesburg, Va.: Sometimes you're more of a coward than you thought (say someone is mocking another person and you say nothing in that person's defense). And sometimes you show more love than you thought you have. Hey, you're human. Don Hutnick