Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Zach Braziller


		
		
		
		
	


									February 24, 2018 | 5:59pm
												

Seton Hall insists it has nothing to hide. To prove that point, in the wake of the Yahoo Sports bombshell report Friday that former player Isaiah Whitehead and former assistant coach Dwayne “Tiny” Morton were on an agent’s payroll, it has brought in a law firm to investigate the program.

Unlike many of the other schools involved in the ongoing federal investigation into corruption in college basketball, the Pirates are bringing in a group, reportedly New York City law firm Jackson Lewis P.C., from the outside.

“I’m looking forward to having them come in,” coach Kevin Willard said Saturday, after his Pirates held off St. John’s, 81-74 in overtime at the Garden, to win their straight game and reach the 20-win plateau for the third consecutive season. “We’re going to be 100 percent open. We’re going to be 100 percent honest and I have a lot confidence in my staff and ourselves in what we’ve done in the past. I’m glad the school moved quickly on this so we can move on from it.”

Whitehead, a Brooklyn native, McDonald’s All-American and member of the Nets, was the linchpin of Willard’s program-changing 2014 recruiting class that included current players Khadeen Carrington, Angel Delgado, Desi Rodriguez and Ismael Sanogo. Yahoo received some of the documents from the Feds’ Sept. 26 raid on former NBA agent Andy Miller’s agency’s office, ASM Sports, as part of the FBI’s investigation into coast-to-coast corruption in the sport.

The spreadsheet alleges Whitehead received $26,136 during his freshman year at Seton Hall in 2014-15, and another document listed Whitehead as being given $37,657 and stated he was “setting up a payment plan.” He signed with Miller shortly after his sophomore season at Seton Hall, in which he led the Pirates to the Big East Tournament championship. He recently switched agencies, joining Roc Nation Sports.

Morton, Whitehead’s high school coach, was also listed in the documents for receiving a $9,500 loan. He coached at Seton Hall for one year, Whitehead’s freshman season — he was part of a legal package deal for the Pirates to land the five-star recruit — before returning to coach Lincoln. Morton’s relationship with Miller predates coming to Seton Hall, as the agent represented Morton’s former player, Sebastian Telfair.

Carrington declined to comment on the controversy involving Whitehead, his close friend, and Willard didn’t offer much of substance either, claiming it wouldn’t be prudent to address the issue until the investigation had concluded. He didn’t even broach the subject with his players before the victory Saturday, and didn’t directly answer a question about whether he thinks agents or runners are involved with his current players.

“We went through an [NCAA] investigation one other time [involving Whitehead] that came up clean, and we’ll go through it again, and I’m confident again it will come out everything we did, everything we’re supposed to do, we did the right way,” said Willard, who is in eighth season at Seton Hall. “I got great players in my program. They’re great kids, and [we have] a perfect graduation rate. I like where my program is.”

When asked if he was worried St. John’s could get mixed up in the scandal at some point, Chris Mullin said, “No,” and doesn’t have any concerns about such an issue arising.




“I’m proud of my team,” said Carrington, who scored a team-high 22 points, six in the extra session, and added six rebounds and four assists Saturday. “I definitely think we regained [our confidence and swagger]. I don’t think I was really worried when we went on that little streak, because every team hits walls during the season. It just happened that ours came late.”


			Read Next
		


			
				Sean Miller not coaching for Arizona after wiretap bribe c...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Sean Miller not coaching for Arizona after wiretap bribe c...			
		

Share Selection

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						