Advertisement

Supported by

By Ben Kenigsberg

Our guide to film series and special screenings happening this weekend and in the week ahead. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.


ALAN RUDOLPH’S EVERYDAY LOVERS at the Quad Cinema (April 27-May 10). A protégé of Robert Altman with a highly stylized approach to visuals and dialogue, Mr. Rudolph has — according to the Quad — never before received a retrospective of his own. To celebrate the director’s return with “Ray Meets Helen” (which opens on May 4), his first feature since “The Secret Lives of Dentists” (showing on May 7 and 9) in 2003, the Quad is giving his movies a full airing. His Los Angeles romantic roundelay from 1984, “Choose Me” (on Friday and Wednesday), might be a strong dose of undiluted Rudolph. But the uninitiated could try “The Moderns” (on Saturday and Thursday), from 1988, whose Lost Generation milieu gives shape and even some verisimilitude to Mr. Rudolph’s verbal flights of fancy. (He wrote the script with Jon Bradshaw.) It centers on an American painter and forger (Keith Carradine) in Paris in the 1920s.212-255-2243, quadcinema.com

ART OF THE REAL at the Film Society of Lincoln Center (through May 6). This annual series is committed to showing work that operates at the edges of traditional nonfiction cinema. This year, it includes “Yours in Sisterhood” (on Wednesday), in which contemporary women recite and comment on unpublished letters sent to Ms. Magazine in the 1970s, creating a kind of living time capsule and putting the past into a dialogue with the present. In “Fail to Appear” (on Thursday), a dramatic feature, the actress Deragh Campbell plays a caseworker navigating the bureaucracies of the Canadian legal and social service systems. “Infinite Football” (on May 5), a new bit of drollery from the Romanian director Corneliu Porumboiu (“Police, Adjective”), focuses on Laurentiu Ginghina, a real-life bureaucrat who wants to rewrite the rules of soccer.212-875-5601, filmlinc.org

CANYON CINEMA 50 at Anthology Film Archives (April 27-29). The San Francisco-based cooperative Canyon Cinema is one of the essential institutions of American experimental film. The names in this 50th-anniversary retrospective — which is divided into four programs of shorts — read like a roll call of filmmakers any moviegoer interested in the avant-garde should know. They include Bruce Baillie, Curt McDowell, Pat O’Neill, Barbara Hammer, Chick Strand, Peter Hutton, Robert Breer, Phil Solomon, Jodie Mack and Saul Levine.212-505-5181, anthologyfilmarchives.org


EMILE DE ANTONIO at the Metrograph (April 27-May 7). As a documentarian, Mr. de Antonio is known for capturing the turbulence of the 1960s. “Point of Order” (showing on Friday and Saturday) — for which the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas founder Dan Talbot, who died in December, served as a producer — condenses 188 hours of the 1954 Army-McCarthy hearings to 97 minutes. “In the Year of the Pig” (May 5-7), from 1968, makes a far-reaching argument against the Vietnam War.212-660-0312, metrograph.com


‘A TIME TO STIR’ at Jerome Greene Hall, Columbia University (April 29, 10 a.m.). As the 1968 student protests at Columbia reach their 50th anniversary, the director Paul Cronin’s definitive documentary on the events will be shown at the university. When I saw part of it as a work in progress at the Toronto International Film Festival 10 years ago, Mr. Cronin informed the audience that we would be seeing only the last four hours. The completed film runs seven hours and uses footage from more than 700 interviews. The all-day screening will be broken up with audience discussion. Seating is said to be limited, so reserve your spot online. Mr. Cronin will also introduce “The Activist,” a low-budget, X-rated feature shown in 1969 about an antiwar student, at Roxy Cinema in TriBeCa on Monday night.library.columbia.edu/locations/rbml/exhibitions/current.html










Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS