The Women's March is back — with a new focus.

Last year's Women's March on Washington, D.C., and other cities was the largest single-day protest in American history, but for 2018, the event is focusing on registering voters and re-energizing the anti-Trump resistance.

"This year we've rallied, we've marched, we've held town halls, we've huddled, we've written postcards, and we've run for office in bigger numbers than before," the March's co-founder Bob Bland told HuffPost. "All of it was culminating in this moment, which is the anniversary of the Women's March, where we convert our collective power that we all felt last year on January 21st into a groundswell of political power."

The March will gather in Las Vegas, Nev., this year, the site of the largest mass public shooting in modern American history and a key battleground state in the November midterm elections. It begins at 10 a.m. on Sunday, Jan. 21, at Sam Boyd Stadium. Activists from organizations like Planned Parenthood and Black Lives Matter along with singer Faith Evans and speakers Marisa Tomei and Melissa Harris-Perry will be featured. The event is called "Women's March: Power to the Polls."

"The national voter registration tour will target swing states to register new voters, engage impacted communities, harness our collective energy to advocate for policies and candidates that reflect our values, and collaborate with our partners to elect more women and progressives candidates to office," the March's site reads.

More than 250 marches across the world — in countries including Zambia, Thailand, Italy and Australia — are expected this weekend. Larger U.S. events in Washington, D.C., and New York City are among the most notable, but the official Women's March website — PowerToThePolls.com — has a searchable database to locate them all. Cities across America from Charlotte, N.C., and Lancaster, N.H., to Portland, Ore., and Cheyenne, Wyo., are participating through grassroots organizers and affiliated chapters of the Women's March.

The March has 5,500 groups across all 50 states called "huddles."

The D.C. event starts at 11 a.m. Saturday at the reflecting pool at the base of the Lincoln Memorial. In New York City, a pre-march rally starts the day at 11:30 a.m. at Central Park West and 61st Street, followed by the march itself at 12:30 from Central Park West and 72nd Street down to 6th Avenue to 43rd Street, according to the event's Facebook page.

After the conclusion of the anniversary weekend, the Women's March will visit 10 swing states with goals of registering citizens to vote and inspiring them to political action through town hall meetings and rallies.

"This next stage of the movement will channel the energy and activism of the Women's March into tangible strategies and concrete wins in 2018," the Women's March site reads. "We are the leaders we have been waiting for."