Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Living
					

By Hana R. Alberts


		
		
		
		
	


									April 18, 2018 | 10:22am
												

After consuming New York and Los Angeles, food-hall mania is now sweeping Miami. At least 10 such smorgasbords have recently debuted (or are planning 2018 openings) in Magic City.

Will Donaldson and Barre Tanguis unveiled the Design District’s St. Roch Market, modeled after their successful New Orleans outpost of the same name, in February. Highlights of the dozen vendors they gathered for this new indoor-outdoor foodie mecca include fried-chicken purveyors Coop and vegan chef Chloe Coscarelli’s tempting treats.

In Brickell (just south of Downtown), two Italian extravaganzas — La Centrale and Casa Tua Cucina — opened in February and this past December, respectively, in the area’s major new mall, Brickell City Centre. The former is a 40,000-square-foot market with 14 eateries and bars across three levels; Eataly-style, it includes places where you can purchase imported ingredients. The latter, meanwhile, is Saks Fifth Avenue’s first food hall, a collaboration with the elite Miami Beach restaurant, hotel and club Casa Tua. Built over 18,000 square feet at a cost of $15 million, Casa Tua Cucina offers 10 dining stations, a full bar, a flower market and a home-goods shop.

South Florida’s new culinary meccas serve up a medley of delights (all under one roof — or shared sky), from healthy poke bowls and tropical cocktails to fanciful Asian ice-cream cones.

No wonder the largest shopping center in Florida — Aventura Mall, just north of Miami — is also revamping its food-and-beverage game. Forget a standard-issue food court, the megamall’s new Treats Food Hall is adorned with airy skylights, stylishly tiled floors and buzzy fast-casual joints like Luke’s Lobster and NYC-style deli Hank &amp; Harry’s, with celebrity chef Todd English’s Figs + Mozzarella on the way.

Street-art haven Wynwood is also getting in on the hall party. Since its launch in November, Asian food hub 1-800-Lucky has drawn visitors and locals alike to its seven restaurants, two bars, karaoke room and convenience store/record shop. Taiyaki — an Instagram sensation for its scoops of green-tea and black-sesame ice cream served in fish-shaped cones — is a must-try. But don’t miss the delicious ramen, banh mi sandwiches or dim sum in steamer baskets scattered around the other eateries.

The same folks behind Wynwood Yard — a lively collection of food trucks and retail shops drawing crowds to the neighborhood since late 2015 — launched the brand-new Jackson Hall on April 17. Located in Miami’s Jackson Health District, a hub for hospitals west of I-95, this new concept is (fittingly) wellness-focused, serving up healthy food intended to be affordable for area workers and residents, and outfitted with its own hydroponic farm. Two of Wynwood Yard’s popular vendors — the rice- and grains-based Della Bowls and Charcoal rotisserie chicken — will spin off to join.

Of course the food-hall craze isn’t limited to Miami’s city limits. An hour’s drive north, in West Palm Beach, Grandview Public Market celebrated its opening at the end of February. Founder and creator Chris Villa, a Palm Beach native, modeled the lush space after New York’s Chelsea Market, converting decades-old warehouses into a warren of restaurants, shops, fitness studios and event spaces. Culinary standouts include Clare’s chicken sandwiches and the Corner’s Detroit-style (i.e., square) pizza, both from top chef Dale Talde’s hospitality group.

And several Miami food halls are still in the works: Time Out Market, which will bring goodies from local chefs and restaurateurs to South Beach by the end of the year; Lincoln Eatery, to open in November near Lincoln Road in Miami Beach; and the 60,000-square-foot Citadel, coming this summer in the emerging Little River neighborhood.
Bring your appetite.

Fujifilm Girl

Taiyaki

Marcello Cassano

Dillon Burke

Madison Sanders

Time Out Market

View Slideshow


			Read Next
		


			
							
		


			Read Next
		


			
							
		

Share Selection

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters