On a sultry July night in 2014, an ambulance crew brought Angel Rivera to Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx after the handyman got punched in the head.

Rivera slipped into a coma and wound up dead due to negligence, a lawsuit charges.

Startling hospital security video obtained by the Daily News shows Lincoln's emergency room staff left Rivera unattended for nine hours, failing to monitor his condition until a nurse noticed him slumped unconscious and bleeding from the mouth in a hallway chair.

Bleeding of the brain had plunged the 53-year-old Rivera into a coma. He would remain comatose for two years before dying of a heart attack.

The video and records obtained by The News indicate that hospital staff lost track of Rivera. At one point, the staff even noted in a hospital document that Rivera had left the emergency room against medical advice. But the video clearly shows Rivera was there the entire time, crucial hours during which, medical experts say, he should have been constantly monitored for signs of the hemorrhaging that took his life.

A doctor at Lincoln admitted to Rivera's family that there was a delay in care and that he might have been saved if he had been treated quickly. And a doctor hired by the family concluded Rivera would have lived and been fine if Lincoln had caught his deteriorating condition within the first two hours.

"A hospital can't lose their patient who's literally right in front of them," said the Rivera family's lawyer Mark Bodner. "How does that happen in the absence of some basic flaw in the way that (the emergency department) is run? That is a basic problem for any patient that comes into that hospital."

The tragic death of Rivera is alarmingly similar to the 2008 fate of 49-year-old Esmin Green at another city-run facility, Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn.

Green checked into the psychiatric emergency department at Kings County and spent the night waiting to be placed in the hospital's psychiatric unit. In the morning, she walked into a side waiting room, where she collapsed.

Kings County staff wrote in logs that they had checked on Green and she was fine, but video showed she had fallen to the floor and 57 minutes passed before staff came to her aid. She died that morning.

In Rivera's case, records and video portray a disturbing scenario that began on July 19, 2014.

That afternoon, Rivera was drinking and playing dominoes with a friend, Luis Medina, at an apartment on E. 167th St. The two got into an argument, and Medina slugged his pal. It's not clear if Rivera fell and hit his head, but the injury hurt enough that Rivera called for an ambulance and was taken to Lincoln.

About 8:35 p.m., staff took his vitals and gave him a white ID wristband and an ice pack. The triage nurse noted his injury as "punched in the head" and his pain score as "moderate." He did not complain of dizziness, but his head was still hurting.

Lincoln staff told him he had to stay for observation. On video, he's spotted sitting in the pediatric waiting room. At 9:44 p.m., he gets up and walks toward the nurses' station. At 9:54 p.m., he enters the adult waiting room dubbed Area A. In hospital records, staff noted Rivera "was placed in hallway J in A area at 2154 (9:54 p.m.)"

Rivera appeared alert and ambulatory as he entered Area A and headed toward a seat midway down the hall.

More than 2 1/2 hours passed. About 12:30 a.m., an unnamed physician started looking for Rivera, the records show.

"Multiple attempts were made to call patient in A area without answer," the records claim. Records also claim that "nursing staff walked around A area in attempt to locate patient without success."

Also at half-past midnight, Lincoln staff decided Rivera had left the building. They wrote in records Rivera had "voluntarily left the ED (emergency department)."

The video, however, makes clear Rivera never left his seat in the hallway. How the nurses and doctors missed him — if they in fact looked for him — remains a mystery.

At 7:21 a.m. the next morning, the records show, nurses doing rounds suddenly reported that they had "found" Rivera after he had "com(e) back to the ER."

He was in the same seat all night.

The hospital staff notes state Rivera was "found to be unresponsive" and bleeding from the mouth. In the video, Rivera can be seen lying immobilized on a stretcher as staff wheeled him out of Area A.

At 10:41 a.m., records show, he underwent surgery, but it was too late.

Dr. Paul Grewal, medical director of surgical critical care at South Nassau Communities Hospital, said ERs typically make sure that patients with head injuries are observed for a significant amount of time to monitor for possible deterioration.

Depending on the injury, Grewal said, doctors often order brain scans as a precaution "and a deeper medical evaluation depending on the setting of injury." If the patient is sent home, he said, "follow-up should always be completed with a medical provider for follow-up for evaluation of potential for concussion because symptoms may not be present at the time of initial evaluation."

A physician hired by Rivera's family, Dr. Murthy Vishnubhakat, estimates that Rivera "began to deteriorate neurologically between 10 and 11:30 p.m." that night — during the time he sat unattended in hallway J and before the doctor claimed he tried to page him.

Vishnubhakat decreed "with a reasonable degree of medical certainty" that if surgery had been performed "by midnight on July 19, 2014, (Rivera) would have been successfully treated without any residual neurological injury and he would not have died from cardiopulmonary failure on Aug. 17, 2016."

Rivera's son Angel Rivera Jr. learned his father was in the hospital from his sister and immediately flew to New York from Orlando. He was shocked when he walked into the room where his father lay, intubated and unable to speak.

"It was tough. I didn't know what to think," he recalled. "He's always been so active. To see him just lay there not being able to communicate, it was difficult."

Two weeks later, on Aug. 3, 2014, Dr. Jay Yelon, the supervising physician overseeing the case, sought a meeting with Rivera Jr.

In that meeting, according to records, Yelon said that Rivera "has a severe traumatic brain injury and the likelihood of neurologic recovery was poor."

"He gave me an update which was pretty vague," Rivera Jr. told The News. "They weren't sure exactly what was going on with him with his injury. He said there had been a delay (in care) and that they were going to look at the tapes. He assured me that he would keep me posted on what happened."

Rivera Jr.'s recollection is backed up by hospital records in which Yelon states that he told Rivera's son "there was a delay in his father's care — although I was not sure of all the details because we are in an investigative phase of our review."

Yelon assured the son he would "keep him informed of our findings throughout our process," the records state, and Rivera Jr. asked, "If there was not a delay, would it have changed the outcome?"

Yelon responded, "My answer was that it might have, but I would need more details about the delay."

That, Rivera Jr. says, was the last he heard from Yelon or anyone else at the Health &amp; Hospitals Corp., the overseer of city hospitals. He never learned if there was an investigation and, if there was, what HHC discovered.

His father lingered in a coma for months before dying. Rivera Jr. filed a negligence lawsuit against HHC. That case, which seeks unspecified damages, is pending.

Last week, Rivera Jr. recalled that his father was "very fit, very healthy, very active" before entering Lincoln. He last spoke with him in the spring of 2014 around Easter when his father called and he put his two daughters on the phone.

A short while later, his father wrote him a letter and drew a picture of the Easter bunny for his granddaughters.

"That was our last communication," Rivera Jr. said.

City hospitals spokesman Robert de Luna declined last week to answer The News' questions about the incident, citing rules barring hospitals from discussing patient information.

"While patient confidentiality laws preclude our commenting on the specifics of this case, we nevertheless extend our heartfelt sympathies to the family members of Mr. Rivera," de Luna wrote in an email.

The hospital turned over records to Bodner, the family's attorney, claiming Rivera left the ER against medical advice. Bodner then demanded all video in Lincoln's emergency ward during the time Rivera was present.

The video arrived in May 2016 and contradicted Lincoln Hospital's version of events.

"Before I knew there was a video, I questioned that. I said, 'Why would my father leave?' It made no sense," Rivera Jr. said.

"This is an emotional roller coaster. Here I am thinking that he left the hospital. And to find out that he never left and someone just wrote it somewhere — that's troubling to me. That's a lie."