Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Zach Braziller


		
		
		
		
	


									March 12, 2018 | 1:19am
												

Zach Braziller’s All-Area tournament team:

So. G Rawle Alkins (13.7 PPG, 4.7 RPG), Arizona, Brooklyn
The potential first-round pick with the sculpted 6-foot-5 frame is Arizona’s best defender, and when he scored in double figures this year, the Wildcats went 12-2. 

Fr. F Mohamed Bamba (12.9 PPG, 10.4 RPG), Texas, Harlem
A potential top-five pick in June’s draft, the nation’s No. 2 shot-blocker at 3.7 rejections per game can dominate without scoring, and has keyed a turnaround season for the Longhorns. 

Sr. G Khadeen Carrington (14.9 PPG, 4.5 APG), Seton Hall, Brooklyn
The all-time leading scorer in Bishop Loughlin High School history makes Seton Hall go. When he’s on, the Pirates can play with anyone in the country. 

So. G Ty Jerome (10.5 PPG, 3.9 APG), Virginia, New Rochelle
The Cavaliers lead guard isn’t scared of the moment — he lives for it, taking and making big shots all year in Virginia’s run to a No. 1 seed. 

Sr. F Desi Rodriguez (17.8 PPG, 4.9 RPG), Seton Hall, Bronx
The former Lincoln High star is one of the premier athletes in the Big East, a mismatch on the wing at 6-foot-6 capable of finishing at the rim and draining 3-pointers. 

So. G Alpha Diallo (12.7 PPG, 6.5 RPG), Providence, Harlem
Fr. G Hamidou Diallo (10.3 PPG, 3.7 RPG), Kentucky, Queens
Sr. G Joel Hernandez (20.9 PPG, 5.9 RPG), LIU, Teaneck, N.J.
So. G Myles Powell (15.4 PPG, 2.9 APG), Seton Hall, Trenton, N.J.
Jr. F Eric Paschall (10.4 PPG, 4.8 RPG), Villanova, Dobbs Ferry, N.Y. 

Sr. G Hallice Cooke (4.9 PPG, 1.6 APG), Nevada, Harlem
Jr. G Paul Jorgensen (10.5 PPG, 3.2 RPG), Butler, New City, N.Y.
Jr. F Markis McDuffie (8.6 PPG, 3.4 RPG), Wichita State, Paterson, N.J.
Jr. G Rickey McGill (13.5 PPG, 5.6 APG), Iona, Spring Valley, N.Y.
Jr. G Kyle Allman (19.2 PPG, 3.3 RPG), Cal State Fullerton, Brooklyn 

The Oklahoma guard was the talk of college basketball throughout most of the season, but the Sooners struggled down the stretch and another freshman phenom has captured the sport’s attention. Alabama’s Collin Sexton, a likely lottery pick in the upcoming draft, sparked the Crimson Tide’s run in the SEC Tournament to lock up a bid. He hit a buzzer-beater against Texas A&amp;M on Thursday, then dropped 31 points Friday to upset Auburn. 

With Louisville having to relinquish its 2013 championship and an FBI investigation causing chaos in the sport, this year seems as likely as any to wind up with a vacated title. The leading contender would have to be Arizona, as coach Sean Miller reportedly was caught on an FBI wiretap discussing a $100,000 payment for star freshman Deandre Ayton. Miller is back with the team, while Ayton hasn’t missed any time, raising the possibility of the Wildcats eventually having to forfeit wins because of an ineligible player.

Rhode Island coach Dan Hurley has emerged as a popular candidate for openings at Pittsburgh and Connecticut. Eric Musselman, a former NBA head coach, has Nevada in the tournament for a second straight year and could become a hot commodity. 

At least one member of the Kanter family will be playing in the postseason. Kerem Kanter, brother of Knicks center Enes Kanter, starts for a Xavier team that has Final Four potential. 

Grayson Allen’s tripping days appeared to be behind him, only for the Duke guard to unveil his latest innovation against North Carolina in the ACC Tournament: the butt trip. 

— Harrison Goodman


			Read Next
		


			
				Hurley brothers bond was on full display Selection Sunday			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Hurley brothers bond was on full display Selection Sunday			
		

Share Selection

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						