Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Joshua Rhett Miller


		
		
		
		
	


									November 28, 2017 | 2:50pm
												

A homeless man accused of killing another man with a three-foot sword at a makeshift encampment in Florida claims he was acting in self-defense after being sexually harassed, police said.

George Christopher Livingston, 51, was arrested after 58-year-old David Beckett was found dead and covered in blood on Saturday lying next to the murder weapon next to railroad tracks in Lake Worth. Beckett had “visible injuries consistent with a violent attack,” a spokeswoman for the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office told the Palm Beach Post.

Deputies were alerted to Beckett’s body by a train passenger who spotted it near railroad tracks near Seventh Avenue North, according to an arrest report obtained by the newspaper. Deputies then followed a trail of blood to locate the sword after finding Beckett’s body on gravel near the railroad tracks.

Another trail of blood led the deputies to a makeshift homeless encampment, where they found Livingston, whose hands were bloodied, with one wrapped in a bandage, according to the arrest report.

“He attacked me,” Livingston told the deputies.

A witness at the homeless camp told deputies that Livingston replied “he tried to rape me” when she asked him about the cut on his hand.

“Don’t worry … that person is probably going to die,” Livingston allegedly said when asked to identify his attacker.

Another witness told deputies that he spotted Livingston chasing Beckett while holding a sword. Livingston later returned to the camp, but Beckett did not, he said.

Livingston, according to the report, claimed that Beckett fell onto the sword.  He also told deputies that the “assailant” had threatened his life continually in the past. Both Livingston and Beckett lived in the homeless camp, WPTV reports.

Livingston remains held without bail on a second-degree murder charge in the Palm Beach County Jail, records show.

Livingston has served two separate prison stints in Florida following aggravated stalking convictions, the Sun Sentinel reports, citing state prison records. In 2013, he was also arrested for possession of a weapon by a convicted felon for carrying a knife near a casino. He was also arrested in 2011 for carrying a knife and stun gun while at a children’s play area at the Boynton Beach mall, WPTV reports.


			Read Next
		


			
				Small-business leaders tout GOP tax plan amid criticism			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Small-business leaders tout GOP tax plan amid criticism			
		

Share Selection

150,047

66,678

49,844

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters