Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 88F. Winds NNW at 10 to 15 mph..

A clear sky. Low 63F. NNE winds at 10 to 15 mph, decreasing to less than 5 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:54 pm

This file photo shows an arrangement of pills of the opioid oxycodone-acetaminophen. St. Joseph County has joined numerous Indiana counties and cities in a federal lawsuit against opioid manufacturers and distributors.AP Photo/PATRICK SISON

This file photo shows an arrangement of pills of the opioid oxycodone-acetaminophen. St. Joseph County has joined numerous Indiana counties and cities in a federal lawsuit against opioid manufacturers and distributors.AP Photo/PATRICK SISON

SOUTH BEND — St. Joseph County commissioners unanimously voted Tuesday to join numerous Indiana counties and cities in a federal lawsuit against opioid manufacturers and distributors.

Commissioners signed off on an agreement with Indianapolis law firm Cohen &amp; Malad to file a lawsuit against pharmaceutical companies, accusing them of deceptive marketing practices that have contributed to the county's opioid problem.

To name a few, others in Indiana that have signed up with the firm for the lawsuit include Indianapolis, Bloomington, Marion County and Marshall County. The lawsuit will seek to have drug companies reimburse the county for the cost of increased public health and safety services it has provided to combat the problem, which continues to contribute to overdose-related deaths.

According to its agreement with the county, Cohen &amp; Malad won't be paid for its services unless a favorable judgement is made in the case.

If a settlement in favor of the county is reached with drug companies, the firm would receive either 33 percent, 40 percent or 50 percent of the settlement amount to cover attorney fees, depending on how long it takes to reach such a deal. The county would receive a portion of the remaining amount, after other legal expenses are deducted.

Commissioner Dave Thomas emphasized that the county doesn't face a financial risk by joining the lawsuit. If the lawsuit fails, the firm won't be paid.

"If they go through this litigation process — whether it's one month or 10 years — we're incurring no costs," he said.

It remains to be seen how much the county could benefit from the lawsuit, which contends that marketing efforts of drug makers have created a false perception in the medical community and public that opioids are safe.

County officials say a burden has been placed on first responders, courts, the jail and the Juvenile Justice Center because of the opioid crisis. It will be up to the law firm to assign a dollar amount to that burden.

Commissioner President Andy Kostielney, who expects the firm to file the lawsuit in the next month, said drug makers have "some culpability for creating this problem, so we're asking them to help clean it up."

In the county, there were 59 overdose-related deaths in 2015, 60 in 2016 and 57 in 2017, according to the Indiana State Department of Health.

tbooker@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6070

@Tbooker24



Indiana emergency rooms saw a 35 percent increase in treatment of opioid overdoses last year, according to a new report that suggests the hero…

SOUTH BEND — South Bend is the latest among dozens of cities and counties across Indiana announcing plans to sue opioid manufacturers and dist…




Suit claims more than 20 companies misled doctors and the public about risk of addiction


                                    
                                        Whenever Ted Booker posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Be the first to know about breaking news with email alerts sent right to your inbox.

The news you need to start your day, sent weekday mornings.

The day's top 5 news headlines, sent weekday afternoons.