Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSION — The city council approved an amendment to its nepotism policy that will allow council members’ relatives to serve on advisory committees, a practice that has been ongoing in the city for years. 

BOSTON (AP) — J.D. Martinez hit his major league-leading 28th home run, Steve Pearce added a two-run shot and Eduardo Rodriguez pitched 5 2/3 innings on Monday night to lead the Boston Red Sox to a 5-0 victory over the Texas Rangers and their seventh straight win. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Authorities investigated the discovery of a grenade Friday morning, which had been found inside a dilapidated home, according to a news release.


The grenade had been discovered by a Mission Code Enforcement employee during an inspection of the home.


“Upon inspecting the interior of the residence, he discovered what appeared to be a grenade covered in a blanket and inside of a box,” the release stated. “He then recovered the item and transported it to the Mission Police Department.”

The McAllen Bomb Squad and ATF were called to the scene where they found that the grenade did not have a pin or safety lever.


The agents were able to recover the grenade without incident.


Additionally, agents responded to the home where it was found, located on 947 Adams St. There they found a second grenade but it was determined to be a dud, according to Assistant Fire Chief Robert Alvarez.

The investigation is still ongoing.


bereniceg@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Berenice Garcia posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.