Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 6:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


News organizations are pushing for the public release of data detailing the distribution of prescription opioids throughout the U.S., information that could show how drug manufacturers and distributors contributed to the nation's addiction and overdose crisis. 

LONDON — It’s Serena Williams … and everybody else. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Last week, at its convention in New Orleans, the American Library Association announced that it was dropping Laura Ingalls Wilder’s name from the prestigious children’s literature award that was created in her honor in 1954, three years before her death. The award “recognizes authors and ill…

The McAllen Fire Station No. 2.

The McAllen Community Garden next to Fire Station No. 2 on North Main Street in McAllen.

The McAllen Fire Station No. 2.

The McAllen Community Garden next to Fire Station No. 2 on North Main Street in McAllen.

This story was updated to correct information about the impact the bond will have on McAllen taxpayers, which will be an increase of four tenths of a penny.

McALLEN — The first steps in building a new parks and recreation building and Fire Station No. 2 are underway.


City Commissioners voted unanimously Monday, with District 1 Commissioner Richard Cortez absent, to begin the process of selling bonds to pay for a new parks building and new Fire Station No. 2, which sits next to the popular community garden at the intersection of North Main Street and Harvey Avenue.


The city’s financial adviser said at Monday’s commission meeting that the city will now advertise a notice of intent to issue the bonds, which the commission voted will not exceed $6 million. City Manager Roel “Roy” Rodriguez said he’s hoping to only spend $5 to $5.5 million on the two projects.

The city will receive the bond funds in February, Rodriguez said. The impact on McAllen taxpayers is an increase of four tenths of a penny, according to Rodriguez.


While city officials have stated the importance of rebuilding Fire Station No. 2, the community garden which sets next to the station is a unique asset to the city, District 5 Commissioner John Ingram has said. Ingram also played a part in starting the garden nearly 10 years ago.


A campaign has been underway to preserve the garden, as the new station could possibly cause the removal of some trees and gardening slots.


When the bond project was first discussed earlier this fall, Ingram, who represents the district, was firm about protecting the garden, which Rodriguez assured Ingram would happen.


“I think all components of that site will be impacted,” Rodriguez said Tuesday. “But the garden is important and we want it there.”

The current parks and recreation building has suffered an unwelcome invasion rodents, leaks and a staff evacuation was prompted by the conditions in July. Rodriguez once called the building “terrible.”


Two other bond projects will likely go to McAllen voters in May: drainage upgrades and traffic improvements. The two items would likely total in the $25 million range, but city commissioners will not decide whether to hold that May bond election until January.


mferman@themonitor.com



On Dec. 11, 2017, the McAllen City Council voted to give a conditional use permit to build a new Fire Station No. 2, but did not vote on the l…


                                    
                                        Whenever Mitchell Ferman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.