Scattered clouds with the possibility of an isolated thunderstorm developing this afternoon. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Some clouds. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 6:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


LOS ANGELES — A California federal judge on Monday rejected the Trump administration's efforts to detain immigrant families for long terms, calling it a "cynical attempt" to undo a longstanding court settlement. 

NBA 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

President Johnson kneels down as he talks with flood victims. Photo Courtesy Museum of South Texas History

President Johnson kneels down as he talks with flood victims. Photo Courtesy Museum of South Texas History

My name is Ruben Martinez and I was working as an electrical engineer at Central Power and Light in McAllen when Hurricane Beulah hit the Valley in 1967. We had crews throughout the Valley as the storm raged.


I was assigned a crew to North McAllen and Edinburg. There were five linemen in my emergency team and we were responsible for maintaining electrical power to McAllen General Hospital during the storm. Our headquarters during those days was the Echo Hotel in Edinburg. My full crew was made up of 23 members with equipment and gear.


Two days after the storm we were working the 12 kV power lines from the North Edinburg station running along Farm-to-Market Road 1425. Our poles were not stable in rainwater saturated ground and we had found seven cows electrocuted in the area. As a precaution I parked my CPL vehicle across FM 1425 to prevent any thru traffic from danger. I received a radio dispatch from our San Benito communications center alerting us that the president of the United States Lyndon Baines Johnson was inspecting damages in the area.

A few hours later a motorcade neared my car and I informed them they could not drive through since the unstable power lines posed a safety threat. At that point several members of the group got out of their cars. Congressman Kika de la Garza recognized me as he got closer. I had met the Congressman through his brother Roberto when he worked for IBM Mexico in Monterrey and I was a student at Tecnologico de Monterrey.


President Johnson approached me and asked how we were doing. I answered that we were having difficulty keeping our electrical poles upright due to the rain saturated ground and the safety concern was real.


The president gave me a handshake as the congressman introduced us. I was impressed by his height, his strong Texas accent and his imposing personality. I mentioned we needed Bell Telephone to secure their lines and he requested that on the spot. Needless to say, a few hours later several of their crews were doing just that. The president and his entourage boarded their cars and turned back to continue their tour.

Hurricane Beulah brought destruction and damage to our region. It also brought out the best in all those that worked hard to return normalcy back to our beloved Rio Grande Valley. Although under difficult circumstances, it afforded me the opportunity to meet President Lyndon B. Johnson.


— Ruben P. Martinez Calderoni, Brownsville

