Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSOULA, Mont. — A man told investigators he left a 5-month-old baby boy in the woods after a weekend car crash because the baby was very heavy, court records said. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Children run through the snow as it fell at Morris Middle school Friday, Dec 8, 2017, in McAllen.

A mail box is dusted with snow on Friday, Dec. 8, 2017, in McAllen.

A vehicle drives through a snow storm along Mccoll Blvd. Friday, Dec 8, 2017, in McAllen.

Children run through the snow as it fell at Morris Middle school Friday, Dec 8, 2017, in McAllen.

McALLEN — In terms of snowfalls, what visited the Rio Grande Valley on Friday was merely a dusting. But the late morning flurry, coming during the morning rush hour, energized Valley residents enough to prompt one of them on social media to declare it the Blizzard of 2017.


And, as should be expected with the rare appearance of snow that was at the front edge of a massive winter storm that pushed across the southern United States, residents of the RGV took full advantage of its first snow day since December of 2004.


Children — many who had never seen the white stuff before in their lives — could be seen frolicking in fields while adults reverted to childhood as they stood for selfies in the midst of the flurries.

Officially, the accumulation of snow was so slight that weather officials couldn’t measure it, although they reported that in the northern parts of Hidalgo County they expected up to an inch of snow before it tapered off during the lunch hour, said Tim Speece, meteorologist for the National Weather Service.


A mail box is dusted with snow on Friday, Dec. 8, 2017, in McAllen.

The snowfall capped off a week of wintry weather and extended from Starr to Cameron counties during the overnight hours on Thursday. The only remnant of the winter storm in the Valley, aside from a snowman or two, was expected to be colder temperatures.


“That’s the next thing we’re turning our attention toward," said Speece. “We’re going be seeing temperatures drop quite a bit tonight; there’s not much of a warmup.”


Speece said overnight temperatures on Friday were projected to hover in the 30s, causing potential problems for freezing roads on bridges and overpasses. But by Saturday a warming trend was expected to overtake the weekend and temperatures were projected to reach the 60s and even into the 70s by the new work week on Monday.


City employees from Weslaco to McAllen to Rio Grande City were on standby in case of problems, but none were reported.


Many area school districts had already called for delayed Friday openings, but officially, there were few problems caused by the snow’s visit – except for possibly overly energized kids.


Roy Rodriguez, McAllen city manager, also reported no problems Friday.


“We’re pretty good,” he said. “We’ve got staff all over town, but there’s been no road closures.”


At the McAllen Miller International Airport, there were reports a “couple of delays” in the morning, according to Rodriguez.


A vehicle drives through a snow storm along Mccoll Blvd. Friday, Dec 8, 2017, in McAllen.

No flight delays were expected or reported for the rest of the day, Rodriguez said.


In Donna, many city workers, excluding emergency personnel, had their workday cut short. City offices closed at 3 p.m.


The McAllen Nature Center was closed Friday due to the cold and forecast precipitation. And part-time staff was excused from work as well.


Others were off because Friday was the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, said Brenda Nettles-Riojas, a spokeswoman for the Diocese of Brownsville.


Earlier Friday, the National Weather Service issued a winter storm warning until noon for Hidalgo County.


As snow fell across the Valley, the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley remained on schedule, university officials said.


The “tropical Christmas” parade went on as scheduled for Friday in Mercedes.


In Rio Grande City, the city worked with Casa de Esperanza, a community center that provides temporary shelter, to see if they had received requests from more than four families, their maximum, according to City Manager Alberto Perez


The center only received a request for shelter from one family. The city will be checking in again with Casa de Esperanza tonight.


The city experienced some drizzle and slush but hasn’t had power outages and has not received complaints about issues with their services.


Their Christmas parade also went on as planned Friday night.


The same system that impacted South Texas stretched east where snowfall was heavier and problems more pervasive.


Heavy snow fell across several Southern states Friday. Accumulations of 6 inches were reported in Mississippi and northern Georgia, while at least 5 inches fell in Alabama. Rare snow flurries were spotted in New Orleans.


The weather band also brought a rare snowfall to parts of South Texas.


“It’s the first snow of the season and any time you even mention snow in the South, you’re going to get people a little panicky,” said David Nadler, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service’s office south of Atlanta.


Temperatures were expected to sink below freezing across much of the region overnight Friday into Saturday morning, and forecasters warned that black ice could make roads treacherous. Things were expected to thaw by Saturday afternoon, with sunnier weather and highs reaching into the 40s and 50s.


In Alabama, manager Liza Snell worked the morning shift at Bertile’s Restaurant, as coffee cups and utensils clattered and regulars talked at their tables. Through the window she saw a bleak winter scene in the town of Grove Hill, about 80 miles north of Mobile.


“We got a lot of sleet right now. It’s an ugly thing — cloudy, wet and cold,” she said.

Delta Air Lines canceled 375 flights Friday through its hub at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, while Southwest Airlines canceled more than 40 flights. Both airlines prepared for the storm by having crews de-ice planes, and Delta waived fees for some passengers scheduled to fly on Friday.


Highway department officials were monitoring the elevated roadways and bridges that stretch across much of south Louisiana, warning that motorists to stay home if possible. Some highways were shut down Friday, as snow fell in cities and towns that have little experience with it.


Short, squat snowmen — some already melting by Friday afternoon — dotted yards and parks around Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Josh Black, a 30-year-old LSU graduate student, took photos of one tiny snowman outside the State Capitol building near the gravesite of former Louisiana Gov. Huey Long.


Black, who hails from the Toronto, Canada, area, chuckled about southern Louisiana’s reaction to the snow.


“They canceled school this morning, which is funny to me, for an inch of snow that is going to melt in an hour,” he said, smiling. “This is like May or October where I’m from.”


Snowfall and icy roads in North Carolina closed government offices and schools, sent cars sliding off the road and altered the governor’s travel plans.


Forecasters said heavy snow was falling in the mountainous western part of the state with up to 6 inches likely in areas including Asheville. A winter storm warning was in effect through Saturday morning for western counties.


In Alabama, Glenn Thompson said he had no trouble getting to work at a Texaco station in the northeastern town of Heflin despite snow that was still falling.


“We probably got about an inch. As long as the temperature doesn’t drop we’ll be fine,” said Thompson.


The frigid temperatures behind a cold front combined with moisture off the Gulf of Mexico to bring the weather to parts of the South. It knocked out power to thousands and caused numerous accidents along slick roadways.


Snow and sleet fell Thursday in Laredo and other communities on the Mexican border. The weather band also brought snow to San Antonio, Corpus Christi, Houston and elsewhere.


Georgia road crews took no chances ahead of Friday’s morning rush hour and pre-treated bridges and overpasses late Thursday with a briny water-and-salt mix against any snow or ice.


In southwestern Alabama, Snell took another look at the weather outside Bertile’s Restaurant where sleet had turned to snow.


“We’re getting some snowflakes now. It’s white and pretty. It just changed in a few seconds,” she said.


This report included material from the Associated Press




                                    
                                        Whenever Mitchell Ferman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.