Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 11:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) — Opponents of an initiative to split California into three states asked the state Supreme Court on Monday to pull the measure from the ballot, arguing it's too drastic a change to state government to go through the normal initiative process. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

The McAllen Fire Station No. 2.

The McAllen Fire Station No. 2.

McALLEN — Despite city commissioners voting earlier this month to build a new Fire Station No. 2, the plans have hit a snag.


A locally loved community garden sits next to the current Fire Station No. 2 at the intersection of North Main Street and Harvey Avenue. The garden is 12 years old and has grown 54 different types of vegetables, according to John Goolsby, who started the garden on his personal time, aside from his day job at his post at the United States Department of Agriculture here in the Rio Grande Valley.


While the garden has been a success, championed by District 5 Commissioner John Ingram, the prospect of a much-needed new Fire Station No. 2 has community members rallying to save it. Nearly 10 audience members, including Goolsby, wore stickers at Monday’s city commission workshop that read “McAllen deserves both,” referring to the garden and fire station. A group on Facebook seeking to preserve the garden has also reached nearly 200 followers.

Commissioners voted unanimously earlier this month, with Commissioner Richard Cortez absent, to begin the process of selling bonds to pay for a new parks and recreation building and new Fire Station No. 2. The plan was to keep the garden while building a new fire station.


The city’s financial advisor said that the city would advertise a notice of intent to issue the bonds, which the commission voted would not exceed $6 million. City Manager Roel “Roy” Rodriguez said he’s hoping to only spend $5 to $5.5 million on the two projects.


The city will receive the bond funds in February, Rodriguez said. The impact on McAllen taxpayers will be an increase of four tenths of a penny, Rodriguez added.


However, new plans have sprouted. Commissioners discussed during workshop of building a new Fire Station No. 2 in the same part of town, but closer to the nearby elementary school.


“That seems like it could work,” Ingram said after Monday’s meeting.


Mayor Jim Darling said the city will discuss the possibility with the McAllen Independent School District.


After hearing from the city’s fire chief and city engineer, Ingram admitted that if another site doesn’t work for the fire station, a new one in the current location would probably be best, and the garden would move to the park across the street.

“It would be sad to see that happen,” Ingram said. “I think they (city officials) tried to accommodate the community garden, but you don’t want to potentially have inadequate fire service 20, 30 years down the line.”


While local residents seemed to understand the pressing need for a new fire station, Goolsby said the unique location next to the fire station builds a strong sense of community.


“I think we like being by the fire station because it gives people a sense of safety,” Goolsby said. “It really gives people perspective of the real life heroes firefighters are. While we work on something we’re passionate about for so long, we see them at work literally saving lives.”


mferman@themonitor.com



On Dec. 11, 2017, the McAllen City Council voted to give a conditional use permit to build a new Fire Station No. 2, but did not vote on the l…


                                    
                                        Whenever Mitchell Ferman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.