Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

RIO GRANDE CITY — A Border Patrol pursuit ended Tuesday night here when a vehicle crashed into another car, resulting in a five-car accident that injured 17.


The accident occurred in the downtown area at San Antonio Street and Main Street a little before 5:30 p.m. after a gold Chevy Prizm that was being pursued by U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents struck a white Chevy Malibu, causing a chain reaction.


“(CPB) were not physically involved but they were involved,” said Rio Grande City Assistant Police Chief Jose Solis.

According to a statement released by CBP, “agents assigned to the Rio Grande City Border Patrol Station encountered a vehicle suspected of smuggling illegal immigrants. The driver of the vehicle collided with several stationary vehicles …”


Solis said the Prizm allegedly picked up undocumented migrants on the west side of the city.


Eleven people were taken to Starr County Memorial Hospital, he said, and all six people in the Prizm were transported to a McAllen hospital, including a child who was airlifted.

The accident is under investigation by Rio Grande City Police and Homeland Security Investigations.


msmith@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.