


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Zynia Chapman, 23, was arrested on suspicion of first-degree murder after police said she stabbed her boyfriend to death.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Zynia Chapman Initial Court Appearance on January 15, 2018
    

Zynia Chapman
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A woman detained on a freeway overpass is now suspected of first-degree murder after investigators say they found a journal entry detailing how she was going to kill her boyfriend and herself, according to court documents.


Police were called to the Loop 101 freeway at 23rd Avenue Sunday morning after a woman was seen attempting to jump, according to a statement in a court document released Tuesday.


Department of Public Safety and Phoenix officers detained Zynia Chapman, 23. Officers said she later told them she had killed her boyfriend on Saturday night, according to the court document. 


Officials said when they arrived at Chapman's apartment near 19th and Glendale avenues, they found the body of a 25-year-old man. His name had not been released.


Court documents state that Chapman lived with her boyfriend in the 1800 block of West Ocotillo Road. When he got home from work shortly after 11 p.m. Saturday, she stabbed him repeatedly, officials allege in a court document. He died of his injuries. Chapman cut her own neck, giving herself superficial injuries, the document said.            .


In a search of the home,  investigators found a journal entry dated "January 12, 2018," that appeared to detail Chapman's plan to murder her boyfriend and kill herself, the document said. 


Chapman was transported to a hospital for treatment of non-life threatening injuries and was booked on Monday on suspicion of premeditated first-degree murder, according to court documents. 


She was being held in a Maricopa County jail on $1 million bond. Her next court appearance is set for Jan. 22.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.