


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

According to police records, the man arrested on suspicion of fatally stabbing a stranger at a Circle K had called 911 beforehand.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Ysidro Ramon Reyes
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A suspect in the fatal stabbing of a man at a Phoenix convenience store called 911 beforehand and warned police he was planning on hurting someone, court records show.


Ysidro Reyes, 37, was being held Wednesday in a Maricopa County jail on suspicion of first-degree murder. A court commissioner set his bond at $1 million.


Police said in court records that Reyes called 911 just after 2:30 a.m. Tuesday morning.


"The caller stated he was really pissed off, had issues with police and would attack them or he was going to go look for someone and hurt them," according to a probable cause statement.


At the time of the 911 call, Reyes did not state his name. 


Within 30 minutes and about a block away, police were called to a Circle K at Cave Creek Road and Peoria Avenue where a man had been stabbed. 



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Police said surveillance video shows Reyes entering the store, walking up to the man from behind and stabbing him in the neck. Police said the man, identified only as a 54-year-old, died at a hospital.


Shortly after, police received a call from someone who said that their neighbor had just confessed to stabbing someone in the neck at Circle K. The caller identified the neighbor as Reyes, court records show.


At Reyes' apartment, police said they found a white sweater with blood on it, which matched the clothing of the attacker in the surveillance video. Reyes also appeared to have blood on his hands and shoes. 


Reyes' next court appearance is Feb. 20. 


READ MORE:


Arizona couple fall in love again after husband loses memory


Feds: Pennsylvania-convicted child-sex trafficker hid out in Flagstaff


Jodi Arias prosecutor manipulated women to get juror info, complaint alleges
