


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Alyssa Pettibone of Buckeye, who is accused of shooting and killing her 2-year-old son, tried to shoot herself but the gun jammed, court records show.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Go inside the Phoenix Fire Department 911 call center to learn about what's going on when you call 911 in the Phoenix metro area. Hannah Gaber/azcentral.com
    

Alyssa Pettibone
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A 26-year-old woman accused of fatally shooting her toddler stabbed herself multiple times after the gun she turned on herself had jammed, Buckeye police say in court records.


Alyssa Pettibone was booked Monday into a Maricopa County jail on suspicion of second-degree murder upon her release from a hospital. The wounds to her neck were evident in her mugshot.


Officers encountered a bloody scene when they entered Pettibone's Buckeye home on Friday, court records show. 


Buckeye police received a call around 4 p.m. Friday from the woman's mother, who told police that Pettibone had shot her 2-year-old son, Hudson Pettibone, and tried to kill herself, records show.


Officers arrived at the residence near Pima Street and 230th Avenue to find the toddler, deceased on a bathroom floor near a 9 mm. handgun. Pettibone was also lying on the floor, bleeding from her neck.


When officers inspected the gun, they found a round in the magazine that had been loaded backward, causing the gun to jam and not fire again, according to the court records. Pettibone's mother told police that, before her daughter stabbed herself multiple times, she held the gun to her head, records show.


Pettibone would later state that she "shot her baby, and tried to kill herself," records show one officer as saying.


When police interviewed her, Pettibone said she was sorry and that she knew she was in "deep, deep, deep," and then, "No one would understand I..."


Police said in the report that Pettibone exhibited "control/ownership/jealousy issues" and there were indications that she was mentally disturbed.


A judge set Pettibone's bond at $750,000. Her next court appearance is scheduled for 8:30 a.m. Dec. 22 in Maricopa County Superior Court.


READ MORE:


Phoenix police extend landfill search for missing mom by 3 weeks


Arizona livestock officers to carry opioid overdose treatment


Arizona death row comes out of solitary, giving convicts more human contact, socialization
