


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Here's a roundup of the 17 most shocking or unnerving Arizona stories of 2017.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Former Mesa police Officer Philip "Mitch" Brailsford is on the stand during his second-degree murder trial on Nov. 29, 2017, at Maricopa County Superior Court in Phoenix.
(Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

2017 closed the books on some of the Valley's most notorious crime cases of recent years.


It brought death sentences for a husband and wife for the disturbing murder of Ame Deal; the arrest of a suspected serial killer, and acquittal for one of the only Arizona police officers in recent history to be charged with murder in an on-duty shooting.


It also marked the end of the Joe Arpaio era, the former longtime sheriff whose immigration-based policies cost the county millions of dollars in legal fees. In the past 12 months, Arpaio's internationally famous Tent City jail was shuttered, his policies on immigration holds were reversed, and the lawman himself was convicted of contempt of court — then pardoned by President Donald Trump.


Here's a roundup of the 17 most shocking, heartbreaking or otherwise noteworthy Arizona public safety stories of 2017.


Eric Falbe, his wife, Carrie, and his daughters, Victoria (Tori) and Skylar, on his wedding day. All four died when their small plane headed to Telluride, Colorado, from Scottsdale crashed north of Payson on Jan. 2, 2017. (Photo: Michael Maledon/Special for The Republic)

Family of 4 dead after plane bound for Telluride, Colorado, from Scottsdale crashes north of Payson


A Scottsdale attorney, his wife and the attorney’s two daughters were killed when their small plane bound for Telluride, Colorado, crashed near Payson.


The family was identified as 44-year-old Eric Falbe; his wife, 31-year-old Carrie Falbe; and their daughters, 14-year-old Victoria Falbe and 12-year-old Skylar Falbe.


⚫ ⚫ ⚫


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Good Samaritan shoots, kills man who wounded Arizona DPS trooper in struggle


In the early morning hours of Jan. 12, Thomas Yoxall was driving to California with his fiancee on Interstate 10 when he pulled over just west of Tonopah because of a disturbing scene: A man was pounding a DPS trooper’s head into the pavement.


The man had already shot and injured Trooper Edward Andersson and looked intent on finishing the job. While Yoxall’s fiancee called for help, Yoxall retrieved his own gun from his car and shot and killed Andersson’s attacker, Leonard Penuelas-Escobar.


Andersson recovered from his injuries, and later said he “probably wouldn’t be here” if it weren't for Yoxall’s actions.



    Guadalupe García de Rayos reunites with her children in Nogales, Mexico. The Mesa mother found herself at the epicenter of the national debate over immigration enforcement after she was taken into custody during a routine ICE check-in.
    

Mesa mother deported under Trump’s order to deport immigrants convicted of any crime


Mesa mother Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos found herself at the center of a national immigration debate in February, when she became perhaps the first person deported under Trump’s Jan. 25 executive order.


The order called for federal authorities to deport immigrants without legal status who had been convicted of any crime, not just serious crimes.


Garcia de Rayos’ felony conviction stemmed from a work-site raid conducted in 2008 by then-Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio.


⚫ ⚫ ⚫


Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers arrest foreign nationals Tuesday during a targeted  operation in Los Angeles on Feb. 7, 2017. (Photo: AP)

Maricopa County jails will no longer detain people flagged by federal authorities for ICE


In the first major departure from his predecessor’s administration, new Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone announced that his jails would no longer honor “courtesy holds” for federal immigration agents.


Former Sheriff Joe Arpaio, who made his name as an immigration hard-liner, would detain migrants for federal authorities up to 48 hours after the person otherwise would have been released. The change in policy came in response to a lawsuit that challenged the holds as unconstitutional.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Phoenix police name Aaron Juan Saucedo as a suspect in the 'Serial Street Shooter' case


After weeks of speculation, Phoenix police officially named 23-year-old Aaron Saucedo as their suspect in the “Serial Street Shooter” case.


Saucedo is accused of 12 attacks and nine murders between 2015 and 2016. Many of the victims were shot just outside their homes in the Maryvale area, with some shootings in central and east Phoenix as well.


⚫ ⚫ ⚫



    Long lines formed at Comicon due to the props ban and added security after a man was arrested with real weapons at the convention Thursday.  Tom Tingle/ azcentral.com
    

Man with 4 guns, knife arrested at Phoenix Comicon


Phoenix police arrested Mathew Sterling at Phoenix Comicon after the 31-year-old wrote to a woman about his plans to have a shootout with police.


Sterling was found carrying an arsenal, including two 45-caliber handguns, a .454-caliber handgun, and a 12-gauge shotgun, all fully loaded; a combat knife; pepper spray; and throwing stars.


The arrest prompted festival organizers to ban prop-weapons, a move that disappointed many of those with elaborate costumes.


⚫ ⚫ ⚫



    The Republic public safety reporter Megan Cassidy helps clarify some of the persistent confusion related to murders that took place in Yuma in 2005.
    

Preston Strong sentenced to death for La Mesa Street murders


In June 2005, four children and two adults were killed in small home on La Mesa Street in Yuma. For years, the crime went unsolved, and no one could fathom a motive to kill Luis Rios, his girlfriend, Adrienne Heredia, and her four children. But police eventually focused their investigation on Preston Strong, Rios’s best friend.


Though Strong looked nothing like the witness’s accounts of the suspect, Strong was convicted through largely circumstantial evidence.


He was later sentenced to death.


⚫ ⚫ ⚫


The last photo of Karli and Kelsey Richardson taken before they died in a car crash on April 14, 2017. (Photo: Kyle Kercher/Special for The Republic)

Three college students killed in wrong-way crash on I-17


Three Grand Canyon University students were killed in a wrong-way crash on Interstate 17 in Phoenix.


The wrong-way driver, 21-year-old Keaton Allison, was found to have a blood-alcohol level three times the legal limit. The sisters who were killed, 18-year-old Kelsey Richardson and 20-year-old Karli Richardson, did not have any drugs or alcohol in their systems.


The crash came amid state efforts to better thwart wrong-way drivers and to alert other drivers of their presence.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Payson flash flood kills 10 members of a Phoenix family


A family of 10 was killed in July after what was described as a “40-foot-wide black wave" of rainwater, mud and debris crashed into a swimming hole near Payson.


All of the victims were from Phoenix and were at the swimming hole to celebrate the birthday of one of the victims. The flash flood stemmed from a thunderstorm that hit about eight miles upstream along Ellison Creek.


The body of the 10th victim was discovered five days later.



    Republic reporters Yvonne Wingett Sanchez and Michael Kiefer talk to former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio in his home the night of his pardoning by President Donald Trump. Patrick Breen/azcentral.com
    

Former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio guilty of criminal contempt; pardoned by Trump


July 31 was the day for which civil-rights activists had waited years. Former sheriff and immigration hard-liner Joe Arpaio was found guilty of criminal contempt of court after defying a federal judge’s orders to stop his immigration patrols.


Weeks later, it was Arpaio’s turn to celebrate. Trump granted Arpaio his first presidential pardon, allowing the former lawman to avoid sentencing of what could have been up to six months in jail.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Police disperse Trump protest crowd with pepper spray outside rally in Phoenix


What began as a largely peaceful demonstration ended in chaos as Phoenix police pepper-sprayed thousands who had gathered to protest Trump.


Police said a small group of protesters, many identifying as the radical left-wing “antifa,” had provoked the officers in riot gear.


Many community members said they believed the police response was excessive.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Arizona’s first husband/wife couple on death row


Both Sammantha and John Allen were sentenced to death for the 2011 murder of 10-year-old Ame Deal.


The two were arrested in July 2011 after Sammantha's cousin Ame was found at their Phoenix home dead in a plastic box in which they had locked her as punishment for stealing a Popsicle.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Glendale teacher found dead after bailing out man from Flagstaff jail


Glendale kindergarten teacher Cathryn Gorospe disappeared soon after bailing Charlie Malzahn out of a Flagstaff jail Oct. 6.


Her remains were discovered a week later, and officials said she was stabbed to death.


Malzahn has been named as a suspect in her murder but has yet to be officially charged.


⚫ ⚫ ⚫



    This is how Phoenix police will search SR 85 Landfill for Christine Mustafa's remains. The Phoenix woman has been missing since May 10. Carly Henry/The Arizona Republic
    

Police begin searching Phoenix landfill for missing Phoenix mom


In October, Phoenix police began the daunting task of searching for missing Phoenix mom Christine Mustafa in a Buckeye landfill.


Mustafa has been missing since May 10, and her boyfriend, Robert John Interval Jr., has been charged with murder.


As of mid-December, police have yet to locate Mustafa’s remains.


⚫ ⚫ ⚫


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Maricopa County's Tent City jail officially shut down


Tent City, Maricopa County’s infamous outdoor jail, quietly closed in October, fulfilling a promise of new Sheriff Paul Penzone.


The jail was the brainchild of Penzone’s predecessor, Joe Arpaio, who used the facility to burnish his tough-on-crime image.


In recent years, the jail sat almost empty yet cost taxpayers millions to remain open.


Penzone said closing the facility would save approximately $4.5 million annually.


Scottsdale police are investigating a shooting involving "multiple subjects" near Thunderbird Road and Frank Lloyd Wright Boulevard on Nov. 10, 2017. (Photo: Chris McCrory/The Republic)

Scottsdale family of four dead in apparent murder-suicide


In early November, Jason Fairbanks, 39, shot and killed his wife and children in their home near Frank Lloyd Wright Boulevard and Thunderbird Road before turning the gun on himself, police said.


Fairbanks’s wife, Annie, was 39; their daughter was 3; and their son was 9 months old. Police said the couple had been experiencing financial struggles.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Former Mesa police officer found not guilty in fatal on-duty shooting of an unarmed Texas man


A Maricopa County jury in December found former Mesa police Officer Philip "Mitch" Brailsford not guilty of second-degree murder charges in the 2016 shooting of an unarmed Texas man who was on his knees begging for his life.


Brailsford was one of two officers in Arizona since 2005 who had been charged with murder in connection with an on-duty shooting.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.