


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Sgt. Steve Chervenak's wife was killed and 11-year-old daughter injured after being struck by a man in a pickup truck Nov. 29.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Amy Chervenak
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A charity motorcycle ride and fundraiser on Sunday will support funeral, hospital and rehabilitation costs for the family of a deputy sergeant with the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office. 


Sgt. Steve Chervenak's  wife, Amy, and their 11-year-old daughter were randomly attacked by a man in a pickup truck while they were grabbing the mail on Nov. 29. 


Amy Chervenak, 47, died from her injuries. Their daughter suffered serious injuries that will require long recovery time after extensive surgery, according to the family's GoFundMe.


The Sheriff's Office is participating in the ride Sunday, to be hosted by Ride AZ Promotions.


It is a free event, and donations for the family will be accepted. The fundraiser begins 10 a.m. at Desert Ridge Sandbar Mexican Grill, 21001 N. Tatum Blvd., Phoenix.


After 1 p.m., motorcyclists will ride from Desert Ridge Sandbar to the Hideaway Grill in Cave Creek to hold a charity raffle and auction that will end at 5 p.m. Hideaway Grill is at 6746 E. Cave Creek Road, Cave Creek.


The GoFundMe said Steve Chervenak has been with the Sheriff's Office since 2007. 


"He has a long road ahead of him piecing life back together the best he can, while coping through the pain which has befallen the entire family," wrote Christopher Pittmann, host of the GoFundMe campaign. 
The campaign was started by Chervenak's friends and co-workers, and the family granted permission for the campaign prior to its launch.


The suspected pickup driver, 45-year-old Trent Garrett Ferree of Mesa, was charged with first-degree murder and attempted first-degree murder and was being held in a Maricopa County jail on $1 million bond. He has pleaded not guilty to the charges.


READ MORE:


Penzone's first year: Shedding the Arpaio legacy in Sheriff's Office


Motorcyclist killed in Scottsdale crash involving car


Opioid overdoses killed 716 people in Arizona in 6-month span, tracking effort shows
