


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Phoenix woman located this week after having been reported missing with a 3-year-old boy is now facing child abuse charges.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Taquila Marie Mejia Wilson
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Phoenix woman who had been reported missing earlier this month along with a 3-year-old boy now faces child-abuse charges in the case, court documents show.


Taquila Marie Mejia Wilson, 21, was arrested Thursday on suspicion of one count of child abuse in connection with injuries to the toddler.


Investigators said in court documents that police were alerted Oct. 20 to possible abuse and were provided with photos that appeared to show injuries covering most of the child's body.


Police issued a bulletin Wednesday asking the public to help find Wilson and the boy, who family members said had gone missing nearly two weeks prior. They were located Thursday.


Also Thursday, the boy was examined by the staff of Phoenix Children's Hospital. The staff reported that the child suffered from cauliflower ear, a deformity sometimes caused by blunt trauma, and injuries to his back, thighs and abdomen, court records show.


Authorities believe the injuries were caused by belts, shoes and clothes hangers.


Wilson was taken into custody, and investigators say she acknowledged physically harming the child, citing abundant stress in her life, court documents show.


Wilson was being held without bond Friday in a Maricopa County jail. A judge declined to set a bond amount for Wilson because she had been on release in connection with a June incident in which she was charged with possession of dangerous drugs, drug paraphernalia and narcotics, records show.


Her next court appearance is set for 8:30 a.m. Nov. 7 in Maricopa County Superior Court.


READ MORE: 


Jury sees video of ex-Mesa officer shooting man


Candidate for AZ Senate charged with assault
