


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Inmates at several MCSO detention facilities are going on a three-day hunger strike to protest the quality and frequency of the food they are serving.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Some inmates in a Maricopa County jail are going on a three-day hunger strike beginning Oct. 31, 2017, to protest the food served in the jails.
(Photo: The Republic)

Some inmates at Maricopa County jails are going on a three-day hunger strike to protest the quality and frequency of the food they are served, according to a Phoenix activist.


There have been complaints for years about the food served at the jails overseen by the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office, primarily under the previous sheriff, Joe Arpaio.


However, Sheriff Paul Penzone has continued the same food policies as his predecessor, said activist Salvadore Reza on Tuesday at a press conference with other inmate supporters in front of the Durango Courthouse building, next to Estrella Jail in Phoenix.


"Penzone claims they are receiving their calories. Well, that's the same thing Arpaio claimed," said Reza.


"The thing is, why can't you show them what you are feeding them?" Reza said, adding that under law, the inmates are required at least 2,400 calories a day.


Inmates are being fed only twice a day, Reza said.


In those meals, small portions of breads, meat and soups are ground together in a sloppy paste for inmates to consume, he said.


Reza and the inmates at the facilities believe this is to hide the fact that officials are severely underfeeding the jail populace.


Arpaio often boasted about the low cost of the twice-daily meals he served at the jails.


The strike, which Reza said will extend through Thursday, is aimed at making sure the food for Maricopa County Sheriff's Office facilities is adequate.


"They are human beings and not animals," Reza said. "They are there to be rehabilitated, not to be starved." 


A Maricopa County Sheriff's Office spokesman said the office is aware of the possible food strikes in their detention facilities, but has not experienced many inmates participating.


"Only one pod in one jail has refused one meal today," said Sgt. Calbert Gillett Tuesday. "This is 0.006% of our inmate population." 


Officials will continue to monitor the situation, Gillett said, adding care of the inmates is a priority.


READ MORE:


Could one checkbox at Maricopa County jails avert hundreds of arrests?


Maricopa County's Tent City jail officially shut down


Sheriff Joe Arpaio has always done it his way


Arpaio will begin charging inmates for meals
