


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Security worker was able to flash emergency lights on truck, DPS says.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Dallas Jozwick
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A 23-year-old woman was arrested early Friday on suspicion of drunken driving after she was stopped by an alert motorist as she was driving the wrong way on Interstate 10, the Arizona Department of Public Safety said.


DPS said it received several reports about 12:15 a.m. of a white vehicle driving west in the eastbound lanes of U.S. 60 at Mill Avenue in Tempe.


As troopers were responding to the area, additional reports came in saying the vehicle had taken the transition ramp from U.S. 60 onto Interstate 10 and now was driving west in the eastbound lanes of that freeway, DPS said.


The vehicle was in the HOV lane when it was approached by an eastbound vehicle driven by a worker who was on duty for a security company, DPS said. That driver activated emergency lights on the security vehicle, which caused the driver of the wrong-way vehicle to stop as troopers were arriving, DPS said.


The driver of the wrong-way vehicle was identified as Dallas Jozwick of Phoenix, DPS said.


She was arrested and booked into Maricopa County jail on one count of driving while under the influence. Additional charges could be sought, DPS said.


READ MORE:5 Arizona bills that could affect how you driveWhy clearing freeway wrecks takes so longShould all drivers who cause fatal car accidents be drug tested?



    There are five bills working their way through the Arizona Legislature that could affect Arizona drivers.
    Wochit

 
