


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Marcos Martinez, 23, was arrested on Tuesday on suspicion of killing his grandmother, Maricopa police said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Marcos Martinez
(Photo: Maricopa Police Department)

Maricopa police arrested a man on Tuesday suspected of killing his grandmother.


Marcos Martinez, 23, was found in an industrial area of Chandler about 1 a.m., police said.


Officers found Martinez in a stolen 2016 Honda CR-V that belonged to his grandmother. 


Officers were called to the 42000 block of West Bunker Drive on Sunday night after a man arrived home after work to find his wife dead in the kitchen, police said. 


After an autopsy by the Pinal County Medical Examiner's Office, detectives classified the death as a homicide but did not specify how the woman died, said a statement released by the Maricopa Police Department on Monday.


The woman was identified by officials on Tuesday as 62-year-old Vicky TenHoven.


Police said they found enough physical and biological evidence on Martinez and in the vehicle to establish probable cause to arrest him on suspicion of second-degree murder.


The Maricopa Police Department said Martinez was booked into the Maricopa County Fourth Avenue Jail in Phoenix and is awaiting extradition to Pinal County.


READ MORE:


Police: Person of interest sought in Maricopa homicide


Woman arrested in death of 91-year-old father


Businessman spent $7.3M in employees' tax withholdings on cars, homes, travel
