


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Billy Wayne West Jr. is being held in a Maricopa County jail on suspicion of first-degree murder in the death of tow-truck driver Alfredo Palencia.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Billy Wayne West Jr.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Phoenix police have arrested a 27-year-old man in connection with the fatal shooting of a tow-truck driver on Friday night.


Billy Wayne West Jr. was being held Monday in a Maricopa County jail on suspicion of first-degree murder. His bond was set at $750,000.


Police said 26-year-old Alfredo Palencia was in the process of towing a vehicle from an apartment complex near 32nd and Hubbell streets Friday night when he was shot dead. The shooter fled the scene.


An anonymous caller reported to police that they had heard a verbal argument between five people near the entrance of the apartment complex.


The caller also stated that they believed the argument was over a vehicle being towed and reported hearing one gunshot.


MORE: Police: Man fatally shot tow-truck driver at Phoenix apartment complex


During the investigation, police said they located surveillance camera footage capturing a woman walking down a stairwell with West following behind.


The footage shows West removing a handgun from his waistband with his right hand and then aiming the weapon at the driver's side of the tow truck, according to police.


When the tow truck stops, West is shown behind the truck trying to work the controls and release the Ford Expedition that Palencia had been towing, police said.


According to police Sgt. Jonathan Howard, the vehicle belonged to a friend that West had been partying with that night.


Police records show that two of West's children stated to police that they were at a birthday party for a family member when the tow truck showed up for the white Ford Expedition. Both children said they witnessed West shoot the driver in the head and then leave the area, according to police records.


West later agreed to meet with investigators. Police records show he claimed to have been drinking and did not remember anything from the night before.


West's first court appearance is scheduled for Oct. 16, 2017.


READ MORE:


DPS: 1 arrested, 1 dead after fatal crash on I-17 in Phoenix


Phoenix police arrest 3 suspected of robbery spree


Police investigating Glendale bank robbery
