


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Cave Creek resident Connie Eskelson is being held with bond set at $1 million after her arrest on an attempted-murder charge.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Connie Eskelson
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The husband of Connie Eskelson, a Cave Creek woman accused of trying to kill the man by poisoning his drinks with an antifreeze chemical, said he remains fearful for his life, according to Maricopa County court records.


"I firmly believe that my wife of 34 years tried to kill me with ethylene glycol," Randy Eskelson said in a statement included in court records released Friday, referring to the poisonous chemical that authorities had found in his system. "There is proof that it was bought by her and proof that it was delivered to our home."


Randy Esklelson did not shed light on a motive for why his wife, Connie, 66, would try to harm him. The man said he believes his wife, who was in custody Friday, would kill him if released and accused her of having hidden a firearm, according to court records.


“I honestly fear for my life," Randy Eskelson said. "She stated many times that she would shoot herself, kill herself before she would spend one day in prison."


RELATED: Woman accused of tainting husband's drinks with antifreeze chemical


On Aug. 21, 2017, Connie Eskelson told authorities she had found her husband unconscious, officials said. He was taken to a hospital and authorities later found a potentially lethal dose of ethylene glycol, an active ingredient in antifreeze, in his system, according to the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office.


Randy Eskelson had no brain activity at that time, but eventually made a full recovery, according to the Sheriff's Office.



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Homicide detectives who took over the case identified several purchases made by Connie Eskelson for "lab-grade'' ethylene glycol.


Detectives believe Eskelson tainted drinks her husband consumed "on a daily basis" with the substance, officials said.


Officers arrested Connie Eskelson on Thursday at her residence in the 40100 block of North 50th Street in Cave Creek after a grand jury indicted her Wednesday for one count of attempted first-degree murder, the Sheriff's Office said..


She is facing a charge of attempted first-degree premeditated murder and was booked into a county jail with bond set at $1 million.


Connie Eskelson has been deemed a flight risk, according to a probable-cause statement submitted to a court by the Sheriff's Office. Officials discovered four different aliases she had been using, records say.


Connie Eskelson will appear in Maricopa County Superior Court for arraignment March 15.


READ MORE:


A step-by-step look at Rebecca Zahau's bizarre death


Body found may be that of missing Phoenix mom; ex-boyfriend arrested


Serial-killing suspect Cleophus Cooksey Jr. pleads not guilty to 10 murders


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
