


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A federal judge  denied former Sheriff Joe Arpaio's request to vacate his criminal contempt conviction after he was pardoned by President Trump.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio with his pardon from President Donald Trump on Aug. 25, 2017.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

U.S. District Judge Susan Bolton on Thursday denied former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio's request to vacate his criminal contempt conviction after he was pardoned by President Donald Trump. 


In her ruling, Bolton said while Trump's pardon "undoubtedly spared Defendant from any punishment that might otherwise have been imposed. It did not, however, 'revise the historical facts' of this case." 


Bolton found Arpaio guilty of criminal contempt in July, saying the former lawman showed “flagrant disregard” for another federal judge’s order that halted his signature immigration roundups on grounds his department was racially profiling people.


Trump pardoned his political ally weeks later. The move effectively canceled Arpaio's scheduled sentencing hearing, but defense attorneys additionally asked that Bolton's verdict be scrubbed from the record. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Arpaio's pardon was issued before a sentence was imposed. Defense attorneys likened his case to that of Archie Schaffer III's, who was pardoned of his corruption-based conviction by President Bill Clinton.


Because Schaffer was appealing his conviction at the time of the pardon, a D.C. circuit court vacated the verdict. 


"The President’s pardon moots the case, and it warrants an automatic vacatur of all opinions, judgments, and verdicts related to the criminal charge," Arpaio's attorneys said in their Aug. 28 motion. 


Prosecutors from the Department of Justice agreed with their former adversaries and doubled down on this assertion even after a challenge from Bolton. 


Bolton acknowledged the Schaffer argument in her ruling but said it wasn't comparable to the case at hand. 


ROBERTS: Pardon, schmardon. Joe Arpaio's criminal conviction stands


Not only was the Schaffer case on appeal, she said, but the district court had ordered a new trial and the prosecutor had appealed. 


"The legal question of Schaffer’s guilt was never reached," Bolton said. "This was due not only to the pendency of an appeal when the pardon was issued, but also to the unique procedural posture of the case at that time."


Jack Wilenchik, one of Arpaio's attorneys, said they would challenge Bolton's decision and likely appeal to the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.


Though Arpaio will not be penalized for this case, Wilenchik said the conviction could hypothetically be used against him in future legal proceedings. 


"At this point what the court has to do is undo it all," Wilenchik. "It's not saying he’s innocent, not saying he’s guilty, it’s really just a procedural right he’s entitled to."


Cecillia Wang, deputy legal director at the American Civil Liberties Union and plaintiffs' attorney in the underlying racial-profiling case, said Bolton's order "gets it exactly right." 


"The court made detailed findings after a bench trial about Joe Arpaio's criminal conduct," Wang said. "The court’s findings and documents in the record of the case should stand and now will stand."


As a practical matter, Wang said Arpaio's conviction should remain on the books for public knowledge and to serve as a deterrent for future criminal actions by Arpaio or other law-enforcement officials. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Earlier this week, a group of constitutional attorneys asked Bolton to appoint a private prosecutor to appeal her earlier ruling that the pardon is valid.


Ian Bassin, Protect Democracy’s executive director and a former associate White House counsel to President Barack Obama, said Arpaio's motion was an overreach. 


"The pardon itself was also an overreach which trampled on the rest of the Constitution," he said in a statement. "With an authoritarian President trying to expand the bounds of his Presidential power, it's critical for the country that these issues be heard by higher courts and we hope Judge Bolton appoints a private attorney as the rules provide to allow for that." 


READ MORE: 


Former Sheriff Joe Arpaio's presidential pardon accepted by federal judge


Maricopa County's Tent City jail officially shut down


Poll: Arizonans oppose Joe Arpaio pardon; ex-sheriff says he hasn't been invited to rally
