


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Richard Hamilton is accused of negligent homicide.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Richard Louis Hamilton appears before a court commissioner on April 20, 2018.  Bond was set at $50,000.
    

Richard Hamilton
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Phoenix father was arrested on suspicion of negligent homicide after police say he ran over his 21-month-old son with a truck Thursday evening. 


Richard Hamilton, 49, had been moving a truck at 5:50 p.m. on his property near 25th and Augusta avenues and told officers he didn't know the boy had gotten close to the vehicle.


Hamilton stopped the truck when he felt a bump under the tire, according to a police statement. 


A neighbor told police they had seen Hamilton playing with the child in the front yard before the crash, according to the probable cause statement submitted to a court by Phoenix police.


Little Samuel Hamilton was taken to a hospital, where he was later pronounced dead.


Hamilton told police he had been driving the truck, but he claimed he hadn't had anything to drink other than a half pint of vodka the night before, the court document said. 


He refused a field sobriety test, but police said he had bloodshot eyes and smelled of alcohol, the court statement said. 


A broken beer bottle was found feet away from the back of the truck and liquid was splashed onto the driver side rear tire, the report said. Glass fragments were also found near the bottle and in a nearby trash can, which led investigators to believe someone had tried to clean up the broken bottle, according to the record. 


Police said Richard Hamilton was "processed for DUI" and booked into a Maricopa County jail.


A woman who spoke at Hamilton's initial appearance Friday on the boy's behalf said the incident "was a total accident.'' She asked for him to be released from jail so the family can properly mourn Samuel's death. 


The Arizona Department of Corrections website shows Hamilton served six years in prison for an aggravated DUI and vehicular homicide. He was released in 2013.


His bond was set at $50,000 at Friday's court appearance, but he was placed on a no-bail hold because of a probation violation for a second aggravated DUI conviction.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
