


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The five-time MLB All-Star played 11 seasons in the major leagues for the Cleveland Indians, the Chicago White Sox and the Baltimore Orioles.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Former MLB star Albert Belle was arrested on charges of indecent exposure and DUI.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Former MLB All-Star Albert Belle was arrested Sunday in Scottsdale on suspicion of driving under the influence and indecent exposure after police say he urinated in the parking lot of a Scottsdale soccer stadium.


Police said one of the people he exposed himself to was a juvenile.


Belle was arrested outside of the Phoenix Rising Stadium just after 10:30 p.m., according to a probable cause statement. He has since been released on his own recognizance.


A man told Salt River police his 15-year-old daughter had witnessed Belle urinating next to the driver's side door of his car in the parking lot, the report said. The man proceeded to yell at Belle, who responded by shaking his genitals at the father and daughter, court records show. 


MORE: Former NBA All-Star Chris Gatling sentenced to 2.5 years for Arizona fraud scheme


Officers said Belle had bloodshot eyes and his breath smelled like alcohol, police wrote in the report. Belle admitted to having a verbal altercation with the man, but denied urinating in public. He also told police he had driven his car, the statement said. 


Officers noticed two separate wet spots in the parking lot next to where the car was parked, according to the report.


Belle was booked into a Maricopa County jail on suspicion of two counts of indecent exposure, driving under the influence and DUI with a blood-alcohol content of .08 or higher. 


The 51-year-old was a five-time All-Star with the Cleveland Indians, Chicago White Sox and Baltimore Orioles from 1989 to 2000. A hip problem forced him to retire at 34.


Belle has been a relatively controversial figure for a variety of incidents both on and off the field, from using a corked bat in 1994 to allegedly chasing down teenagers who egged his house on Halloween. In 2006, Belle pleaded guilty to stalking his former girlfriend and was sentenced to 90 days in jail and five years of supervised probation.


READ MORE:


Which celebrities have been arrested in metro Phoenix?


Cactus League Arizona spring-training baseball coverage coverage


Police: Goodyear teacher had sex with student in car and on campus, sent naked pics



    Readers can send news tips to azcentral.com via the newspaper's social media channels, email or by calling the office.
    Wochit