


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Gov. Doug Ducey is proposing expanding Durango Jail in southwest Phoenix to make room for new anti-recidivism programs. Neighbors oppose it.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The state Department of Corrections has partnered with the state Department of Economic Security to begin programs at three prisons to help inmates leaving the system get a job. The goal: lower the 39 percent recidivism rate. Nick Oza/azcentral.com
    

Inmates wait for their turn to meet employers to fill out job applications at the Sunrise Employment Center at Lewis Prison in Buckeye.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

State plans for a 335-bed employment center and a 265-bed re-entry center on the Maricopa County Durango Jail campus in southwest Phoenix are drawing criticism from neighbors who feel the area has an overabundance of correctional facilities.


The centers are one piece of a larger statewide recidivism-reduction initiative from Gov. Doug Ducey called "A Real Second Chance." The Arizona Department of Corrections and Department of Economic Security are overseeing the effort. 


The employment centers would help inmates learn job skills and search for post-release employment. The re-entry centers would act as alternatives to returning to jail for technical parole violations and instead offer substance-abuse and rehabilitation programs.


The expansion would bring new buildings to the campus, and inmates across the state and county prison system would be brought to the employment and re-entry centers.


READ MORE: Will helping inmates hone skills, find jobs keep them out of prison?


The governor sees the return of inmates to jail over and over again as a "public-safety concern," said Ducey's Public Safety Adviser Tim Roemer.


Other recent parts of the A Real Second Chance initiative, such as allowing inmate pre-enrollment in Medicaid and Ducey's order last month eliminating questions about criminal background from state job applications, support the state's attempt to curtail recidivism.


"What we focus on is changing the cycle," Roemer said.


Business owners and residents in the area around Lower Buckeye Road and 35th Avenue say the plans could increase inmate presence in an area that already has several correctional facilities, including the state prison.


Stephen Montoya, a lawyer representing residents in the area, said the neighborhood's degradation and poverty are due to the abundance of correctional facilities in the area.


"I see this as a government-created problem," he said.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Similar employment centers are already in place in Perryville, Tucson and the Lewis Prison in Buckeye. They allow inmates with good behavior to search for jobs and improve vocational skills within their final 60 days of incarceration.


The three current employment centers have a collective 200-person capacity at any given time. Since March, 512 high-risk inmates have graduated from the program, and 272 (53 percent) have been employed post-release, according to Roemer.


Inmates at a higher risk of reoffending are prioritized for the program.


"These individuals need jobs," Roemer said.


The employment centers offer opportunities such as electrical classes, a specially trained post-release fire crew and access to Vivitrol, an opioid blocker. Vivitrol's first shot can be administered for free while inmates are still incarcerated.


A Maricopa County re-entry center in north Phoenix has also set a blueprint for the state's plans for Durango.


Its substance-abuse programs offer an alternative to returning to jail because of technical parole violations, such as false positive drug tests or missed parole meetings or hearings.


Roemer said the re-entry center is nota shelter.


The participants "come and go on the Department of Corrections' say-so." They may be able to leave for job responsibilities or medical appointments, but have strict curfews, Roemer said.


Montoya described his experience meeting residents in the area, many who were poor, single mothers who spoke little to no English.


He said their stories compelled him to oppose the additions to the Durango facility and attempt to protect the people in the area from further burden.


"I'm not an anti-government dude, but I became somewhat anti-government," Montoya said, after seeing the effect of the prisons on the neighborhood.


He said encampments of homeless are spread throughout the neighborhoods and even on people's lawns.


Montoya admits that a primary source of this may be the homeless resource Phoenix Rescue Mission. He opposed recent city-approved expansion plans of this as well.


Nevertheless, the presence of a state prison and other county jails feed into the homeless problem, Montoya said.


He said the area is at an unfair disadvantage because of the racial and class demographics of the area, which predominantly skew Hispanic and poor.


"The phrase environmental racism popped into my head," Montoya said, but added it may be more accurate to call the effect "discrimination of the poor."


"It's wrong and I oppose it," he said.


Paul Gilbert, a lawyer representing a number of businesses in the area, said "there's a need to address recidivism," but suggested other locations not saddled by other correctional facilities would be more appropriate.


"That's a political fight," he said.


Montoya said his discussions with the city are shaping up to bring increased police presence and reduced vagrancy to the area.


"We were happy with the status quo," Montoya said, and added he wants to prevent the neighborhood from becoming more distressed than it already is.


He believes bringing institutions such as a community college into the neighborhood could go further to reduce recidivism and improve the neighborhood.


The plans are still tentative. 


The next step, Roemer said, is to determine whether the plan is a "realistic possibility" by continuing discussions with the community and county officials.


The state would then have to determine the cost of executing the plan.


"We know we have programs that can work," he said.


The employment and re-entry centers were proposed for Durango Jail because of its size and central location, Roemer said.


If they were to come there, the state would also transfer the re-entry center currently being operated out of the north Phoenix facility at 29th Avenue and Pinnacle Peak Road.


That property may then revert to its use as a juvenile facility.


The re-entry center in north Phoenix faced strong opposition, but Roemer said these changes are not being made in response to resident criticism.


"We're by no means moving it because of community pushback," he said. 


Ultimately, the larger scope of expanded Durango facilities would save more money, Roemer said.


"We hope we save money long term," he said, by reducing recidivism and cutting away at the nearly $24,000 the average taxpayer pays annually to jail an inmate.


READ MORE:


Could one checkbox at Maricopa County jails avert hundreds of arrests?


Will a 'miracle drug' reduce Arizona's prison recidivism?


'Re-entry center' for felons in north Phoenix upsets neighbors


Drone carrying drugs, phones crashes in Buckeye prison yard
