


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Erich McCarter, 32, was arrested in connection with a fatal collision in Mesa over the weekend, and authorities suspect impairment played a role.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Arizona has some of the toughest DUI laws in the U.S. Learn about the laws and how to steer clear of the penalties.
    Wochit

Erich McCarter
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A 32-year-old man has been arrested in connection with a fatal collision in Mesa over the weekend, and authorities suspect impairment played a role.


Erich McCarter, of Tempe, was driving west on Emerald Avenue toward Stapley Drive when he was involved in a crash that resulted in someone's death late Saturday night, police said.


The crash victim's name was not immediately available.


McCarter stayed at the scene, and officers noted he had bloodshot and watery eyes, slurred speech, and a strong odor of alcohol on his breath, police wrote in court records. 


McCarter surrendered himself to officers but refused to cooperate or answer any questions, police said.


While canvassing the area, police officers were able to find two witnesses who placed McCarter in the driver's seat of the involved vehicle, records show.


McCarter was arrested on suspicion of manslaughter and was being held Monday in a Maricopa County jail on a $50,000 cash bond. 


His next court hearing is scheduled for Sept. 25.


READ MORE:


NBA's Morris twins' attorneys: Brothers played no role in assault


Yuma police officer arrested in San Diego on a rape charge


Impairment suspected in crash that critically injured motorcyclist
