


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Anthony Milan Ross is charged with three counts of first-degree murder in the Christmas Day slayings of his kids and former wife.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Anthony Milan Ross appears in Maricopa County Superior Court on Jan. 11, 2018.
    

Anthony Milan Ross
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A man charged with fatally shooting his ex-wife and two children on Christmas Day entered a not-guilty plea to murder charges on Thursday.


Anthony Milan Ross, 45, entered the plea during his arraignment in Maricopa County Superior Court.


Ross was arrested Dec. 25 after exchanging gunfire with officers at his Phoenix apartment complex, where the woman and children were found shot to death, police said.


Ross is being held without bond at a Maricopa County jail on three counts of first-degree murder and several other felony assault charges.


READ MORE:


Man accused of killing wife, children was vegan chef


Woman shot by ex-husband, along with kids on Christmas, identified



    Initial court appearance on 12/26/17 for Anthony Milan Ross, booked on suspicion of three counts of murder, aggravated assault on an officer and other charges in the death of his estranged wife and 2 children on Dec 25, 2017.
    

According to court documents, witnesses told police they saw Ross shoot his former wife, Iris Ross, and return to an apartment where witnesses said they heard two more shots from inside the home.


Also according to court documents, shortly after, Anthony Ross was seen searching Iris Ross' pants pockets. When asked if Iris Ross was OK by witnesses, Anthony Ross pointed his gun at them and said, "No," according to court documents.


Police said Ross told police negotiators that the two children were dead before changing his story and threatening to kill them. Negotiations continued for hours in the hopes that the children were still alive, police said.



    Family and friends gather to celebrate the lives of Iris Ross, son Nigel and daughter Anora at a memorial at the Salt River near Mesa on Dec. 30, 2017. Ross and the children were killed Dec. 25. Thomas Hawthorne/azcentral.com
    

Shortly after 10 p.m. on Christmas, a police Special Assignments Unit robot was deployed into the apartment, where Anora, the younger child, was found dead, police said.


Following a six-hour standoff, officers proceeded to enter the apartment taking fire from Ross, police said. Nigel, the other child, was found dead in another room shortly after, police said.


One officer with 23 years of service was injured due to shrapnel and taken to a hospital in stable condition, police said.


Anthony Ross’ next court hearing is set for Feb. 26.


READ MORE:


Brother of Phoenix woman killed on Christmas: 'I’m burying half my family'


Sister at Phoenix woman's memorial: 'Loving woman with faith in the greater good'


Community invited to 'celebration of love' for Phoenix mom, kids killed on Christmas


What we know: Kids, mom killed on Christmas Day


Mom, 2 kids dead in Christmas Day shooting



    Will Smith talks about the tenacious personality of his sister, Iris Ross, and the pain of losing her and her two children, on Jan. 6, 2018. Patrick Breen/azcentral.com
    

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
