


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Phoenix police officer shot an armed 42-year-old man Tuesday night at a west-side mobile home park, police said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Readers can send news tips to azcentral.com via the newspaper's social media channels, email or by calling the office.
    Wochit

Update
(Photo: azcentral.com)

A Phoenix police officer shot an armed 42-year-old man Tuesday night at a west-side mobile home park, police said.


The man, whose identity was not released as of early Wednesday, was treated at a hospital for a non-life-threatening injury and will be booked into the Maricopa County Jail, Phoenix police said.


Sgt. Vince Lewis, a Phoenix police spokesman, said in a statement Wednesday that police officers responded at  about 8 p.m. to a "shots fired" report near 21st Avenue and Van Buren Street.


Arriving officers saw a man holding a gun in each hand facing away from them, Lewis said. The officers told the man to drop his firearms, but he turned toward the officers and pointed one of the guns at police, Lewis said.


That's when one officer, a 29-year-old man with three years of service, fired his rifle, striking the man, Lewis said. The officer wasn't named.


Lewis added that officers used a police dog to help apprehend the man.


Before police arrived, Lewis said, the man had argued with his wife, grabbed two guns, exited a mobile home trailer and fired multiple shots. The wife and daughter confronted the man and he fired an additional shot, Lewis said. 


The man then pointed one of the guns at his wife, Lewis said.


Othe details were not available.


The incident marked the 33rd police shooting in Maricopa County in 2018, at least 19 of which have been fatal, according to a tally by The Arizona Republic. 


In all of 2013, there were 59 police shootings in Maricopa County, 40 of which were fatal, data compiled by the Maricopa County Attorney's Office show. The county attorney's data show that in the past six years, 2013 had the most police shootings in Maricopa County.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
