


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Texas residents Clark Wylie, 22, and Tiffany Van Nest, 18, face charges of first-degree premeditated murder, conspiracy of murder and burglary.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Clark Wylie
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Two Texas residents believed to be involved in a murder on May 19 in Mesa were extradited from El Paso and booked into the Maricopa County Fourth Avenue Jail on Thursday, Mesa police said.


Clark Wylie, 22, and Tiffany Van Nest, 18, face charges of first-degree premeditated murder, conspiracy to commit murder and burglary.


Wylie additionally faces a charge of disorderly conduct with a weapon, according to police.


They are being held in connection with the May 19 killing of 19-year-old Cristian Camarena, who was found dead inside an apartment near Stapley Drive and U.S. 60 in Mesa, police said.


Tiffany Van Nest (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The local East Valley Violent Offender Task Force worked closely with law-enforcement agencies in El Paso, who were able to locate and apprehend the two, Mesa police said. 


Wylie and Van Nest are each being held on a $1 million cash bond.


A third person also is being sought in the case, police said.


READ MORE:


Tempe man arrested on suspicion of sharing child porn


Man stabbed at downtown Phoenix light-rail station


ADOT: Southbound I-17 closed; vehicle stuck on freeway-ramp wall


Mother, child struck by car at bus stop in Phoenix
