


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A man was arrested early Sunday morning on suspicion of sexually assaulting his Uber driver. He denied his actions.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Danny Hale makes his initial court appearance after his arrest in Tempe on suspicion of sexually assaulting an Uber driver. Maricopa County Sheriff's Office
    

Danny Hale
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Kingman resident was arrested Sunday morning on suspicion of sexually assaulting an Uber driver in Tempe, court records said. 


Danny Hale, 35, was sitting in the front passenger seat of an Uber car that was taking him from Gilbert to Scottsdale, according to the Tempe police probable cause statement submitted to Maricopa County Superior Court.


The female victim was driving Hale west on the Loop 202 at McClintock Drive at around 12:30 am when Hale reached over and grabbed her arm while the vehicle was in motion, records said.


The driver pushed Hale away from her but he then reached over and grabbed her chest, records say. The woman then pushed Hale off again and he proceeded to grope her crotch, according to the documents.


The driver exited the freeway on Scottsdale Road and stopped the car, police said in the report. She told Hale to get out of the car and she called Tempe police.


When officers arrived, they found Hale in a nearby parking lot, where he appeared to be urinating, records said, adding that the man appeared heavily intoxicated.


Hale later admitted to touching the driver, but claimed he did so to calm her down, the court records said. He denied touching her on her chest or crotch area.


Hale was arrested and booked on a charge of sexual abuse. He was in custody Tuesday morning in a Maricopa County jail with bond set at $10,000. A preliminary court hearing is scheduled for Dec. 13.


READ MORE:


Arizona women sexually abused at Massage Envy speak out


First-time Phoenix homebuyer duped out of $73K in real-estate scam
