


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Christopher Melendez and Julius Kane pleaded guilty to aggravated assault in September. A jury found Marcus and Markieff Morris not guilty.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    NBA players Marcus and Markieff Morris and former college-football player Gerald Bowman were acquitted on Oct. 3, 2017, of all charges stemming from a January 2015 assault. Robert Gundran/azcentral.com
    

Marcus Morris (left) and Markieff Morris during closing arguments on Monday, October 2, 2017, in Maricopa County Superior Court, Phoenix.
(Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

Two men who were co-defendants in an aggravated assault case alongside NBA players Marcus and Markieff Morris have been sentenced to 60 days in jail.


Christopher Melendez and Julius Kane pleaded guilty to aggravated assault in September. The Morris twins took the case to trial and were acquitted in October. 


Per the plea agreement, Maricopa County Superior Court Judge Pamela Gates on Thursday sentenced Melendez to three years of probation and 60 days of deferred jail time, according to officials. 


Kane's 60 days of jail time commences immediately. 


Police said the beating victim was in Phoenix at a youth basketball game when he was assaulted in 2015. The man claimed the Morris twins were part of the group that physically attacked him, but the brothers denied the allegations. Ultimately, a jury found them not guilty.


READ MORE: 


NBA's Morris twins trial: Defense grills victim


Witness says she saw one Morris brother beat man


Morris' co-defendant says he was falsely accused


Attorney: Morris twins had no role in assault


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 