


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

More than 40 percent of Maricopa County inmates in the work furlough program tested positive for drugs, officials said Tuesday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone 
said that more than 40 percent of inmates in the work-furlough program tested positive for drugs.
    Bayan Wang, The Republic | azcentral.com

Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone
(Photo: The Republic)

More than 40 percent of Maricopa County inmates who were drug tested Thursday while in a work-furlough program tested positive for drugs.


As result of that and nearly a dozen overdoses by participants in the past year, Sheriff Paul Penzone is promising to overhaul the program.


The Maricopa County Adult Probation Department runs the work-furlough program, which allows inmates to leave jail for 12 hours a day to go to work.


The purpose, Penzone said, is to "reduce the probability of recidivism."


But the drug-testing results are spurring questions.  


There were 230 inmates in the program. Of those, 177 were tested. Seventy-two tested positive for drugs, five tested positive for alcohol and 11 refused to take the drug test, according to Penzone.


MORE: AZ has a huge prison population; lawmakers take no action to change that


All have since been removed from the program.


"A high number of these inmates tested positive for methamphetamines" and "many tested positive for opioids," Penzone said.


“I will not tolerate nor will allow for us to have programs that jeopardize the safety for anyone involved. I will be more strict and stringent about the rules that apply to the work-furlough program.”


Penzone said since last July, 10 overdoses have occurred among work-furlough participants being held in the Durango Jail facility. Nine of those have occurred since January. He said officials administered Narcan, which counteracts opioid overdoses, eight times. 


Two inmate deaths, one in May and one in June, may have resulted from those overdoses, but the Sheriff's Office is awaiting medical reports to confirm.


The Sheriff's Office and Adult Probation both play a role in determining which inmates are eligible for the work-furlough program, Sgt. Bryant Vanegas said. Participating inmates are housed at the Durango Jail off 35th Avenue and Lower Buckeye Road.


"I will not tolerate nor will allow for us to have programs that jeopardize the safety for anyone involved," Penzone said. "I will be more strict and stringent about the rules that apply to the work-furlough program."


Barry Roska, executive chief of custody for the Sheriff's Office, said inmates who test positive for drugs are removed from the program and may face additional consequences, including losing visitation time with family. 


"The program continues on," Roska said. "It's a program that we still have faith in, and that we still believe that those that are deserving of our trust should be given an opportunity to re-engage in our community in a positive way. We want to see them be successful."


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.