


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Cave Creek woman has been charged with attempted murder after her husband was found with a potentially lethal dose of ethylene glycol in his system.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Connie Eskelson
(Photo: MCSO)

A Cave Creek woman has been charged with attempted murder, accused of trying to kill her husband by tainting his drinks with an ingredient used in antifreeze, the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office said.


Connie Eskelson, 66, was arrested Thursday at her residence after a grand jury indicted her Wednesday for one count of attempted first-degree murder, the Sheriff's Office said.


On Aug. 21, 2017, Eskelson told authorities she had found her husband unconscious, officials said. He was taken to a hospital, and authorities found a potentially lethal dose of ethylene glycol, an ingredient in antifreeze, in his system, MCSO said.


Homicide detectives took over the case after family members said they suspected he might have been poisoned, officials said. At the time, the man had no brain activity, but eventually made a full recovery, according to the Sheriff's Office. His identity was not released.


In the following months, investigators identified several purchases made by Eskelson for "lab-grade'' ethylene glycol, the Sheriff's Office said in a press release Thursday.


Detectives believe Eskelson tainted drinks her husband consumed "on a daily basis" with the substance, officials said.


Eskelson was booked into Maricopa County Jail with bond set at $700,000, the Sheriff's Office said.


READ MORE:A step-by-step look at Rebecca Zahau's bizarre deathBody found may be that of missing Phoenix mom; ex-boyfriend arrestedSerial-killing suspect Cleophus Cooksey Jr. pleads not guilty to 10 murders


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 
