


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Katrina Mitchell, 20, was charged in the suspected murder of Tim Harnack, 56, whose body was found in a cornfield on June 2, officials said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Katrina Mitchell
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A woman was arrested Friday in the suspected murder of a man whose body was found in a cornfield near State Route 303 and Glendale Avenue earlier this month, the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office said.


Katrina Mitchell, 20, was arrested on suspicion of first-degree murder and abandoning/concealing a dead body, MCSO said. She was booked into MCSO's Fourth Avenue Jail.


The dead man was identified as Tim Harnack, 56.


MORE: Authorities identify man found dead off Loop 303 and Glendale Avenue


On June 2, Harnack's body was found wrapped in a blanket on a large cornfield in Litchfield Park by an employee of Rousseau Farms.


MCSO gathered evidence at the scene and received tips from the community to help them identify and confirm Mitchell as the main suspect. MCSO said that, based on their investigation, Harnack and Mitchell were friends.


Two days later, the Phoenix Police Department responded to a call about a suspicious vehicle, which turned out to be Harnack's. MSCO detectives found a large amount of blood in the rear compartment and evidence from the vehicle that matched evidence at the crime scene, MCSO said.


Mitchell's initial appearance was scheduled for 2 a.m. on June 16.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
