


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Both Sheriff Paul Penzone's second-in-command and public information director have parted ways from the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    When talking about public service after one year in office, Sheriff Paul Penzone says, "We are public servants who work quietly behind the scenes to promote public safety."
    

Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone
(Photo: The Republic)

Two top executives at the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office have parted ways with the agency in the past two weeks, becoming the department's first high-level shake-up since Sheriff Paul Penzone took office. 


Chief Deputy Ben Henry's last day was Jan. 26. On his heels came the resignation of Public Information Director Mark Casey, a civilian employee, which will become effective Feb. 16. 


In a statement to the Arizona Republic, Penzone said he appreciated Casey's service to the agency and his assistance in a "smooth and effective start-up for the new MCSO administration." 


"Recently Mark tendered his resignation, with his stated intent to pursue other opportunities in journalism, public affairs, corporate communications and consulting," the statement read. "We wish Mark success moving forward, and will begin our search for a replacement soon." 



    On what is most challenging after one year in office, Sheriff Paul Penzone says, "There’s two federal court orders that require this office to meet a lot of lanes of compliance."
    

On Henry, Penzone said the now-former chief deputy provided "strong leadership." 


"His strength and character was essential to building the structure for the future of MCSO," Penzone's statement said.


Penzone added that he was aware of Henry's short-term intentions when he was hired for the second-in-command position.


"Although his resignation was sooner than expected, his passion for endeavors outside of law enforcement was known when he accepted the role," he said.  


Russ Skinner, a 28-year veteran of the office, has assumed the chief deputy position. Penzone promoted Skinner last year as well, from captain to deputy chief. 


Casey's departure comes as Penzone works to shake the reputation of his predecessor, long-time Sheriff Joe Arpaio. While Penzone traditionally demurred when asked about Arpaio, he has as recently become more vocal about underscoring their differences. 


MORE ON SHERIFF PAUL PENZONE:Penzone's first year: Shedding the Arpaio legacy in Sheriff's Office Penzone: Where we're taking the Sheriff's Department after Joe ArpaioPenzone says Maricopa County jail meals are sufficient, offers a taste to media


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Last month, around the one-year mark of Penzone's tenure, the office released a promotional video “Then and Now,” which highlighted Penzone's closing of Arpaio's famed Tent City, Penzone’s engagement with the community, and Arpaio’s contempt-of-court case.


The department also recently stressed its re-introduction of a Special Response Team inside the jails, a program Arpaio's administration cut in 2016. To demonstrate the team's significance, Penzone cited a bloody use-of-force incident that occurred in the Fourth Avenue Jail days before he took office. 


READ MORE ABOUT MARICOPA COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE:Held improperly by Sheriff's Office under Arpaio? You could be compensatedAudit: Hispanics still treated differently in MCSO traffic stops


2 high-level appointments


The Republic was unable to reach Casey at the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office. 


Casey was a longtime media executive prior to his role at the Sheriff's Office. Most recently, Casey worked as vice president and station manager KPNX-TV 12News, Phoenix's NBC affiliate. 


Henry is a former commander with the Phoenix Police Department.


Casey and Henry were two of the high-level appointments Penzone made just after he ousted Arpaio in the November 2016 general election.


Other executive staff he named at the time included: Chief of Staff Stephanie Fleischman Cherny; Executive Chief Matt Giordano; Community Affairs Captain Ken Mentzer; Director of Community Relations and Outreach James “J.C.” Collins; Community Outreach Officer Ron Gomez; and Director of Drug Education, Prevention and Initiatives Shannon Scheel. All still are with the agency.


Casey and Henry's departures come several months after those of high-level holdovers from Arpaio's administration, including former Commander Amy Rex and former Executive Chief of Administration LeeAnn Bohn. Both Rex and Bohn voiced their support for Penzone in interviews with The Republic on the night of his election. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
