


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Dennis J. Kenniker, 48, was arrested by Chandler police for child pornography on Mar. 22, outside of Mesa Gateway Airport.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A mugshot of Dennis J. Kenniker.
(Photo: Chandler Police Department)

A Chandler man who worked with a company that helps transport detainees for the U.S. Customs and Immigration Service was arrested on suspicion of possessing child pornography, officials said. 


According to court documents, Dennis J. Kenniker, 48, was arrested by Chandler police March 22 outside his workplace at Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport.


Kenniker worked as a transport officer for a security company that is under contract with another firm that provides aviation service for ICE out of the airport in Mesa, according to Chandler police and court documents.


The Maricopa County court documents said Kenniker's wife found child pornography on his tablet computer in November but was afraid of reporting them to police because Kenniker threatened to harm her physically.


Kenniker's wife then saw new images of child pornography for the second time on his tablet on Feb. 13, and told police, the court documents said.  


The court documents said police arrested Kenniker after certifying that the juveniles in those pictures and videos were younger than 14. 


Kenniker admitted to police that he had been downloading child pornography to his tablet computer, thumb drive and laptop for four years, according to the documents, which include a probable cause statement submitted by Chandler police after his arrest.


Kenniker was booked into Maricopa County Jail and is facing 10 counts of sexual exploitation of a minor. 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 
