


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police say David Vipond told detectives he stabbed his wife and then himself after they decided to end their lives over financial troubles.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    David Vipond, 60, is accused of fatally stabbing his wife, 61-year-old Elizabeth Vipond, on Dec. 27, 2017. In his initial appearance, a judge set his bond at $1 million.
    Maricopa County Superior Court

David Vipond
(Photo: Mesa Police Department)

Police say a Mesa man charged with murder told detectives he stabbed his wife and then himself after they decided to end their lives over financial troubles.


David Vipond, 60, was released from a hospital this week and into the hands of law enforcement. He was being held Thursday at a Maricopa County jail on a $1 million bond.


Police said Vipond fatally stabbed his wife Dec. 27 at their Mesa home in the 4600 block of East Elena Ave.


Police say in court records that they found no evidence in the home that Vipond and his wife had made a pact to die, despite his assertion.


He called police just before 11:30 p.m. and court documents say he told the dispatcher he stabbed his wife four or five times when she asked him to kill her. He also said he planned to kill himself.


When officers arrived, Vipond had apparent stab wounds to his chest and stomach and was taken to a hospital for treatment. 


Elizabeth Vipond, 61, was found dead on a bed inside the home. On nightstands next to the bed were several bloody knives and an ice pick.


An autopsy determined Elizabeth Vipond had been stabbed 11 times, court records show.


Police said in court documents that, before being booked into jail, David Vipond told them he had been laying in bed next to his wife's body for hours but called 911 when "he could not go on."


READ MORE:


Arizona police pursuit ends with a hug, a kiss and 2 arrests


Arizona woman accused of killing husband, running errands before reporting it 3 days later


Scottsdale police hope age-enhanced photo helps nab fugitive on run for 23 years
