


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police suspect that impairment may have played a role in a rollover crash that killed a taxi driver.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Do you know what to do if you're in an accident?
    Wochit

Blaze Franklin
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A 42-year-old taxi driver critically injured in a rollover crash in west Phoenix almost a week ago has died, police said.


The other driver, Blaze Franklin, 26, was booked into a Maricopa County Jail on suspicion of aggravated assault related to driving while impaired, according to Sgt. Jonathan Howard, Phoenix police spokesman. Franklin also was booked for warrants related to a prior DUI incident, Howard said.  


Shortly before midnight Feb. 6, a car driven by Franklin was traveling east on Thomas Road when the vehicle attempted to turn left onto 57th Avenue in front of a taxi, police said. The two vehicles collided, causing the taxi to overturn.


The taxi driver, Santiago Maya, 42,  died of his injuries Saturday, police said.


Investigators were working with the Maricopa County Attorney's Office to have the aggravated assault charges modified because of Maya's death.


A passenger in the taxi and Franklin were hospitalized with non-life-threatening injuries, police said. Franklin was released from the hospital Feb. 8 and was booked into custody, Howard said.


Howard said alcohol was detected in Franklin’s system. Additional toxicology results will take more time, he said.


READ MORE:


Flagstaff police release body-cam footage from fatal shooting


Phoenix firefighter admits to stealing from 8 firehouses, court document says


Goodyear man used stolen IDs to get driver's licenses, ADOT says


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
