


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police have arrested a Scottsdale man after they said he repeatedly beat three children, including a non-verbal autistic boy, with a belt over the

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Courts
(Photo: azcentral.com)

UPDATE: A Maricopa County court ruled on Dec. 19, 2017, that no proof existed of abuse or neglect of the children by Ali Mohammad Juma and that he is not a danger to their health, safety or welfare.


Police have arrested a Scottsdale man accused of using a belt to repeatedly beat an autistic boy and two other children over the course of two years.


Ali Mohammad Juma, 42, was booked into a Maricopa County jail Tuesday on suspicion of two counts of child abuse, four counts of threatening and intimidating and four counts of disorderly conduct.


Court records show that, in a recent interview with police, Juma explained that he hits the autistic boy when he won't eat and hits the youngest girls when they won't go to sleep.


The Department of Child Safety notified police on Monday after a school official noticed that a student, who has autism and is non verbal, had unexplained injuries. Child-safety officials reported the boy had what appeared to be scratch marks all over his body, including two fresh ones on his back encrusted with dried blood.


After interviewing three of the boy's sisters, all of whom are juveniles, police said it appeared the man had regularly beaten all but the oldest child "for a long time." Reports show two girls under the age of 10 had marks on their arms and backs at the time of the interviews.


Police said the man used a 10-inch-long belt with the ends cut off to hit the children. The oldest girl told police Juma would keep the belt visible to intimidate the children.


A woman close to the children said Juma had hit her on multiple occasions and that she noticed injuries on the children multiple times in the past two years, according to a probable-cause statement. She told police she called the Department of Child Safety, though she was initially afraid to come forward because Juma threatened her and the safety of the children, the statement said.


The woman told police she eventually got an order of protection against Juma, after which she reported many of the injuries to DCS. She said she reported injuries on the children at least three separate times, according to the statement.
