


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A 70-year-old Scottsdale woman was arrested on a homicide charge in the death of her 94-year-old husband.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Marie Carmen Rudd
(Photo: Maricopa County Jail)

A 70-year-old Scottsdale woman has been arrested on suspicion of killing her 94-year-old husband, whose body was found dumped alongside a forest road in northern Arizona, officials said Friday.


Marie Carmen Rudd, 70, was arrested and booked into a Maricopa County jail on Wednesday on one count of second-degree murder, according to the Coconino County Sheriff’s Office. 


She is being held in connection with the death of William Max Rudd, 94, also of Scottsdale, officials said.


On May 20, Coconino County sheriff's deputies responded to a report of a deceased man whose body was found on the side of Forest Service Road 512, known as Young Road, near State Route 260 in the Forest Lakes area, the agency said.


The death was investigated as a homicide, which led to his wife, Marie, as a suspect, officials said.


Marie Rudd is being held with bond set at $500,000 bond, officials said.


Additional details were not immediately available.



    Readers can send news tips to azcentral.com via the newspaper's social media channels, email or by calling the office.
    Wochit