


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Tiffany Sunshine Avalos and Ray Rudy Saucedo were being held in a Maricopa County jail on Monday morning with their bond at $250,000 each.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Ray Rudy Saucedo
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A 25-year-old man shot at an Arizona state trooper's patrol vehicle at least five times from a sedan as his accomplice drove away Sunday morning, according to newly released court documents.


Records released Monday detail what followed after a Department of Public Safety trooper tried to pull over a vehicle outside of Phoenix but was met with gunfire.


Tiffany Sunshine Avalos, the suspected driver, and Ray Rudy Saucedo, the suspected shooter, were being held in a Maricopa County jail on Monday morning. A judge set their bonds at $250,000 each.


Tiffany Sunshine Avalos (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The incident began Sunday at about 8 a.m. when a DPS trooper signaled for a southbound Honda with a New Mexico license plate to pull over on Interstate 17 near Black Canyon City. A probable cause statement says the Honda had been speeding.


A dispatcher told the trooper the car had been reported stolen as he approached the Honda on foot. The trooper was giving the driver verbal commands when the car peeled out and drove away, records show.


The trooper got back in his vehicle to chase the Honda, and he was soon joined in the chase by a second trooper. Records show that's when a man leaned out the front passenger window of the Honda and shot a total of five or six bullets at the troopers' vehicles, striking one of them.


The Honda eventually exited the freeway and the occupants abandoned the car at a parking lot behind an Albertsons grocery store near Carefree Highway in north Phoenix, records show.


One witness told police that a man had offered her $1 million to drive him away from the area, but she refused and took a picture of him with her cell phone, which she later gave to police, records show. The DPS said the man in the photo was Saucedo.


Other witnesses directed officers to a nearby restaurant on North Valley Parkway, where Saucedo and Avalos had been trying to hide out, records show. Authorities later found a handgun inside of a trash can near where troopers arrested them.


Avalos, 30, and Saucedo are facing various charges, including aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, aggravated assault on an officer, attempted murder, drive-by shooting, driving a stolen vehicle and tampering with evidence.


Police say Avalos and Saucedo had been on probation for a conviction for possession of dangerous drugs and paraphernalia.


Their next court appearance is scheduled for Oct. 30 in Maricopa County Superior Court.


READ MORE:


Man shot, injured in west Phoenix home invasion


Tempe police investigate child pornography left in mailboxes


Phoenix police: Men were likely shot by motorcycle club member
