


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The number of people living on the streets in Maricopa County is rising by about 25 percent every year. Money allocated to help them has been cut.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Homeless place encampments on the sidewalks near the Central Arizona Shelter Services on April 6, 2018, in Phoenix.
(Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

On any given evening in downtown Phoenix, people panhandle along the streets.


People who are homeless sit under bus-stop awnings, seeking a sliver of shade. They sleep on sidewalks near the light-rail stops as diners and sports fans sidestep them on their way to restaurants and sporting events.


Some people orate from the light-rail platforms or rant to no one in particular as they stride agitatedly along the sidewalks. 


Since 2014, the number of people who are homeless and not living in a shelter in Maricopa County has more than doubled. According to county statistics, about half of these people have mental-health or substance-abuse issues.


Administrators at the shelters claim that nearly 600 people a year report that they are homeless because they were recently released from jail or prison.


Curtis Bagley was released March 17 by the Arizona Department of Corrections. In the scant two weeks he was living on the streets downtown, he had numerous contacts with police, including one arrest and one trip to the Urgent Psychiatric Care Facility for evaluation, neither serious enough to keep him locked up.


The murder in which he was accused spurred people in one neighborhood to demand government officials address the challenge of more people living on the streets.


The complexity of the issues, and the relative scarcity of money and other resources to help address them, have proven daunting for decades.


Curtis Bagley (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

On March 31, Bagley was seen in a tree-lined residential neighborhood just north of downtown.


According to police, he chased one woman in and out of her apartment and tried to set several fires. And sometime after 1 a.m., police said he climbed through a backyard window of a house, looking for a woman he had seen in the neighborhood, confronted her husband and stabbed him to death.


When officers arrived, they found Bagley in the house’s front yard, covered in blood and singing country songs, a bloody kitchen knife on the lawn next to him. Inside, Joshua Fitzpatrick, 36, lay dying. 


Four days later, neighborhood residents demanded a meeting with the mayor and other elected representatives to ask, simply, why. 


And none could answer satisfactorily.


No evidence exists of a widespread problem of people who are homeless committing violent crimes. But neighbors still want answers. They want to know why a man was repeatedly released from custody and left to live on the streets.


Every January, the Maricopa Association of Governments conducts a Point-In-Time Homeless Count and then extrapolates the numbers to estimate the number of homeless in the county.


Communities across the country submit the data to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as a snapshot of their homeless populations.


The 2017 count determined there were 5,605 homeless people in Maricopa County. The 2018 count has not been finalized.


Phoenix police investigate a homicide near the 100 block of West Willetta Street on March 31, 2018. (Photo: Derek Hall/The Republic)

The total number of people who are homeless has remained consistent for several years, while the number of individuals and families living on the streets increased by more than 400 people from 2016 to 2017.


Chronic homelessness may be an unwanted situation, the result of an illness or numerous other factors. 


Officials acknowledge there is a lack of funding and resources in the patchwork of charities, non-profits and government services to deal with it.


“It’s worse than it’s ever been,” said Lisa Glow, the CEO of Central Arizona Shelter Services. “We’re not sufficiently funded to meet the need.”


 


The number of people who are homeless has shrunk somewhat since the 2014 count, when there were 5,918. But the number of homeless in the unsheltered category — that is, those wandering the streets — has grown by 22 percent to 27 percent every year, rising to a preliminary count of 2,618 this year from 1,053 in 2014.


A map that accompanies the annual MAG studies shows homeless people live all over the county, with denser populations in Tempe and along the I-17 access roads in Phoenix.



    A suspect in a Phoenix home-invasion killing on March 31, 2018, had been arrested previously on March 23, 2018. From an Arizona Republic Building Security video.
    

That the majority of them are in downtown Phoenix is borne out by the following: at least 1,000 of them gather every night just west of downtown at the Maricopa County Human Services Campus at Ninth Avenue and Jackson Street, a sort of mall of government and charitable social-service agencies. 


There are 437 beds at Central Arizona Shelter Services there. Another 200 or so sleep on the floor at the nearby St. Vincent de Paul facility, and the rest sleep in tents along Ninth Avenue or against the boarded-up buildings of that decimated neighborhood.


During the day, men and women milling about, relieving themselves in the alleys, pushing shopping carts along the streets or sitting with thousand-yard stares, their backs against the surrounding buildings as pigeons pick through the scattered trash.


CASS staffers report that people arrive daily in prison-issued clothing, as if they were being dropped off after release from prisons. The Arizona Department of Corrections unequivocally denies the allegation. 


“The drop-off doesn’t happen,” said Andrew Wilder, the Corrections spokesman. “It just doesn’t happen. ADC does not transport individuals there.”


According to Glow, the CEO of Central Arizona Shelter Services, 581 CASS visitors last year said that they were homeless because they had just been released from jail or prison.


Homeless people spin out into the surrounding neighborhoods, looking for food, or a place to sleep.


ON WILLETTA STREET: New details emerge in Phoenix home-invasion murder


Homeless place encampments on the sidewalks near the Central Arizona Shelter Services on April 6, 2018, in Phoenix. (Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Downtown now has city-scape high-rises, a baseball park, a movie theater, a light-rail system, a refurbished convention center and a host of hotels and restaurants and bars.


Once there were residential neighborhoods just north of the city center. But in the 1990s, block after block after block of bungalows were razed. 


Those lots are increasingly filled with apartment complexes, such as those near Third and Roosevelt streets, where an encampment of homeless people sprung up in January in a triangle-shaped median. They shouted at the yuppies walking by or sitting on their balconies, and within weeks were moved out by police.


The only thing unique about the situation was that it took place in a gentrifying  neighborhood. Between November and March, Phoenix cleaned up after 563 encampments, nearly half of which were on private property.


The downtown parks fill with homeless with their piled belongings and shopping carts, and parks crews clean tons of garbage in their wake.


 “I wonder when I, as a taxpayer, can actually use the park across from my house,” one downtown resident asked at a Town Hall meeting April 4 at Phoenix City Hall, called in the wake of the Willetta Street slaying.


Dozens of community members were able to ask city officials questions about safety at Phoenix City Hall in downtown Phoenix on April 4, 2018. (Photo: BrieAnna J. Frank/The Republic)

This is the inner-city/gentrification interface, and people who are homeless are still part of it, perhaps pushed farther afield like bears or mountain lions forced out of their habitat.


“There are fewer places for people to stay,” said Anne Scott, human services planner for the Maricopa Association of Governments, “or if you will, to hide.”


Funding for homelessness is hard to track, coming from state, federal, county and city monies.


There are few facilities for those suffering from mental-health issues.


The solution often is left to “community partnerships,” essentially government associations with not-for-profits and charities, organizations that make earnest efforts to contact the needy on the streets and get them to treatment or shelters or more permanent housing.


According to a spokesman for the Arizona Legislature, the baseline appropriation for homeless services in recent years has been $873,000 from the state general fund and $1,650,000 from federal block fund grants.


State funding has been cut, however. In both fiscal years 2007 and 2008, the state appropriated $1.1 million from the general fund for homeless services.


In fiscal 2017, the state of Massachusetts, which has a slightly smaller population than Arizona, allocated more than $191 million.


TRANSIENT CONCERNS: Stabbing death prompts worry about homeless population


Phoenix police investigate a homicide near the 100 block of West Willetta Street on March 31, 2018. (Photo: Derek Hall/The Republic)

Just north of downtown, the Roosevelt District is an amalgam of older, relict neighborhoods. Its borders, roughly, are from McDowell Road on the north to Van Buren Street on the south, and from Central to Seventh avenues to the east and west.


But in reality, it comprises those sparse streets north and south of Hance Park in which the trees were not cut down and the historic homes were not bulldozed in the 1980s and 1990s.


Willetta Street is an oasis populated by affluent hipsters, longtime legacy residents and the occupants of a large, pink dowager apartment building. The houses are big and ornate and in some cases magnificently restored, boasting architectural styles known as Tudor and Bungalow and Neoclassical and Period Revival and Southwest Vernacular.


There is not a lot of foot travel other than by residents, and there is no direct foot-traffic flow from Hance Park a block away, where the homeless often camp, except along the main thoroughfares of Third, Fifth and Seventh Avenues. 


Murders are not supposed to happen there, and the fact that one did sparked the Town Hall meeting April 4 attended by about 200 residents, a brace of uniformed police officers, including the chief of police, and the neighborhood’s elected representatives — mayor, congressman, state representatives, a county supervisor, a City Council member — all of them Democrats.


Phoenix police investigate a homicide near the 100 block of West Willetta Street on March 31, 2018. (Photo: Derek Hall/The Republic)

Angry residents wanted to know why Bagley, the accused murderer, was allowed to be on the streets after being arrested twice after his prison release.


Court records also show Bagley has been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.


The answer is in the Constitution. Bagley had served his time in prison and couldn’t be held longer than his sentence. He couldn’t be held indefinitely by the psych emergency room, either.


“Here’s the problem,” Phoenix Human Services Director Marchelle Franklin told The Arizona Republic, “Being homeless is not a crime.”


Nor is being mentally ill.


As Phoenix City Councilwoman Kate Gallego told The Republic, “Our police officers have had to become mental-health workers.”


And neighborhood residents, outraged at the murder, called on police to do something.


But the problem extends beyond what police can do.


Phoenix Police Chief Jeri Williams pointed out that Bagley had been arrested 36 times over a 10-year period.


“Thirty-six times we arrest the guy; it didn’t work,” she told the crowd. “We’re not going to arrest our way out of this situation.”


IN AND OUT: Suspect in home-invasion killing was arrested week before 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.