


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Many different justice organizations partnered to host an "open mic" outside the Fourth Avenue Jail to challenge deportation efforts in Arizona.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Attendees gather around the "open mic" held on April 6, 2018, by Trans Queer Pueblo, Center for Neighborhood Leadership, Black Lives Matter Metro Phoenix, Raíz of Planned Parenthood, Arizona Black Voters Initiative, and Arizona Coalition to End Domestic and Sexual Violence.
(Photo: Victor Ren/The Republic)

LGBT migrant-rights organization Trans Queer Pueblo concluded a weeklong effort to spread its message of social justice with an "open mic'' event held outside the Maricopa County Fourth Avenue Jail in Phoenix on Friday night.


The group, joined by several other activist organizations, called for greater respresentation of minority groups at this weekend's Phoenix Pride festival and parade and urged Sheriff Paul Penzone to further distance himself from the immigration policies of his predecessor, Joe Arpaio.


About 20 people gathered outside the jail on Friday evening to share stories and poems about their communities and to listen to music. A drag performance also was part of the evening.


The groups denounced aggressive deportation efforts by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement and urged Penzone to avoid cooperating with ICE.


MORE: Trans Queer Pueblo launches LGBT justice week


Soon after taking office last year, Penzone announced he would stop a policy of "courtesy holds'' for ICE in Maricopa County jails. Under the policy, the county jails would hold people found to be in the country illegally an additional 48 hours as part of an ICE ''detainer,''  even if there was no other reason for their continued incarceration. Doing so allowed ICE agents time to pick them up. 


Penzone later adjusted his approach, saying he would allow ICE officials inside the jails to pick up people suspected of being in the country illegally but would not hold them beyond their legally prescribed time.


Attendees of the "open mic" on April 6, 2018, watch the performance of a drag show. (Photo: Victor Ren/The Republic)

Trans Queer Pueblo on Friday said it also was drawing attention to a situation that occurred last year, when members were subjected to taunts by spectators at the Phoenix Pride parade. 


Spectators at the Pride Parade in 2017 directed racial slurs at Trans Queer Pueblo members, many of them Latino, and began shoving them, shouting, "This is our day! This is our parade!"


MORE: Activist groups march in front of Phoenix police headquarters


Rafael Gabriel Esquer, a member of Trans Queer Pueblo, said the open mic approach was designed to help Trans Queer Pueblo create a safe space. 


Friday's participants called on organizers of this year's Pride Parade and Festival to be more inclusive of LGBT members of Latino, black and other communities of color.


Other groups represented at Friday's event were Black Lives Matter Metro Phoenix, Center for Neighborhood Leadership, Raiz of Planned Parenthood, Arizona Black Voters Initiative, and Arizona Coalition to End Domestic and Sexual Violence.


READ MORE:



    Arizona Republic reporter Maria Polletta talks with Dagoberto Bailón and Karyna Jaramillo of Trans Queer Pueblo about the group's week of action, starting March 31. Dianna M. Náñez/azcentral.com
    

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
