


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Brittany Zamora is accused of having a a sexual relationship with an underage student.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Goodyear teacher Brittany Zamora appears before a court commissioner for the first time since being arrested March 22, 2018, on suspicion of sexual conduct with a minor, child molestation and transmitting obscene material. Bond was set at $250,000.
    Maricopa County Superior Court

Brittany Zamora
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The Goodyear teacher accused of having sex with a 13-year-old student pleaded not guilty to the charges in Maricopa County Superior Court on Friday.


Brittany Zamora, 27, was arrested last month after a phone-monitoring app alerted the boy's parents to sexually explicit text messages between the sixth-grade teacher and the teen, according to court records.


From about Feb. 1 through March 8, Zamora is alleged to have had sex with the boy multiple times and performed oral sex on him in the classroom and in her car, The Arizona Republic reported previously. Zamora is also accused of sending naked pictures of herself to the student. 


The former Las Brisas Academy Elementary School teacher is charged with two counts of molestation of a child, nine counts of sexual conduct with a minor, one count of furnishing harmful material and one count of public sexual indecency. 


Zamora has been held in a Maricopa County jail on $250,000 bond since her March 22 arrest. 


MORE COVERAGE


During her initial appearance, Zamora told Commissioner Melissa Zabor that she would "love to go home, to be released. … I’d love to go home to my husband."


Her next court hearing has been scheduled for May 18. 



    The father and stepmother of a 13-year old boy that was allegedly molested by a Goodyear teacher speak out. David Wallace/The Republic
    

Court records indicate Zamora's husband asked the teen's father not to contact the police and suggested that they "meet up" and "settle this." 


Goodyear police said the school's principal reported the alleged misconduct March 21. Zamora was arrested the following day. 


The parents said during a press conference last week that they are exploring legal action against the Goodyear school for failing to properly notify them of rumors about the relationship.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
