


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Trent Ferree, accused of running over Amy Chervenak, told Phoenix  investigators he blamed his actions on "drinking alcohol and hearing vibrations and voices."

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Trent Ferree, 45, is accused of hitting a Maricopa County deputy's wife and child Wednesday. He made his initial court appearance on Nov. 30, 2017.
    

Trent Ferree
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A man held on suspicion of hitting the wife and daughter of a Maricopa County sheriff's deputy with his pickup told Phoenix police investigators he blamed his actions on "a combination of drinking alcohol and hearing vibrations and voices that made him want to murder someone," according to a court document released Friday.


 Amy Chervenak, 47, died in the attack.


Trent Garrett Ferree, 45, of Mesa was booked on suspicion of first-degree murder and attempted first-degree murder. He was being held on a $1 million bond in a Maricopa County jail.


Ferree was driving his silver 2001 Dodge Ram pickup near Jomax Road and on 41st Street just after 7 p.m. when he saw a couple walking their dog. He drove up onto the sidewalk to hit them, but they jumped out of the way, according to a court document.


About 10 minutes later, Ferree told police, he saw a woman and a child walking. 


Chervenak and her 11-year-old daughter were walking back to their north Phoenix home from the mailbox at the corner of 41st Street and Maya Way when Ferree hit them from behind, according to the police statement. He hit them once, then turned his car around and hit Chervenak again, the statement said.


The mother and child ran, attempting to flee to safety in the driveway of a nearby home, the statement said. But Ferree ran over Chervenak three times, telling police he made sure she was dead while her daughter screamed at him to stop, according to the statement.


"He added that he lined up his tires as he drove over the victim," the statement said.


Ferree took off in the truck south down 41st Street, but neighbors and Chervenak's husband, Deputy Sgt. Steve Chervenak, were able to pull him from the vehicle and detain him until police arrived, the statement said.


Chervenak was pronounced dead at the scene.


Police said Friday that her daughter, who sustained serious but non-life-threatening injuries, was at home recovering.


Ferree arrested on suspicion of one count of first-degree murder and three counts of attempted first-degree murder.


His next court appearance is set for Dec. 7.
