


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Arizona Republic has obtained video of Phoenix 'Serial Street Shooter' suspect Aaron Saucedo in jail.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Aaron Saucedo is charged with nine counts of murder in the Phoenix "Serial Street Shooter" case. He is in Maricopa County's Fourth Avenue Jail, where for one hour a day he is allowed out of his cell and into an adjoining day room.
    Wochit

Aaron Saucedo
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

On the advice of his defense team, Aaron Saucedo has been a no-show at his hearings in Maricopa County Superior Court.


Police and prosecutors believe that Saucedo, 23, is the "Serial Street Shooter," who terrorized parts of west and central Phoenix in 2015 and 2016, killing nine people and wounding two others.


He is scheduled for another court hearing Thursday morning and is not expected to attend. His attorneys claim that identity will play a major part in his trial or trials, and few, if any, witnesses, including at least one of the surviving victims, apparently can say Saucedo is the man who fired the shots.


The Arizona Republic, in fact, showed a mugshot of Saucedo to one of the survivors, who said he was not the man he picked out of a police photo lineup.


The Republic obtained surveillance video of Saucedo in his cell in the Special Management Unit of the Fourth Avenue Jail through a request under the Arizona Public Records Law.


READ MORE: Death penalty sought in Phoenix serial killings


The Maricopa County Sheriff's Office provided details of his detention. Saucedo is kept in solitary 24 hours a day and is allowed out of his cell into an adjoining day room with a telephone for an hour a day. The door from the cell to the day room opens at a different hour each day, and Saucedo is unaware until it happens. Both rooms are small.


On one of the days of video surveillance, Saucedo did not enter the day room during the designated hour and could be seen through a window sleeping in his cell.



    Public safety reporter Megan Cassidy and breaking news editor Lindsey Collom break down some of what was learned when a judge ordered the unsealed Form IV document relating to the case against Aaron Saucedo. Hannah Gaber/azcentral.com
    

If he were to leave the cell for medical treatment or legal visits, according to an MCSO spokesman, he would be shackled and accompanied by two sheriff's detention officers. And if meeting with an attorney, he is shackled to a wall in a private meeting room.


The Serial Street Shootings began in August 2015 and ended in July 2016. They occurred mostly in the Maryvale neighborhood of west Phoenix, although some of the attacks took place in east-central Phoenix. Saucedo was not arrested until May 2017.


He is charged with 22 felonies in two separate indictments. The two cases will be tried separately, according to a spokeswoman for the Maricopa County Attorney's Office.


One of the cases contains a single charge of first-degree murder, that of the boyfriend of Saucedo's mother, who was killed in 2015.


The other indictment covers the other eight murders, and the County Attorney's Office has filed its intent to seek the death penalty in the eight murders. 


For each of those eight murders, prosecutor Juan Martinez has alleged as an aggravating factor, that "The defendant has been convicted of another offense in the United States for which under Arizona law a sentence of life imprisonment or death was imposable."


That has not yet happened — Saucedo has not been convicted of any felonies — but the allegation is linked to the single murder charge, suggesting that that case will be tried first so that the aggravator will apply if Saucedo is found guilty.


The County Attorney's Office would not comment other than to confirm that the cases will be tried separately.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

On Dec. 26, one of Saucedo's attorneys lodged an objection with the court to a judge's order that Saucedo "undergo IQ, competency and sanity pre-screening evaluations."


Saucedo's lead attorney, Thomas Glow, declined to respond about why they objected, but other attorneys maintain it's a common strategy for defense attorneys to find their own evaluating experts first and to get input into who is appointed by the court.


It's also common strategy to make sure the defendants do not make incriminating statements to the appointed mental-health evaluator that could be used against them.


READ MORE:


Judge: Media may photograph shooting suspect


Sheriff balks at removing suspect's cuffs in court


Battle over coverage of 'Street Shooter' suspect


The case against the 'Serial Street Shooter' suspect


Saucedo pleads not guilty in 'Street Shooter' case


Saucedo charged in 'Serial Street Shooter' murders


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
