


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Maricopa County Attorney Bill Montgomery is asking any additional victims in the Hamilton High school sexual-assault case to come forward.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The Maricopa County attorney is asking any additional victims in the Hamilton sexual-assault case to come forward.
(Photo: The Republic)

Maricopa County Attorney Bill Montgomery on Wednesday reiterated pleas for any additional victims in the sexual-assault case at Hamilton High School to come forward.


Montgomery made the request at a news conference Wednesday, the day after he held a meeting in Chandler to make the same plea.


He offered no timeline on possible charges against three Chandler Unified School District officials, saying he doesn't want to miss anything by charging prematurely.


"Any charging decision we would make would affect a smaller universe of victims than the investigation leads me to believe exists," Montgomery said.


In July, Chandler police recommended charging Principal Ken James, Athletic Director Shawn Rustad and former head football coach Steve Belles with child abuse and failing to report the alleged sexual abuse of five players reportedly assaulted by fellow teammates in a hazing initiation.


MORE:  What we know about the Hamilton High football sexual-assault investigation


Three teens have been charged.


James, Rustad and Belles continue to work in the district, although they were reassigned to work outside of Hamilton High School last month.


"While none of the employees have been charged, it could be some time before the Maricopa County Attorney’s Office decides how it will proceed," Chandler Unified School District spokesman Terry Locke said Sept. 22. "Therefore, to avoid any distraction caused by this uncertainty, the district administration and employees believe that reassignment is the best course at this time."


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Chandler police said in a probable-cause statement submitted to prosecutors that James, Rustad and Belles knew about the alleged assaults but did not contact law enforcement. Instead, they opted to investigate matters themselves, police said.


“We've done everything that we can do to this point, based on the information that we have.”


Investigators said that multiple members of the football team committed multiple physical and sexual assaults in the locker room between fall 2015 and January 2017 on freshman players who were new to the varsity team.


MORE: 5th victim steps forward in Hamilton High sex assaults


Police said assaults occurred at varying levels of criminal offense, including penetration. Victims said they were referred to as "fresh meat" who had to be hazed.


The team didn’t determine initiation “successful” unless there was a form of penetration, police said. Attackers allegedly would manipulate victims' genitals, push their own genitals into the faces of the victims and slap their buttocks.


Victims also were beaten and physically restrained, police said.


“We’ve done everything that we can do to this point, based on the information that we have,” Chandler Police Chief Sean Duggan told reporters after Wednesday's briefing.


“We will do whatever we need to do as a Police Department,” he added. “We have been committed from the beginning. Our charge, our mission, is to protect our children. And that has been the focus from day one.”


Initially, police identified four victims. But as the families of the victims filed notices of claim against the school district, another victim stepped forward. A sixth victim in August reported more alleged sexual attacks, prompting Chandler police to recommend additional charges against James and Belles.


The county attorney said he believes more victims exist.


“I need parents to be good parents and help their kids step forward.”


“There are more football players who were victimized over the course of those two years than we’ve been able to specifically identify and contact to this point," Montgomery said Wednesday.


Choosing his words carefully, Montgomery addressed reports that some victims weren't stepping forward because they were concerned about tarnishing the football program. He reiterated that steps were in place to respect the privacy of victims, simultaneously weighing the need to move the case forward. 


“I need people to be good citizens. I need teammates to be good teammates. I need parents to be good parents and help their kids step forward,” he said.


“This is what good citizenship looks like. This is what being a responsible member of our community look like. And withholding information or fearing stepping out? No. That’s not what we consider being a good citizen or an example of civic virtue within our community.” 


Nathaniel William Thomas. (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Three teenagers face charges in the case.


One player, Nathaniel William Thomas, 17, was charged as an adult with sexual assault and multiple counts of molestation, kidnapping and aggravated assault involving three victims. His next court hearing is scheduled for Oct. 11.


MORE: Hamilton football player pleads not guilty in locker-room assaults


Two 16-year-old players face charges as juveniles of kidnapping, aggravated assault and assault.


Reach the reporter at jpohl@azcentral.com or on Twitter: @pohl_jason.


READ MORE:


After Hamilton arrests, many Phoenix-area anti-hazing rules unchanged


More charges sought against Hamilton High School principal, former coach


How a single email launched Hamilton football sexual-assault case


Ex-Hamilton coach Belles on hazing scandal: 'I'm the captain. I'm responsible'


Ex-Mountain Ridge High School wrestlers accused of sexually assaulting teammate
