


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Oren Aharon Cohen, an Israeli citizen, pleaded no contest to charges from when he broke into a Tempe apartment while drunk and held a toddler.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The initial court appearance of Oren Aharon Cohen, who was found with a 2-year-old girl on his lap in a Tempe apartment on Dec. 15, 2016. He was held on suspicion of aggravated assault, burglary and kidnapping. Maricopa County Superior Court
    

Oren Cohen
(Photo: Tempe Police Department)

The man who broke into a Tempe apartment and held a toddler while intoxicated in December has been sentenced to nine months incarceration along with lifetime probation.


Judge Greg Como sentenced 34-year-old Oren Aharon Cohen on Monday morning in Maricopa County Superior Court on counts of aggravated assault on a minor, child abuse and second-degree burglary.


Cohen is slated to be deported back to Israel after serving his jail term. The 278 days he spent in custody prior to the sentencing will factor into those nine months.


Cohen had pleaded no contest to the charges on Sept. 5 because he had no recollection of the events as he was heavily intoxicated that night, according to his attorney. 


Cohen made a statement to the court via an interpreter that he felt remorseful for his actions that occurred on Dec. 15. 


"I was drunk and don't remember anything from that day," Cohen said through an interpreter. "I was not me that day." 


The Israeli citizen was reported to have broken into a Tempe apartment and was discovered holding a 2-year-old girl on his lap, according to Tempe police. Cohen was in the United States legally with a valid passport under a work visa for at least 10 years.


The family who was victimized was not in attendance at the sentencing. Prosecutor Rebecca Scott said the experience was frightening for them.


The defendant was represented by criminal defense attorney Jason Lamm who stated to the court that there are lots of open arms for Cohen in Israel. He also noted in court that his client had felt embarrassment and shame for what had occurred.


Lamm said in a phone conversation that Cohen was very apologetic for what he had done. 


"He had a sense of relief," Lamm said about Cohen after his sentencing. "He feels a good sense of closure and was relieved that the family could have some closure."


Cohen had no history of felony crimes prior to the events in December. 


READ MORE:


NBA's Morris twins' attorneys: Brothers played no role in assault


Yuma police officer arrested in San Diego on rape charge


Man shot dead after fight escalates in Phoenix; shooter still at large
