


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Shannon Scott, who hit and killed a jogger, had a BAC of 0.08 percent and the inside of her car smelled like marijuana, Phoenix police say.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Shannon Scott goes before a judge for the first time since she was arrested November 2, 2017, on suspicion of manslaughter. Police say she was impaired when she fatally struck a jogger with her car.
    Maricopa County Superior Court

Shannon Scott
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The Phoenix woman who hit and killed a jogger Thursday morning in Ahwatukee had alcohol in her system and the interior of her vehicle smelled like marijuana, police allege in court records.


According to court documents, 25-year-old Shannon Scott was driving her 2014 Toyota Prius on Lakewood Parkway near Amberwood Drive when she crossed the bike lane, drove onto the sidewalk and fatally struck a woman who was jogging at about 4:30 a.m. 


The car also hit a concrete trash can and a palm tree before it came to a stop.


Scott stayed at the scene, Phoenix police said, and the jogger was taken to a hospital, where she was pronounced dead. Police identified her as 36-year-old Martha Hilts.


Officers said Scott showed signs of alcohol impairment and the inside of the Prius smelled of marijuana. A breath test taken at the scene showed Scott's blood-alcohol concentration at 0.08 percent, which is the legal limit, court records say. 


Scott was booked into jail on suspicion of reckless manslaughter and was being held in jail Friday on a $25,000 bond.


Her next court appearance is set for 8:30 a.m. Wednesday.


READ MORE: 


Man arrested after crashing vehicle into two Tempe police cars


Pedestrian crossing the street dies after being struck by vehicle in Phoenix


Arizona has zero tolerance for DUI
