


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police suspect impairment in a man who crashed into a Phoenix home and left the scene of the incident.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Do you know what to do if you're in an accident?
    Wochit

Herman Loredo
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Police have arrested a 23-year-old man accused of driving a vehicle into and through a house in Phoenix before leaving the scene, officials said.


Police arrested and booked Herman Loredo into a Maricopa County jail on suspicion of leaving the scene of a collision, driving while impaired and excessive speed, according to Sgt. Jonathan Howard with Phoenix police.


The collision occurred around 2:20 p.m. Wednesday in the 2100 block of East Roeser Road, Howard said. Images of the scene showed the vehicle in the backyard with a trail of debris behind. Gaping holes were left in the front and rear of the house.


No one was home at the time.


Howard said the driver left the scene, but Loredo was arrested a short distance away. He was taken to a hospital for evaluation and released to police, Howard said.


READ MORE:What would it cost to meet Arizona teachers' demands?Uber reaches settlement with family of woman killed by self-driving carFatal Uber collision highlights secrecy of self-driving tests in Arizona
