


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Chandler police said additional criminal charges are the result of another victim coming forward in the football sexual-assault investigation.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Steve Belles, the onetime head football coach at Chandler Hamilton High School, was reassigned as coach less than a week after six Hamilton football players were arrested in an assault case.
(Photo: Carlos Salcedo/Special for The Republic)

Chandler police are recommending additional criminal charges against Hamilton High School Principal Ken James and former head football coach Steve Belles after a sixth victim stepped forward to report being sexually attacked by team members.  


A total of four charges of child abuse now are being sought by police against both James and Belles. Chandler police allege the two men knew about the assaults but did not contact authorities, opting to investigate matters themselves.


The additional recommended charge was sent to the Maricopa County Attorney's Office on Aug. 31 after another victim came forward and reported more alleged attacks, said Sgt. Daniel Meija, a Chandler police spokesman. 


In addition to James and Belles, Athletic Director Shawn Rustad could face charges of non-compliance with a "duty to report'' law and child abuse in the case, police said. 


READ MORE:


Charges sought vs. Hamilton principal, ex-coach


Chandler police seek charges vs. Hamilton athletic director


Hamilton High School Principal Ken James (left) talks with interim football coach Richard Baniszewski during spring practice in Chandler on April 24, 2017. (Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

It’s been eight weeks since Chandler police initially recommended the three men be charged. 


No charging decision has yet been made by the Maricopa County Attorney's Office, which is continuing to review the case.


Until then, the three men remain on campus under the "presumption of innocence,” according to Terry Locke, Chandler Unified School District spokesman.


Belles was relieved of his coaching duties but has been teaching full time this school year.


Chandler police sought charges against James, Belles and Rustad in late July, saying in a probable-cause statement submitted to a court that the men knew about the alleged assaults but did not contact law enforcement, instead opting to handle the matter in-house. 


"It is important to understand that no adjudication has been made that reporting procedures were not followed," Locke told The Arizona Republic, adding that the men are "innocent until proven guilty under our country's system of justice."


Police allege that members of the football team committed multiple physical and sexual assaults on younger players in the locker room from fall 2015 to January 2017. 


Police said the assaults were varying levels of criminal offense and included penetration. Victims said they were referred to as "fresh meat" who had to be hazed. 


A victim later provided a written statement to police about his meeting with Rustad in January, the court statement said. The victim said he specifically told Rustad, “They had held me down, pulled my pants down.”


The victim also told police that Rustad asked him if he had been penetrated.  


Rustad then recounted details he obtained from that interview, about players pulling down each other's shorts, to the victim's parent, according to the court document.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Police and Chandler Unified School District officials have said a third party alerted them in February about the attacks, which are believed to have occurred from September 2015 to January 2017.


The initial probable-cause statement that outlines the reasons police are seeking the charges against James and Belles says the two knew about the alleged assaults but did not contact law enforcement. Instead, they opted to investigate matters themselves, the document says.


Educators are required by law to report all known or suspected cases of child abuse or neglect. It is not their job to determine whether the allegations are valid.


The families of five victims have so far filed notices of claims against Chandler Unified School District. The district now faces a total of $34 million in damages over allegations that coaches took steps to cover up hazing on campus.


The notices of claim, all filed by attorney Daniel Raynak, contend the district was negligent in supervising and hiring the school's football coaches, who “did nothing to prevent these attacks.”


Three teenagers who were members of the team also face criminal charges in the case.


Chandler police said the investigation is ongoing and that more victims may step forward. 


READ MORE:


5th victim emerges in Hamilton High sex assaults


4th victim in Hamilton assault case to seek $7M


Victims in Hamilton sex-assault case seek $20M


What we know about Hamilton football assault case


Email launched Hamilton locker-room assault case
