


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Maricopa County Sheriff's deputies arrested a 50-year-old Phoenix man this week on suspicion of possessing child pornography.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Stanley Swiacki
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Maricopa County sheriff's deputies arrested a 50-year-old Phoenix man this week on suspicion of possessing child pornography.


Stanley Swiacki was booked into a Maricopa County jail on Monday and is facing 10 counts of sexual exploitation of a minor, according to a Sheriff's Office news release. Deputies served an arrest warrant at Swiacki's home near 35th Avenue and Deer Valley Road. 


Sgt. Joaquin Enriquez, an agency spokesman, said in a news release that investigators found more than 1,200 videos and images of child pornography on Swiacki's laptop hard drive. 


The images and videos of boys engaged in sexual acts had been downloaded and shared on Swiacki's laptop since at least 2013, Enriquez said.


Investigators will send 10 videos and images to a Phoenix pediatrician to help determine the age of the victims, he added.


Investigators also will try to determine the identity of the victims and forward the results to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, an organization that tracks down missing children and helps those who are being exploited.


According to Yavapai County court records, Swiacki was charged in October 2011 with aggravated assault on a minor, intentionally placing a person in fear and unlawful imprisonment.


Court records show the prosecutor in that case dropped the the count of aggravated assault on a minor and Swiacki pled guilty to the two other charges as part of a plea deal.


According to the news release, Swiacki was arrested after he laid on top of an 8-year-old boy in a playground slide and touched the boy inappropriately by tickling him. 


The mother of the boy yelled at Swiacki and he fled, driving away in his van, the news release says.


In January, the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office began an investigation into the potential exploitation of children, which led them to Swiacki, the news release says.


READ MORE:Arizona teachers wear red, talk strike amid frustration over low wagesEscaped zebra hit, killed by car in ChandlerASU professor Lawrence Krauss put on leave amid allegations of sexual misconduct
