


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Chandler police have released hundreds of documents in the investigation into sexual-assault allegations against members of the football team.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Hamilton High School in Chandler on Sept. 22, 2017.
(Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Hamilton High School administrators knew of multiple allegations of sexual assault involving the Chandler school's football players and repeatedly failed to notify authorities, according to information found in hundreds of pages of police documents released Thursday.


The documents allege administrators withheld possible evidence from police and misled authorities after a tipster's email in February sparked an investigation.


The allegations have rocked the powerhouse football team's community. Three teenagers already face charges in the case. Chandler police have recommended to the Maricopa County Attorney's Office that criminal charges be brought against former Principal Ken James, former Hamilton football head coach Steve Belles and former school Athletic Director Shawn Rustad.


Chandler police said many of the sexual assaults could have been prevented if school officials who knew about them had followed the law, which requires educators to report allegations of child abuse.


“Had these offenses been properly reported it is possible that many of the sexual assaults would not have occurred,” Amanda Janssen, the Chandler Police Department’s lead investigator on the case, wrote in a report.


These assaults occurred at varying levels of criminal offense and included penetration by fingers and/or objects, police said. Some assaults were recorded and posted to social media.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Some students aware of the alleged sexual assaults did not appear to grasp the seriousness of the incidents, often using a joking tone about what they saw as a team initiation, according to text messages included in police documents.


They described the hazing acts as "rape," according to police documents.


These details, gathered from the Chandler Police Department's investigation on Hamilton High School, are among those found in the nearly 700 pages of documents released Thursday to The Arizona Republic through the state's public records law.


The documents include transcripts of police interviewswith school personnel and targeted students as well as cellphone videos and texts from students who appear to have been involved or aware of incidents.


Terry Locke, spokesman for the Chandler Unified School District, said in an email that the district had received the police report Thursday and was reviewing the documents.


Here are some of the details found in the documents:


In June, police served a search warrant to James and found several documents relevant to the investigation that had not been disclosed by school officials to law enforcement, according to the police report.


Police recovered a white binder from James’ office that included items “all related to the investigation,” according to documents.


Hamilton High School Principal Ken James. (Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

The items recovered through that search warrant included handwritten notes alluding to multiple instances of coaches and administrators trying to internally address alleged hazing incidents.


The binder contained an undated email that included a phone screenshot, reportedly of a text conversation between two football players who said the coaches knew about the incidents happening in the team locker room and did nothing about it.


Police noted that administrators did not share information with authorities.


That binder also included handwritten notes — the documents do not specify the author  — from a meeting with a student’s family dated March 31, 2017, days after news of the hazing scandal publicly broke.


The notes mention “Rape Squad” and say that “incidents have been going on for years and (football coach Steve) Belles is aware,” according to documents.


Players engaged in what they called "initiation" rituals aimed primarily at freshman players, according to police interviews with witnesses and the targeted students.


In most cases, a group of upperclassmen would hold a younger player and penetrate him with fingers or objects. Sometimes, the incidents would be recorded and shared among friends, according to police documents.


James and school officials have said that the first time they were alerted to possible hazing or sexual assault was when they received an email Feb. 10 from a tipster who kept hearing the reports of abuse “over and over.”


Police launched an investigation after Kevin Quinn, a school resource officer who has worked at Hamilton High School for 15 years, forwarded them the tipster's email. Quinn, who hadn't been aware of any hazing allegations, was one of the email's recipients.


Evidence obtained by Chandler police suggests James was aware of possible hazing months before that email.


In November, James had taken notes during a meeting about a specific hazing allegation from the team's summer camp in Show Low, according to documents.


James later told Belles to address the team about the behavior. But he did not tell Quinn, a Chandler police officer, according to police documents.


On Nov. 28, 2016, James wrote that he'd spoken with students involved in the alleged incident in Show Low and concluded no hazing incident took place because the students were just "horsing" around in the shower, documents show.


James later told police that he did not feel it necessary to notify police or Quinn of the allegation because James already had talked to the student who was referenced as targeted, and the student did not disclose any incidents to him.


The Chandler police report notes that Quinn had provided training on mandatory reporting laws to Hamilton educators and administrators, including James and Rustad.


James, Rustad and Belles were reassigned from the school in September. 


Chandler police in late July recommended that James, Rustad and Belles be charged with child abuse and failing to report the alleged sexual abuse of five players reportedly assaulted by fellow teammates in a hazing initiation.


Amanda Jacinto, spokeswoman for the Maricopa County Attorney's Office, declined to comment Thursday on whether County Attorney Bill Montgomery has decided whether to move forward with charges.


"We are still encouraging anyone with information to contact investigators," Jacinto said. 


One player, Nathaniel William Thomas, 17, was charged as an adult with sexual assault and multiple counts of molestation, kidnapping and aggravated assault involving alleged attacks on three people.


Two 16-year-old players face charges as juveniles for kidnapping, aggravated assault and assault.


At least six families of alleged victims have filed claims with the school district. The total being sought by all of the families is $44 million. In Arizona, claims against government bodies such as a school district first must be considered before a formal lawsuit can be filed.


READ MORE: 


After Hamilton arrests, many Phoenix-area anti-hazing rules unchanged


County attorney seeks more victims in Hamilton sexual-assault case


Chandler police seeking anonymous caller as part of Hamilton criminal investigation


New $10 million claim filed in Hamilton High football scandal


 
