


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The man, who was suspected to be involved in two separate robberies at a Domino's in Sun City, was arrested on Wednesday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Mugshot of Angel Gomez
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A man suspected of robbing the same Domino's restaurant twice was arrested Wednesday, Maricopa County Sheriff's officials said.


Angel Gomez, 33, was arrested in connection with two robberies at a Domino's in Sun City, officials said.


Before the arrest, Gomez was considered "armed and dangerous," according to authorities.


The robberies occurred on Jan. 1 and again on March 6 at 9827 NW Grand Avenue, near Grand and 99th avenues in Sun City, the sheriff's office said.


Officials said a man entered the restaurant on Jan. 1 and showed an employee his handgun, then told the employee to give him everything in the cash register.


He got away with approximately $75 in that robbery, officials said.


On March 6, authorities said the same man entered the Domino’s again and forced employees to lie down in the back room.


After emptying the cash registers, the man had the store manager open the safe and took an unknown amount of money, officials said.  


Gomez was identified by detectives through video surveillance and was later arrested in the same car allegedly used during the robbery, authorities said.


Gomez was booked into the Fourth Avenue Jail on suspicion of two counts of armed robbery, six counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, two counts of kidnapping and four counts of misconduct involving weapons, police said.  


Gomez served a 7 1/2 year sentence in 2006 for armed robbery, the sheriff's office said.


READ MORE:Mesa police: 21 men arrested in prostitution stingPhoenix homeowner and burglar exchange gunshots


 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
