


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

DeCarlos Jones pleaded guilty in November to felony animal cruelty charges for beating, stabbing and decapitating a puppy he and his girlfriend shared

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is the difference between misdemeanors and felonies in Arizona?
    Wochit

DeCarlos Jones
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Maricopa County judge sentenced a Phoenix man to 90 days in jail Thursday for killing and beheading a puppy, according to the Maricopa County Attorney's Office.


DeCarlos Jones, 29, pleaded guilty in November to felony animal cruelty charges.


Police arrested Jones in September after Jones was accused of killing a 6-month-old puppy he shared with his girlfriend.


Jones admitted to beating and stabbing the puppy to death in the bathtub after becoming angry that the puppy had urinated on the floor, police said in court documents.


Jones then decapitated the puppy and placed its head on the table for his girlfriend to see, according to court documents.


Jones told police he was angry at his girlfriend for talking to another man at work, and he claimed to suffer from PTSD and bipolar disorder, according to court documents.


Following his 90-day jail sentence, Jones will serve three years of supervised probation that includes domestic violence and animal cruelty terms.


Jones was convicted of the most serious felony charges that could be imposed, Maricopa County Attorney Bill Montgomery said in a statement. But it wasn't enough, Montgomery said.


"I look forward to changes in our criminal laws that will allow us to meet community expectations in punishing this vicious type of behavior," Montgomery said.


READ MORE:


Puppies worth $30,000 stolen from Tempe pet store


Police: Puppy wrapped in plastic bag found in Surprise dumpster


Teens say Mesa man lured them on Instagram, sexually assaulted them


Valerie Pape: The case of Scottsdale salon owner turned 'torso murderer'


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
