


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Sang Nguyen was arrested for the second time after looking into a woman's window in Phoenix, according to court records say.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is the difference between misdemeanors and felonies in Arizona?
    Wochit

Sang Nguyen
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Police say a 23-year-old man was arrested for the second time this month after he was caught watching a woman from outside her bedroom window in Phoenix, court documents show.


Sang Nguyen is accused of entering a fenced yard near 27th Avenue and Camelback Road and peering into the bedroom of an apartment where a woman was sleeping, according to a probable-cause statement in the court record.


The woman reported that the voyeur said, “I can see you,” and tried to open the window, the statement said.


Police arrived to find a man at the window who ran when they approached. Officers later identified the suspect as Nguyen and arrested him at a nearby residence. 


Nguyen was arrested just three days earlier for the same activity at the same location, according to the court document.


He denied being involved in the incident on Jan. 12 but told police he had been there Jan. 9, the document said.


Nguyen is facing charges of voyeurism and criminal trespassing. Because of that, a Maricopa County Superior Court commissioner said he was not eligible for release from jail.


His next court appearance will be an arraignment scheduled for Friday.


READ MORE:


Homeless Arizona man stored human head in campsite bucket, officials say


Police: Robber who entered Taco Bell via drive-thru window is arrested


Police confident of murder conviction despite failure to locate Christine Mustafa's remains
