


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Kaitlyn Bildilli, 23, had been a family friend and babysat for them several times prior to the arrest, police say.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Kaitlyn Nicole Bildilli
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A former Scottsdale Unified School District bus aide has been arrested after police say she forced a 15-year-old boy to have sex with her and showed pornographic material to the teen and his 12-year-old brother.


Kaitlyn Bildilli, 23, had been a family friend and babysat the boys several times, according to court records. A Scottsdale Unified spokesman said Bildilli was put on leave Jan. 22, and terminated on Feb. 8 for "inappropriate conduct and alleged criminal activity."


Bildilli, who was arrested Wednesday, is facing three counts of sexual conduct with a minor and four counts of furnishing obscene materials to minors.


READ:  Police: Mesa school bus aide arrested in sexual abuse of boy with autism


According to court records, Bildilli was babysitting the children in January when she sexually forced herself onto the 15-year-old boy, who had two broken arms at the time. His younger brother was laying on the floor next to the bed, police said.


The teen would later tell a forensic nurse that he had been scared, court records show.


The 12-year-old told police Bildilli threatened to "kick him" in the genitals if he told anyone because she could get in trouble and lose her job.


Later, police say, she showed them pornographic videos as they waited at a bus transfer station in Scottsdale. 


Police said Bildilli confessed to having sexual contact with the minor and said he was a willing participant, but she denied showing porn videos directly to them. She claimed she was showing the videos to the boy's mother when the minors accidentally saw the video, according to court documents. 


"The defendant stated during the interview that she 'knew it was wrong but I did it anyway,' " police wrote in court records.


Bildilli was being held Friday at a Maricopa County jail on a $50,000 bond.


She is set to appear in court 8:30 a.m. April 12.


READ MORE:
