


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Former Arizona Sheriff Joe Arpaio, in 2010, held a singing contest for inmates who wanted a shot at a holiday meal with all of the trimmings.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    In December 2010, then-Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio hosted a reality-show-type singing contest in his jails. Jodi Arias participated and won. Her reward was a turkey dinner. Video by the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office.
    

Jodi Arias sings "O Holy Night" in December 2010 while in a Maricopa County jail.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

It was close to Christmas time, 2010, and then-Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio held court at a reality-show-type singing contest at his jails.


The prize was a Christmas dinner of turkey, mashed potatoes and cookies — a big upgrade from Arpaio's notoriously bad jailhouse food.


One of the inmate-contestants was Jodi Arias, long before her murder-trial fame.


Inmates performed before a panel of judges: a guy dressed like late-period Elvis, a man in a Santa Claus costume and Arpaio himself.


Arias, wearing the black-and-white striped uniform Arpaio reintroduced to the jails, sang, “O Holy Night.”


She won first place. And her performance was played over the jail televisions on Christmas Day.


Arias was in jail on suspicion of killing her boyfriend in 2008. Her story had been the subject of some local and national attention. But when a Sheriff's Office news release stated she won the competition, her name didn't jump out. 


In 2013, her trial would result in a life sentence and rivet the nation. People searching for all nuggets of information about Arias found the video where it had been hiding in plain sight, on the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office YouTube page.


Now, seven years later, Arias, who was found guilty of killing boyfriend Travis Alexander, is in an Arizona prison for life.


Arpaio, who served as Maricopa County sheriff from 1993 through 2016, was found guilty of criminal contempt of a federal court judge earlier this year. He was pardoned by President Donald Trump in August.


READ MORE:


He violated a judge's order, but what exactly did Joe Arpaio do wrong?


Arpaio hits snag in bid to remove conviction from record


Sen. Jeff Flake's son loses civil case against former Sheriff Joe Arpaio over kennel investigation
