


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Migrant-rights group Puente Arizona is asking Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone to end what activists call an "Arpaio culture of hate."

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Puente Arizona and supporters protest in front of the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office headquarters in Phoenix on Dec. 11, 2017.
(Photo: Ryan Santistevan/The Republic)

Migrant-rights group Puente Arizona used National Human Rights Day to ask Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone to end what activists call an "Arpaio culture of hate."


Leidy Robledo, a Puente spokeswoman, said the group is demanding that Penzone end practices and policies that were implemented under former Sheriff Joe Arpaio.


"Even though Arpaio was defeated, today, a year later, conditions have not changed," Robledo said. "A lot of things have not changed. That's why we are here today."


Mark Casey, spokesman for the sheriff's office, said Penzone has acted against abuses and led by example in putting together a community-outreach team that is involved in building partnerships every day. 


"He has implemented community advisory boards to ensure the voices of marginalized communities are heard," Casey said.


.@PuenteAZ hosts conference to call on Paul Penzone, MCSO sheriff, to stop “Arpaio culture of hate.” @azcentralhttps://t.co/b0CSjpzeqy

At a news conference Monday, Olga Perez talked about her son, Erick Arzate Perez, who was shot and killed by an officer in a confrontation involving sheriff's deputies and El Mirage police on Sept. 10. 


The sheriff said the officer felt threatened, she said through a translator, but "my question is, how can he feel threatened when he shot him from the side and not from the front? My son was emotionally unstable, and he didn't deserve to be treated this way. What he needed was help."


Perez said she wants Penzone to bring justice for her son.


SEE ALSO: Sheriff says jail food adequate, offers media a taste


Jewel Valenzuela said she has empathy for Perez, saying her 26-year-old son currently is booked in the Fourth Avenue Jail. She said he is receiving ill treatment in the county jails. 


"We demand that the culture of Arpaio be removed from the MCSO," Valenzuela said.


She said inmates are fed twice a day. They are served slop, frozen meals and rotten fruit, she said.


She also said food is used as a disciplinary punishment, pointing to "the loaf," a meal she said is composed of bread with slop inside and cold vegetables with cut-up apples.


Ernesto Lopez, Puente development director, said deputies have shown violence toward Latinos on the streets and in the jails.


"People are still being deported in high numbers here in Maricopa County due to Penzone collaborating with ICE," he said. "We demand that Trump and Penzone stop working together."


If Penzone wants the trust of the Latinos in the community, Lopez said, the sheriff needs to stop cooperating with immigration officials. 


Ruby Gonzalez shares a photo of her son Irvin Ortega Gonzalez on Monday, Dec. 11, 2017. He was arrested by Maricopa County Sheriff's Office on Friday, Dec. 8. She said he has been mistreated and put in a room that's freezing because he is "undocumented and not an American." (Photo: Ryan Santistevan)

Ruby Gonzalez, a speaker at the event, also asked that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement be removed from the jail.


She said her 20-year-old son was arrested Friday, taken to the Fourth Avenue Jail on Saturday and transferred to the Durango Jail at 1 a.m. Monday.


She said he only is given food at 5 a.m. and 5 p.m.


"They have him in a room that is freezing," Gonzalez said through a translator. "They told him that because he's undocumented and not an American, that they put him where people who, quote unquote, are illegal."


.@PuenteAZ and supporters call on Paul Penzone, Maricopa County sheriff, to stop “Arpaio culture of hate.” @azcentralpic.twitter.com/nujnT3O2sU

Casey said Penzone has aggressively addressed and acted on behaviors that are in violation of policies, laws and civil rights.


"He has been a staunch advocate in working with the ACLU and DOJ to ensure we are expeditiously meeting the Melendres court-order requirements," Casey said.


In the Melendres lawsuit, a federal judge ordered a sweeping overhaul after finding deputies had racially profiled Latinos during traffic patrols under then-Sheriff Joe Arpaio.


"Although some may believe there are expectations that have not been met, the sheriff will continue to put public safety over politics while acting in a lawful and constitutional manner, " Casey said.


READ MORE:


Attorneys help people improperly detained by MCSO


Sheriff: Orange the new black and white at jails


Mall patrols go on amid posse's uncertain future


Activist: Inmates protest food with hunger strike


Tent City to become opioid treatment center


ASU study finds Latinos arrested more by MSCO
