


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office, Phoenix police, U.S. Border Patrol and Buckeye police joined in the effort that also resulted in three arrests.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Officials said they seized more than 1,400 marijuana plants during an arrest of three men accused of running an illegal marijuana growing operation.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office)

Three men were arrested on suspicion of running an illegal marijuana growing operation in western Maricopa County, officials said Tuesday.


The Sheriff's Office identified the suspects as 57-year-old Ramon Lopez-Frausto, 26-year-old Luis Alberto Aguilar-Amarillas and 24-year-old Alexis Maldonado-Rodriguez.


They were arrested Feb. 1 and booked into the Fourth Avenue Jail on possession of marijuana for sale and producing marijuana, officials said.


Items seized during marijuana grow operation arrest Feb. 1, 2018. (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office)

Officials said they seized more than 1,400 marijuana plants, 18 pounds of marijuana, growing equipment, guns and ammunition with a total estimated value of $3.5 million.


The Maricopa County Drug Suppression Task Force and High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area detectives coordinated efforts to serve search warrants simultaneously at three separate locations in Tonopah and Waddell, the Sheriff's Office said.


Members of the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office, Phoenix police, U.S. Border Patrol and Buckeye police assisted in the effort, officials said.


READ MORE: 


Tempe man accused of running cannabis extraction lab in his condo


Arizona marijuana laws: 14 things you need to know


Man who police forced to eat marijuana gets $100K from city of Phoenix


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
