


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Gov. Doug Ducey's office said it won't proceed with plans to open an employment center because the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office isn't cooperating.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The 7-acre compound that housed Tent City jail will no longer house an employment center, the Governor's Office announced Dec. 28, 2017.
(Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

Gov. Doug Ducey's office announced Thursday that it is scrapping a plan to open an employment center at a complexthat once housed the Tent City jail.


Patrick Ptak, a spokesman for Ducey, a Republican, said in a statement that the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office hasn't cooperated in the partnership and because of that, the Governor's Office didn't want to continue with its plans.


"After many weeks of discussions with the county, the state has determined this site is not the ideal location at this time," Ptak said in the statement. He added, "At this time, we do not have confidence to proceed with a State investment here."


The development comes just a few months after Sheriff Paul Penzone, a Democrat, had announced that he was turning part of the facility into a rehabilitation center for those dealing with substance abuse and opioid addiction.


As part of a multi-agency effort, Ducey's office had also announced at the time a proposal to build a 265-bed corrections center and a 335-bed employment center for inmates at the site, near 27th Avenue and Durango Street in Phoenix. It was meant to help 1,747 inmates annually as part of an ongoing effort to reduce recidivism.


Ptak said the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office hasn't provided Ducey's office with information about the inmates in the Durango facility and hasn't allowed state officials to tour the site.


Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone (Photo: Sam Caravana/The Republic)

But Penzone's office said Thursday that Ducey's efforts have become more political and have less to do with public safety.


Mark Casey, a spokesman for Penzone, said in a statement that the sheriff doesn't want to invest taxpayer money into a program that hasn't been proven to work.


DIAZ: It's great that Tent City plan is dead. But why were residents ignored?


"Although the governor’s office would like to misrepresent the challenges in this process, the intent to execute a project that would come at a yet to be determined, potential cost of over $20 million to the state and $40 million to the County for replacement structures cannot be responsibly evaluated in a two-month timeframe."


In October, during the dual announcements from Ducey and Penzone, a spokesman for the governor said Ducey's plan would cost about $20 million. 


The Sheriff's Office statement didn't say what Penzone plans to do with the site.


Employment centers in Buckeye, as well as in Tucson and the women's prison in Perryville, have resulted in 159 inmates gaining employment upon release, according to Ducey's office.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Tent City, which closed in October, cost taxpayers about $8.6 million last year to remain open, The Arizona Republic has reported. 


Former Sheriff Joe Arpaio opened Tent City in 1993 to combat overcrowding in brick-and-mortar facilities.


The tents drew controversy, and plenty of news coverage, since their inception. Inmates were frequently photographed sweltering in their pink underwear. 


Critics alleged cruel conditions, especially during Phoenix’s scorching summers; supporters cheered incarceration there as fitting punishmentfor breaking the law. 


Republican politicians, including four presidential candidates, would tour the facilities, seeking Arpaio’s endorsement. The tents remained standing even after jail populations dwindled in recent years, and Arpaio often pointed to them to burnish his “tough on crime” image.


READ MORE: 


Phoenix neighbors push back on plan for jail re-entry program


Will helping inmates hone skills, find jobs keep them out of prison?


Penzone says Maricopa County jail meals are sufficient, offers a taste to media
