


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Shane Hidalgo, of Scottsdale, turned himself in Tuesday to the Arizona Department of Public Safety in connection with the Feb. 2 incident.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Shane Hidalgo, 26, turned himself in Tuesday in connection with a February wrong-way crash.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A 26-year-old man turned himself in this week in connection with a wrong-way crash on Loop 101 in Mesa that left four people injured Feb. 2.


Shane Hidalgo of Scottsdale turned himself in Tuesday at the Arizona Department of Public Safety's headquarters in Phoenix, according to a press release from the agency.


The DPS said Hidalgo had a blood-alcohol level nearly three times Arizona's limit of 0.08  percent at the time of the incident.


The initial crash occurred just before 3 a.m. Feb. 2 when troopers received calls of a wrong-way driver who collided head-on with another vehicle on Loop 101 near Guadalupe Road.


Moments later, another crash occurred nearby involving three vehicles.


READ MORE:


MCSO: Arrest made in boating hit-and-run that critically injured teenMotorist's quick action forces wrong-way driver to stop on I-10


Officials said the two separate collisions involved five vehicles and resulted in four people being injured, including Hidalgo.


He was taken to a hospital with serious injuries, where lab results revealed his blood-alcohol content was 0.238 percent.


Hidalgo was arrested and booked into Maricopa County Jail on suspicion of aggravated assault, four counts of criminal damage, three counts of endangerment, super-extreme DUI, possession of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia.


"Wrong-way drivers pose a serious threat to public safety and once again, impairment was the cause," said Col. Frank Milstead, director of the DPS. "As Arizonans, we need to be intolerant of friends and family getting behind the wheel impaired."


READ MORE:


Case in limbo against ex-Flagstaff officer shown in viral video punching woman


Arizona teacher posts salary on social media: 'I need a college degree to make this?'


Police: Women who snatched items from Tempe mosque arrested
