


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Maricopa County could spend more than ever before on reforms to the Sheriff's Office ordered by a judge in the Arpaio racial-profiling lawsuit.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    A judge on Thursday, Oct. 19 denied former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio's request to vacate his criminal contempt conviction after he was pardoned by President Donald Trump. Video by azcentral
    Wochit

Former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio.
(Photo: Nick Oza, Nick Oza/The Republic)

Maricopa County is budgeting a record amount to carry out Sheriff's Office reforms in the wake of a racial-profiling lawsuit over illegal traffic stops of Latinos under former Sheriff Joe Arpaio.


The county plans to set aside almost $30 million next fiscal year to purchase body cameras, hire personnel, and fund a court monitor in an effort to meet a U.S. District Court judge's orders to rid the agency of discriminatory policing.


Five years ago, the county spent $4 million on the effort.


"The trend line that ... now is just upticking with no real, clear knowledge of when we can see it start tipping back down again is disheartening," Maricopa County Supervisor Clint Hickman, R-Litchfield Park, said at a budget presentation Monday. "I hope our Sheriff's Office is putting boots to the ground to get this stuff figured out. ... It's really not providing services to the general county at large. It's just trying to take care of a problem that's existed."


Hickman called on the court to recognize the county's efforts and said he hoped taxpayers would soon be free from the mandates.


"Everyone wants to resolve this issue and move forward," Supervisor Steve Gallardo, D-Phoenix, said. "How is that (new funding) helping us get to the end goal of compliance?"


The additional spending will pay for 26 new Sheriff's Office employees to review employee misconduct investigations, analyze traffic stops for bias, and process public-records requests. It will also include more than $600,000 for body cameras, vehicles and computer software.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

U.S. District Judge G. Murray Snow ordered broad reforms of the agency in 2013 after he found that Arpaio's deputies had singled out Latinos during immigration patrols, often holding them longer than counterparts of different ethnicities.


Snow required the county to work with a court monitor who would issue necessary changes and oversee progress. The judge added additional requirements in 2016 after finding Arpaio and three of his aides in civil contempt of court for defying orders. 


MCSO was 63 percent to 88 percent compliant with the various court orders as of mid-2017, according to Sheriff Paul Penzone, who took office that year.


Taxpayers have paid nearly $90 million total in legal fees and compliance costs in the lawsuit formerly known as Melendres vs. Arpaio. Adding the rest of this year's and next year's proposed compliance budget, the figure would rise to roughly $130 million.


The rising compliance costs overshadow a proposed county budget that is $43 million leaner than last year.


The Board of Supervisors will hold a public hearing and vote on the 2018-2019 budget June 25. The meeting is 10 a.m. on the 10th floor of 301 W. Jefferson Street.


What do you think about the county's budget? Are you worried about certain increases in spending or cuts? Contact Maricopa County reporter Rebekah L. Sanders at rsanders@azcentral.com. #HereToHelpAZ


RELATED STORIES: 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.


    Former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio speaks with Republic reporters Yvonne Wingett-Sanchez and Michael Kiefer after his pardon by President Donald Trump on Aug. 25, 2017. Patrick Breen/azcentral.com
    