


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Even though county officials plan to spend less and keep property-tax rates flat, your bill could still increase.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Republic reporter Rebekah L. Sanders is here with #HereToHelpAZ to help you with any consumer-protection issues you may have. Isabel Greenblatt/azcentral.com
    

The county government estimated homeowners will see a roughly $6 increase on a $100,000 home in the coming year, which will pay for county services such as parks, libraries, flood control, air quality improvement, voter registration and the office of Sheriff Paul Penzone.
(Photo: Ottavia Zappala)

Even though Maricopa County officials voted Monday to keep property-tax rates steady and to spend $43 million less from the county's budget, homeowners still can expect higher bills due to rising home values. 


The county government estimated homeowners will see a roughly $6 increase on a $100,000 home in the coming year, which will pay for county services such as parks, libraries, flood control, air quality improvement, voter registration and the office of Sheriff Paul Penzone.


Property taxes levied by K-12 school districts, community colleges, cities, state and other special districts are additional and vary by location.


Among the biggest new county expenses in the 2018-2019 Maricopa County budget is $30 million to implement reforms to the Sheriff's Office in response to a racial-profiling lawsuit filed over illegal traffic stops of Latinos under former Sheriff Joe Arpaio. The suit was known as Melendres.


The money will cover body cameras, 26 staff members and a court monitor to try to meet a U.S. District Court judge's orders to rid the agency of discriminatory policing.


County supervisors said they hope the court will soon declare the county in compliance.


"What we want in return is to make — and be credited for — consistent, measurable progress," Supervisor Clint Hickman, R-Litchfield Park, said in a written statement. "Taxpayers need to be free of the financial burden of mandated, court-ordered Melendres-related costs that add up to millions of dollars every year."


Maricopa County Sheriff's Office (Photo: Emmanuel Lozano/The Republic)

U.S. District Judge G. Murray Snow ordered broad reforms of the agency in 2013 after he found that Arpaio's deputies had singled out Latinos during immigration patrols, often holding them longer than counterparts of different ethnicities.


Snow required the county to work with a court monitor who would issue necessary changes and oversee progress. The judge added requirements in 2016 after finding Arpaio and three of his aides in civil contempt of court for defying orders. 


MCSO was 63 percent to 88 percent compliant with the various court orders as of mid-2017, according to Sheriff Paul Penzone, who took office that year.


Taxpayers have paid nearly $90 million total in legal fees and compliance costs in the lawsuit formerly known as Melendres vs. Arpaio. Adding the rest of this year's and next year's proposed compliance budget, the figure would rise to roughly $130 million.


Board Chairman Steve Chucri, R-Paradise Valley, said the budget is conservative with taxpayer resources.


"Maricopa County residents want to live in safe communities with a responsive government and a low tax burden," he said in a statement. "This budget is all about maximizing our resources to deliver on those promises for taxpayers."


What do you think about the county's budget? Contact Maricopa County reporter Rebekah L. Sanders at rsanders@azcentral.com. #HereToHelpAZ


READ MORE: 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.