


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Tom Capone, guitarist for New York City-based band Quicksand, was arrested Tuesday afternoon, missing a show at Crescent Ballroom that night.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is the difference between misdemeanors and felonies in Arizona?
    Wochit

Thomas Capone
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

When New York City-based post-hardcore band Quicksand took to the stage of the Crescent Ballroom on Tuesday night, there was one glaring omission from the four-piece band. 


Guitarist Tom Capone was nowhere to be found.


That's because Capone, 47, was in jail on suspicion of shoplifting and resisting arrest from an incident that afternoon, according to Phoenix police.


According to a police report, Capone was observed on closed-circuit television shoplifting from the CVS pharmacy near Jefferson Street and First Avenue. 


CVS employees said they watched Capone put multiple items — 43 in all — into his backpack and pockets, police said. Once he left the store, CVS employees reported the theft to a uniformed off-duty police officer working in the plaza.


The police records did not detail what kind of items Capone is accused of stealing. 


Police said in court records that the officer approached Capone and told him to stop, but Capone kept walking away.


When the officer grabbed Capone, he tried to break away from the officer and continued to resist as the officer took him to the ground and put him in handcuffs, records show. Capone was booked into Fourth Avenue Jail. 


A Maricopa County Superior Court commissioner released Capone on his own recognizance Wednesday morning. His next court date is scheduled for Sept. 27.


Quicksand will perform in Dallas Thursday night.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE:  


HOAs foreclosing on hundreds of Phoenix-area homeowners for as little as $1,200 


Ann Coulter: 'At this point, who DOESN'T want Trump impeached?' 


Jolt Cola and all its caffeinated goodness is making a comeback
