


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Maricopa County Sheriff's Office still treats Hispanics differently years after a judge said the Joe Arpaio-led office racially profiled minorities.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Sheriff Joe Arpaio speaks to The Arizona Republic on Aug 25, 2017, about his pardon from President Donald Trump.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

Nearly four years ago, a federal judge ordered a sweeping overhaul of then-Sheriff Joe Arpaio’s office after concluding sheriff’s deputies had systematically racially profiled Hispanics in traffic patrols that targeted immigrants.


Today, the agency is still dogged by findings that its officers treat minorities differently than whites during traffic stops.


An audit conducted by criminal-justice researchers at Arizona State University as part of the profiling case concluded that Hispanics are more likely to be searched and arrested by sheriff’s deputies in traffic stops than whites.


The agency’s response to the report is expected to be discussed at a court hearing Wednesday. The study, released last week, examined 31,000 traffic stops from July 2015 through June 2016, near the end of Arpaio’s 24-year tenure as metropolitan Phoenix’s top law enforcer.


MORE: Maricopa County sets aside $1M for payouts, expenses in Arpaio's case


“The likelihood of Hispanics being arrested or searched over time has not decreased, or even changed,” wrote the researchers, who had conducted an earlier study of the agency’s traffic stops. “Conversely, the length of stop for Hispanic drivers, while still longer than whites, decreased across years.”


The report was released a month after Arpaio was pardoned by President Donald Trump for his conviction for intentionally disobeying a court order in the profiling case.


MORE: President Donald Trump defends pardon of ex-Sheriff Joe Arpaio


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Sheriff Paul Penzone, who took office in January after defeating Arpaio, is developing plans for confronting the problems identified in the report, including providing sheriff’s deputies and their supervisors with training.


Another report issued this summer by officials who are monitoring the agency on the judge’s behalf charts the status of the Sheriff’s Office in complying with the court-ordered overhaul.


The agency was deemed 40 percent compliant with the first phase of the overhaul and 58 percent compliant in phase two, according to the report, which covered the first three months of this year.


MORE: Taxpayer tab up to $70M in Joe Arpaio racial-profiling case


Taxpayers in metro Phoenix will remain on the hook for legal costs in the case until the Sheriff’s Office comes in full compliance for three straight years with the court-ordered changes. By next summer, the costs are expected to reach $92 million.


Penzone’s office declined a request from the Associated Press to comment on the report.


Penzone, while on the campaign trail, had vowed to make compliance with the court orders one of his top priorities.


READ MORE:


After judge's challenge, DOJ still sides with Joe Arpaio on conviction


He violated a judge's order, but what exactly did Joe Arpaio do wrong?


Joe Arpaio wants to get involved in politics, isn't ruling out run vs. Sen. Jeff Flake


How Joe Arpaio became one of America's most polarizing lawmen


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

DOJ prosecutors agree Arpaio case should be tossed after Trump pardon
