


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Hezron Parks, who is charged with second-degree murder in the Feb. 4 shooting death of Kyle Brayer, is being held on a $300,000 bond.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Tempe Mayor Mark Mitchell and Greg Ruiz, Tempe Fire Medical Rescue chief, talk about Tempe fire Capt. Kyle Brayer, who was shot dead Feb. 4, 2018, in Scottsdale. Tom Tingle/azcentral.com
    

Hezron Parks
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A man charged with second-degree murder in the fatal shooting of an off-duty Tempe fire captain was denied a request to reduce his bond on Wednesday.


Hezron Parks, 21, was arrested in early February in connection with the death of 34-year-old Kyle Brayer.


Upon his arrest, a court commissioner set Parks' initial bond at $300,000. He has pleaded not guilty to charges including seven counts of endangerment, three counts of aggravated assault and one count of disorderly conduct, assault and leaving the scene. He has since been held in a Maricopa County jail.


Parks' trial is to begin in October. 


Hoping to modify his release time, records state that Parks requested that the court reduce his bond. 


In a response, the prosecuting attorney asked the court to increase Parks' bond from $300,000 to $600,000.


Maricopa County Superior Court Judge Gregory Como ordered Wednesday that Parks' bond remains the same.


"The bond was appropriately set," he said. 


RELATED: Suspect, witnesses detail confrontation in Tempe firefighter's shooting death


Documents state that after a night out at Scottsdale, Parks was driving his car at about 2:30 a.m. on Feb. 4 near Old Town as he approached a golf cart Brayer was riding in with several others.


Witness accounts differ on whether Parks hit the back of the golf cart, but they agree he was driving aggressively. At one point, Brayer got off the cart — kicking the front of Parks' car as he did, Parks has claimed — and approached the driver's side window.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

According to court records, Parks pointed a handgun at Brayer's head and pulled the trigger after "feeling threatened." He then fled the scene and turned himself into police after seeing reports about himself and the crime on local news channels, police said.


On Wednesday, Brayer's family and close friends spoke before the judge, asking that Parks' bond not be reduced.


"He is an angry person with a gun," Brayer's mother, Gloria Kane Brayer, said. "A danger to everyone. Reducing his bond would allow him back into our community's streets." 


Besides the community's risks, in their statements, Brayer's family explained the emotional trauma and anxiety Parks' actions have inflicted on their lives. 


READ MORE: Tempe fire chief: Community, country 'lost a real hero' in Kyle Brayer


Even months after the initial crime, Brayer's co-workers and friends continue to show their unwavering support. In a sea of blue shirts with "Tempe Fire Department" printed on the back, one could hardly hear or see into the tiny courtroom.



    Hezron Parks appears before a court commissioner for the first time since being arrested in the fatal shooting of Kyle Brayer, 34, in Scottsdale on February 4, 2018.
    Maricopa County Superior Court

READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.