


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Phoenix police have a woman in custody and are searching for another in connection with a fatal home robbery that happened in south Phoenix on Monday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Keyanda Blakes
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Police have a woman in custody and are searching for another in connection with a fatal robbery at a home in south Phoenix.  


Two women entered a residence in the 2200 block of east Chipman Road around 6 p.m. Monday, when one of them shot and killed 41-year-old man George Talton. First responders tried to treat Talton, but he died at the scene. 


Police arrested Keyanda Blakes, 24, several hours later in Avondale. Blakes is being held in a Maricopa County jail on suspicion of first-degree murder and armed robbery.


Court records show Blakes pleaded guilty to committing forgery and identity theft in 2013. She spent about a year in the Arizona Department of Corrections. 


Police are asking for the public's help finding the second woman, who remained at large Tuesday afternoon, but they didn't offer any descriptions of her appearance. 


Sgt. Jonathan Howard, a spokesman for Phoenix police, told The Arizona Republic that other people were in the home at the time of the robbery and were unharmed. 


Howard said Talton knew the homeowners. He added that evidence suggests the two women knew the homeowners, as well.


Phoenix police encourage anyone with knowledge of the situation to contact Silent Witness at 480-WITNESS.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
