


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Wanda Snow House had been on probation after pleading guilty to a fatal hit-and run. She was ordered to serve prison time after violating probation.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Wanda Snow House
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Chandler woman who pleaded guilty to fleeing a 2015 fatal collision was sentenced to a 1½-year prison term Wednesday for violating her probation, officials said.


Wanda Snow House, 57, failed to comply with the terms of her work furlough, which was part of her probation, said Bryan Bouchard, spokesman for Maricopa County Superior Court.


In January 2015, House was driving in a bicycle lane near Dobson Road and West Canyon Way in Chandler when her vehicle hit a pedestrian, police said.


Frances Johnston, 47, later was pronounced dead.


READ MORE:


Chandler woman sentenced to 3 months in jail for fleeing fatal crash


Police report accuses Chandler woman of fatal hit-and-run


House told police that she stopped, didn't see anything and left the scene. She later watched local television news that evening to see if the collision was mentioned, police said.


The next morning, she watched the news again and became upset upon seeing a report about the fatal collision, police said. Relatives called for police and medical assistance to treat House.


Investigators later determined that she had been drinking at a bar before the collision. She was arrested on a grand-jury warrant in connection with the hit-and-run death.


House pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of an injury accident, a Class 5 felony, and in March 2017 was sentenced to three months in jail followed by three years of probation.


Bouchard said as part of her sentence imposed Wednesday, a judge credited her with the 94 days she already had served in jail. The 1½-year term will be reduced by that much.


READ MORE:


More charges sought against Hamilton High principal, ex-coach


Flu season starts early: 4 cases in Maricopa County


How a toxic mess became Tempe Marketplace
