


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Maricopa County Superior Court judge denied a motion Monday that would have made it easier for Robert John Interval Jr. to be released from jail.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Robert John Interval Jr.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Maricopa County Superior Court judge denied a motion that would make it easier for the man charged in the death of missing Phoenix woman Christine Mustafa to get out of jail. 


An attorney for Robert John Interval Jr., 38, had asked the judge to reduce his bond from $1 million to $100,000. Interval, who has pleaded not guilty to first-degree murder, has been held in a Maricopa County jail since his arrest June 8.


The hearing Monday came after police passed the halfway mark in searching for Mustafa's remains in a landfill southwest of Phoenix.


Mustafa, 34 and a mother of two, was last seen on May 11. Her youngest child was fathered by Interval, and the pair had been living together.


In making the case for reduced bond, defense attorney Jamie Jackson noted that Interval had been present for all of his court hearings, had a supportive family and, if released, could stay with his dad, who lives in the area. 


Prosecutors did not support the motion, arguing that Interval is a flight risk and the unfinished landfill search increases the chances of his leaving.


MORE: What we know about the landfill search for a missing Phoenix woman's body


Deputy county attorney Marischa Gilla noted the nature of the charges and said that Interval's relationship with his father only seemed to flourish after Interval was arrested.


Mustafa's sisters also appeared in court to ask Judge Mark Brain to deny the motion. Mustafa's twin sister, Maryanne Mustafa, said she and Christine were born on Christmas, and she will never again be able to spend the holidays and birthdays with her.


Christine Mustafa, of Phoenix, has been missing since May 10, 2017. Her family says it's unlike her to leave without checking in on her children, ages 15 and 8 months. (Photo: Phoenix Police Department)

"The holidays are nearing. It's time for family, love and happiness," Maryanne Mustafa said. "The defendant took that away from us. It will never be the same, so why should he get to enjoy that?"


She also said Christine Mustafa was always good to Interval and put a roof over his head despite him being unemployed for most of the time they lived together. 


"We are Christine's voice today," she said. "If he did this to someone who was nothing but good to him, what is he going to do to the rest of the community?"


Interval had family members present in court, but no one made a statement on his behalf.


Brain ultimately decided against reducing Interval's bond amount. His next court appearance is scheduled for Jan. 18.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE:


Landfill search for missing Phoenix woman's body passes halfway mark


How police will search 2,600-acre landfill for missing woman's remains


Montini: When Phoenix-area murders turn a landfill into a cemetery
