


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Arizona Court of Appeals upheld a lower-court judgment against former Sheriff Joe Arpaio in a personal-injury lawsuit.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio.
(Photo: Michael Schennum/The Republic)

Former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio lost another court case on Tuesday.


But it had nothing to do with immigration law or prisoner complaints in a Maricopa County jail, and it won’t cost taxpayers money.


Arpaio, in fact, was the plaintiff.


The Arizona Court of Appeals upheld a Maricopa County Superior Court judgment against an Arpaio lawsuit seeking damages for an injury he suffered in a 2013 fall.


In February of that year, while walking to lunch, Arpaio tripped over a drain and fell on the sidewalk outside Two Renaissance Square in downtown Phoenix, just a few blocks from his office.


He broke his shoulder in two places, spent a night in the hospital and stayed home from work for two weeks.


MORE ABOUT ARPAIO: 


Arpaio launches run for U.S. Senate


Arpaio would be oldest elected freshman senator in U.S. history



    Former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio has announced he will run for the U.S. Senate seat being vacated by Jeff Flake. Video by azcentral
    

At the time, he told an Associated Press reporter, “I am angry at myself. When you look at everything I have been through, and I get incapacitated by a sidewalk.”


Then he sued the company that owns the building, asking for unspecified damages.


Arpaio’s attorneys retained an expert who posited that the building’s sidewalks and drains did not comply with accessibility requirements. But Superior Court Judge Aimee Anderson threw out the expert opinions as “inadmissible, irrelevant, and prejudicial.”


She ruled against Arpaio and awarded attorneys' fees to the owners of the building.


READ MORE: County paid $1 million to settle Arpaio-era immigration lawsuit


The Court of Appeals opinion published Tuesday upheld Anderson’s judgment, noting that Arpaio testified that he tripped and that he was not physically disabled — which ran counter to his accessibility argument.


When reached for comment, Arpaio said, “I don’t think I ever sued before. I was going to donate the money, anyway.”


Jeff Surdakowski, one of Arpaio's attorneys, said that at the time, Arpaio was only going to ask for reimbursement of his medical bills and confirmed that the money was going to be donated to charity.


"We greatly respect the court's decision and we thank them for the resolution," Surdakowski said.


READ MORE:


Tentative deal reached over inmate death in jail run by Arpaio


Arpaio gives at least 5 interviews to an anti-Semitic publication


Arpaio's lawyers take another step to get contempt conviction vacated


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

LIMITED TIME: Get a digital subscription to azcentral.com for $4.99 per month

 
