


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

DOJ prosecutors doubled down on their assertion that Joe Arpaio’s criminal contempt conviction should be vacated following a presidential pardon.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Sheriff Joe Arpaio speaks to The Arizona Republic on Aug 25, 2017, about his pardon from President Donald Trump.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

Department of Justice prosecutors have doubled down on their assertion that Joe Arpaio’s criminal contempt conviction should be vacated following a presidential pardon, again siding with the former sheriff after a challenge from a federal judge.


In a federal court filing last week, DOJ attorneys said they supported Arpaio’s bid to dissolve his guilty verdict, arguing that President Donald Trump’s pardon rendered the judgement moot.


U.S. District Court Judge Susan Bolton wasn’t so sure. She ordered prosecutors to explain what legal authority backs their motion, and gave them a Thursday deadline to do so.


MORE: Judge to DOJ: Why toss Arpaio conviction?


A pardon traditionally mitigates or erases a sentence, but doesn’t scrub a conviction from the defendant’s record.


In their Thursday response, DOJ prosecutors acknowledged that no case law directly addresses whether a case should be vacated if a pardon is issued after a verdict but before sentencing.


But they pointed to a precedent set in the D.C. Circuit, and what’s known as the 9th Circuit’s abatement doctrine, to argue their case.


In the 2001 D.C. Circuit case of U.S. v Schaffer, a pardon was issued while the defendant’s conviction was under review, and the case was vacated. And the 9th Circuit — where Arpaio’s case is argued — has vacated a judgement when a defendant died while an appeal was pending.


“The defendant’s verdict should be vacated and the case dismissed as moot,” the prosecutors wrote in conclusion.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

After a five-day bench trial this summer, Bolton found Arpaio guilty of criminal contempt for defying another judge’s order that halted his immigration patrols. The order came amid a now decade-old racial-profiling case against the office.


The DOJ’s filing last week prompted a string of constitutional attorneys and advocates to argue for a special prosecutor to fill the “adversarial” role against Arpaio.


"Faced with the Pardon, the Government is no longer Defendant’s adversary; it is now an advocate for the Pardon and seeks dismissal of this case," it stated.


Bolton has yet to respond to this request. 


Oral arguments on Arpaio's motion to vacate and dismiss the case with prejudice are scheduled for Oct. 4.  Bolton has already canceled Arpaio's sentencing hearing, which had been scheduled for Oct. 5.


READ MORE:


What exactly did Joe Arpaio do wrong?


Maricopa County sets aside $1M for Joe Arpaio's case


What makes Joe Arpaio so controversial?
