


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Former Tempe Municipal Court Judge Thomas Robinson, who pleaded guilty to stabbing his wife, has been sentenced.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Tempe Municipal Court Judge Thomas Robinson at his initial court appearance following his arrest Sept. 22, 2017, on suspicion of domestic violence and tampering with evidence. Maricopa County Superior Court
    

Thomas Robinson
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A former Tempe Municipal Court judge who stabbed his wife has been sentenced to four months in jail and three years supervised probation.


Thomas Robinson pleaded guilty to aggravated assault with a deadly weapon in April. He was sentenced Friday in Maricopa County Superior Court. 


Judge John Rea said the strong family support and genuine remorse Robinson displayed were mitigating factors, but thought some jail time was appropriate. 


Robert Beardsley, the prosecutor, said that although Robinson had a “flawless” criminal record and a long history of public service, the violent nature of 10 stabbings, lying to the police and destroying evidence warranted jail time.


“He was in over his head,” Beardsley said.


In a victim impact statement written by an attorney's office on her behalf, Robinson’s wife said she had been a victim of Robinson’s “mental and physical abuse” throughout their marriage. She “literally cannot function and is plagued with emotional torment,” according to the statement.


According to the statement, she suffers from severe depression and the event “made her life unbearable.”


David Cutrer, Robinson’s defense attorney, said Robinson’s marriage was a “trap made out of his own love” and that Robinson is still worried about his wife. Cutrer argued that putting Robinson in jail wouldn’t change his remorse. Robinson added there was no one who felt worse about what happened than he did.


Robinson said his breaking point came when she flushed his father’s military service medals down the toilet.


“I snapped. I broke,” he said. “I’ll make amends the best I can."


He said he wants to make sure his wife was OK.


The stabbing happened the morning of Aug. 25, a police report said. Robinson and his wife went to the hospital in the afternoon, stating they did not want an investigation or any prosecution. 


Initially, Robinson and his wife told detectives he had gone on a walk, left the door of their Chandler home unlocked, and returned to find his wife with multiple stab wounds, according to police reports. 


Robinson's wife called police Sept. 21 and told investigators her husband had stabbed her. She told officers they did not want to get Robinson in trouble and concocted the story before they went to the hospital, according to a police report.


Robinson's wife told police that on the morning of the stabbing, she was looking at his phone and saw a number she didn't recognize. She called the number and a woman answered, records show.


The two argued before Robinson left the house. While he was gone, his wife said she damaged items in the house and dumped several of Robinson's "prized possessions" in the toilet, records state. 


Robinson returned and found his wife lying on the bed. She told police he came in with a knife and stabbed her in the face, chest, back and arms as he said he was "going to kill her," records state. 


After stabbing her 10 times, she said he stopped and apologized, the police report said.


Officers listened in on a phone call between Robinson and his wife in which he admitted to stabbing her and said he would "have to live with the memory of doing that" for the rest of his life, the police report said.


In a police interview, Robinson admitted that he and his wife "stonewalled" detectives and that he put the bedding and knife in a trash bin behind a business, according to the police report. 


Robinson had worked in the Tempe courts since 1995, according to city records. He became a municipal court judge in 2009. He retired a few weeks after his arrest.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 


 


 


 
