


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Jesse Sullivan is sentenced to prison for using his cellphone to shoot video of a teenage girl as she showered.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Jesse Sullivan
(Photo: Apache Junction Police Department)

An Apache Junction man was sentenced to 7½ years in prison and lifetime probation Monday after pleading guilty to voyeurism and attempted child molestation, officials said.


Jesse Sullivan, 44, was arrested in December 2015 after reports that he used his cellphone to record video through a bathroom window of a 14-year-old girl showering, according to a press release from the Apache Junction Police Department.


Apache Junction police learned that Sullivan had fled Apache Junction and went to Williams, officials said. Police later contacted a family member in Coconino County, officials said.


Sullivan was arrested at the Coconino County Sheriff's Office on a felony arrest warrant issued by the the Pinal County Attorney's Office, the police release said.


Detectives took Sullivan back to Apache Junction where he was booked into Pinal County Jail on one felony count of voyeurism and one felony count of surreptitious photographing and videotaping, the police release said.


In addition to lifetime probation, Sullivan will be required to register as a sex offender after release from jail.


Officials said during the court hearing, the victim's mother called Sullivan's actions the "ultimate betrayal." She also said her family will never be the same and she could not forgive him.


Sullivan chose not to comment before his sentencing, the police release said.


READ MORE:


Hit-run driver sent to prison for probation violation


More charges sought against Hamilton High principal, ex-coach


Flu season starts early: 4 cases in Maricopa County


How a toxic mess became Tempe Marketplace
