Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Opinion
					

By Post Editorial Board


		
		
		
		
	


									January 18, 2018 | 7:20pm
											| Updated January 18, 2018 | 10:23pm
												

Not all of Gov. Cuomo’s budget proposals to save money involve new taxes or fiscal gimmicks: One is pure good sense.

Faced with soaring health care costs in state prisons (more than $380 million a year), Cuomo wants to expand parole for seriously ill, elderly inmates.




Yes, medical parole already exists, but it’s been limited to the terminally ill and those with serious cognitive issues.

As The Post’s Carl Campanile reported, the new “geriatric parole” would be available for those suffering from a “chronic, serious condition, disease, syndrome or infirmity” and who can’t care for themselves.

With an eye on public safety, the gov wouldn’t let convicted killers or those serving life without parole be eligible.

As for the others: Recidivism rates are far lower among older inmates and lower still among those seriously ill. From 1992 to 2014, only six inmates granted medical parole in New York returned to prison.

Fact is, the state’s prison population is aging fast: Nearly one in five inmates is 50 or older, a 46 percent rise over the past decade. And that aging is surely a big reason those costs rose 20 percent in just three years.

Freeing low-risk, ailing inmates makes more sense than spending big to house those suffering from Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s.

Credit state Comptroller Tom DiNapoli for first proposing the idea and Cuomo for following through.


			Read Next
		


			
				New York's coming stealth tax hikes			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				New York's coming stealth tax hikes			
		

Share Selection

150,047

66,678

49,844

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters