Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Phil Mushnick


		
		
		
		
	


									March 23, 2018 | 3:13am
												

I don’t like bullies. Never did. Doesn’t matter if they’re Mike Francesa, Rex Ryan, LaVar Ball, Chris Christie, Bobby Knight or Popeye’s nemesis, Bluto.

Blame my parents. That’s how they raised me, invoking the old “Treat others as you’d have them treat you” thing. Shame on them, I suppose.

And though the TV folks regularly kiss his fanny and pretend they don’t see what can’t be missed, Geno Auriemma is a consistent, remorseless bully.

He’s women’s college basketball’s version of Vlad the Impaler. And he’s here to punish you — stomp you when you’re already thoroughly beaten — in the names of the University of Connecticut and NCAA student athletics.

The only thing worse than a bad loser is a bad winner, and Auriemma specializes in annihilations and humiliations. Why win by 40, 50, 60 when you can win by 70, 80, 88, making your opponents appear as small and as worthless as possible?

But according to Auriemma, those who would dare fault his winning methods are “dopes.” Then I’m a dope, proud of it, too.

Saturday, in the first round of the NCAA Tournament, UConn, playing at home, did what it does under Auriemma: It pulverized its opponent. Yet even by Auriemmea’s long-established standards, this one was extra twisted.

UConn broke several NCAA Tournament scoring records including total points. UConn defeated St. Francis (Pa.), 140-52.

At 94-31, it was a blowout by halftime. But Auriemma still had his team pouring it on, blocking shots, making steals, taking and making 3s, not killing the clock. One of his starters played 29 minutes of the 40, another 24.

Auriemma needlessly, cruelly sent the St. Francis kids back to their 2,100-students campus in Loretto as record-breaking losers, perhaps too embarrassed to be seen.

His latest brutalization was noted by USA Today’s Josh Peter, who wrote that women’s college basketball “could use a mercy rule. Or a coach who knows how to show mercy.”

Asked about that by the Hartford Courant, Auriemma said, “That dope from USA Today — I don’t even know his name — I guarantee he didn’t see the game. He doesn’t know what happened.”

I’ve seen dozens of his games, and most were similar to this one — only not quite as twisted.

And unless the play-by-play sheet and boxscore were sabotaged, what went down was inexcusable, as 33-0 UConn, already ridiculously lopsided winners, piled it on.

Auriemma’s team played, as he explains it, “the way we always play,” which seems more a self-indictment than a reasonable explanation.

These aren’t the SATs. It’s not the Crimean War. They’re college games. Mercy isn’t the issue as much as dignity, specifically how much lies beneath Auriemma’s, and it’s clearly not beneath his to beat a visiting team by 88 points.

Holding the score down to, say, a 50- or 60-point win should not be difficult for any coach, let alone one of Auriemma’s acumen. And if he doesn’t know how it’s done, I’ll be happy to show him.

But paid over $2 million a year by the publicly funded state university, he’s entitled to produce and direct slaughters; he’s another who demands respect in exchange for none.

Two weeks prior in Massachusetts, not far from UConn, a girls’ high school tournament game was won, 93-7, by East Bridgewater, its coach — ostensibly a responsible adult — flooring the gas though up, 48-4, at the half.

Unlike at UConn, where the administration indulges Auriemma with look-away passes — he’s the headmaster of Our Ladies of Perpetual Silence — East Bridgewater school superintendent Elizabeth Legault knows right from wrong — and isn’t afraid to speak it. She apologized for the dehumanizing result and for a coach who kicked kids when they already were way down — under the heading of “sports,” no less.

On Legault’s watch we can reasonably surmise that such will never again occur. She doesn’t want her students to be bullied any more than she’d want them to be bullies. Perhaps she, too, can’t help it. Perhaps that’s the way she was raised.

In the course of watching and listening to TV, consider how many relevancies are lost to irrelevancies.

At the very top of Sunday’s Cincinnati-Nevada, CBS’ Andrew Catalon, on TBS, was compelled to deliver this emphasized news: “Nevada is 24-3 after a loss.”

The significance of such a stat in a single-elimination tournament? Zero.

Yet a significant stat — free throws — has been eliminated from CBS/Turner’s in-game stat summaries.
Points-off-turnovers, often irrelevant or misleading, make the cut, but not foul shots.

Monday, ESPN’s “First Take” chose this as its posted topic for NCAA Tournament discussion and debate: “Are All These Upsets Good For The Game?”

Not sure what the answer is or why such a question would engender serious thought, let alone thoughtful opinion, but it’s irrelevant.

And if upsets are bad for the game, how do we solve it? Ban upsets or just legislate fewer? Do teams that outplay and defeat more talented teams hurt the game?

Are teams that make their free throws good for the game?

A class-action lawsuit has been filed against the Jets, claiming the indisputable: The Jets, by now selling per-game tickets to sit among those previously forced to buy PSLs, have made those PSLs, purchased for thousands of dollars beyond the cost of per-game tickets, virtually worthless.

The purchasers — the most financially devoted Jets fans — became baited-and-switched suckers.

The suit does not, as far as I know, yet include Roger Goodell as a defendant. But, given his bogus public come-on claim that PSLs “are good investments,” it should.

Ready, fire, aim: NFL “instant” replay rules, born without foresight, continue to be altered in hindsight. Now, after another season of lunacy that weekly changed the outcome of games, the NFL will radically change pass-catch qualifiers. The league again failed to consider the rules’ in-game impracticality prior to installation.

Reader Vincent Gugliuzzo asks, “Do Tiger Woods’ playing partners drop out? After the first tee they’re never seen again on TV.”

Actually, Vincent, they must still be there as we occasionally see their ball-markers on the green.

Seems CBS’ Spero Dedes received a copy of the plan: How to succeed as a modern TV play-by-play man. He hollered at anything and everything throughout Michigan-Houston.

Wonder how many “senior graduate transfers,” as identified during NCAA Tournament telecasts, return to their latest colleges to continue their pursuit of their master’s degree? Or are they just one-season rentals?

Ready to wince? Reader Alan Streisfeld: “When Aaron Boone emailed his pitchers, did he remember to cc Sabathia?” Warned ya.


			Read Next
		


			
				Syracuse's vaunted zone faces the ultimate test in Duke			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Syracuse's vaunted zone faces the ultimate test in Duke			
		

Share Selection

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						