Project Promise has literally brought Resa O'Reilly to tears. O'Reilly, founder of the U.S. Virgin Islands-based group assisting at-risk youth on St. Croix, has been drenched in tears of joy because of the marked progress of students in the group's comprehensive Caterpillar Project.

But these successes are now threatened by several setbacks. In the wake of two devastating Category 5 hurricanes in September, Project Promise must fund its programs, find a new temporary home, replace hurricane-damaged office equipment, and raise money to renovate a building as a permanent home. But, O'Reilly is undeterred.

"It has been one blessing after the next being able to work with these children and impact these children's lives," said O'Reilly. "And this journey has been so purposeful and powerful, even (Hurricane) Maria couldn't stop it from happening. We have to find a way to move forward and continue what it is we started," she said, proudly citing some of the program's many successes.

"Two and a half months after we started the program, one of the girls went up 30 points in spelling," recalled O'Reilly. "Her grade was at 58 and she went up to 88 in two and a half months. And she went up 20-something points in reading, 20-something points in math. And when I saw her report card, I literally cried. And I'm not done with her story," said O'Reilly adding that the sixth grader wrote a book with her mentor and the Project is getting a grant to help publish it.

Another student was getting grades in the 40-point range a year before the program. "A year later, his lowest grade was an 80." she said of the youngster who is now an honor roll student at his school.

Started in 2014, the organization was housed in the Lew Muckle Elementary School. Hurricane Irma —which mostly affected St. John and St. Thomas — delayed the start date of this year's fall program, and then Hurricane Maria devastated St. Croix and hit Project Promise hard.

"As an organization, we lost everything," said O'Reilly, who was able to retrieve the personal files of students in the holistic initiative that involves academics, life coaching, mentoring and other areas, and works with youngsters for eight years.

The Caterpillar Project's nine areas of concentration are:

Just over a day after the Maria passed, O' Reilly was driving through storm-ravaged neighborhoods to see how Project Promise students and their families fared after the hurricane.

"My (own) kids were in the car with my sister and her kids and we were driving through the roads — poles are down, wires are down. I needed to know that they were okay," O' Reilly said recalling the looks of appreciation from students and their parents. "They were so happy to know that somebody cared."

Through the aid of Island Therapy Solutions and the island's RT Park research and e-technology facility, the project was able to start up again three weeks after Hurricane Maria and offer instruction for Project Promise Caterpillar students, their siblings and some of their friends, too.

She also focused part of the curriculum on healing from the impact of the storm and moving forward "in a healthy way." This included temporarily replacing the life coaching component with group therapy, conducted through the St. Croix- based Island Therapy Solutions firm, which donated space to house the center after the Hurricane Maria.

But, next week, the temporary time at Island Therapy Solutions ends, and "we're looking for a home," she said, with thoughts of the sturdy two-story building she owns.

Laid off from the Justice Department in 2012, she had an opportunity to buy a building in historic downtown Christiansted, St. Croix, from a relative.

"I literally emptied my pockets of every single dollar I had," said O'Reilly, who paid the taxes to save the two-story building from an auction and later bought it "sight unseen." She says the "solid concrete building" needs a lot of work.

"It's always been my goal to rehab the building and be in a more permanent situation. But of course, funding is always the issue. Any funds that we get go directly into programming. Now, as a result of Maria, we don't have anywhere to go. And that forces me to focus on this building, so we can get money to fix it."

To learn more about the Caterpillar Project, the other Project Promises initiatives and the fund-raising effort for the organization's future home, visit www.projectpromisevi.com or call (340) 513-0446.

Jamaica-born veteran trumpet player Eddie (Tan Tan) Thornton, Jamaica's Alpha Boys School and the influential Religious Sisters of Mercy institute are the stars of the innovative 360-degree film "Passing Through."

A Strange Brothers production, "Passing Through" highlights the accomplishments of Thornton, who has performed with the Beatles, Rolling Stones, Jules Holland, Aswad and many others. And the film also shows his beginnings at Kingston, Jamaica's Alpha Boys School — and his famous classmates such as legendary trombone players Don Drummond (Skatalites) and Rico Rodriguez (Specials).

The 86-year-old U.K.-based Thornton still performs today and "Passing Through" features an original soundtrack dedicated to his late bandmates, Drummond and Rodriguez.

The documentary debuted last week on Dec. 12, which was the 127th anniversary of the arrival of Religious Sisters of Mercy in Jamaica. The Religious Sisters of Mercy, founded by Irish-born Sister Catherine McAuley, began the Alpha Boys School (now called Alpha Institute) and several other educational institutions in Jamaica.

The school's famous music program, begun by the Sisters of Mercy in 1892, sparked the careers of Thornton and a host of internationally renowned musicians, such as ska music's Tommy McCook and Johnny Dizzy Moore; reggae greats Leroy (Horsemouth) Wallace and Winston (Yellowman) Foster; and jazz performers Joe Harriott and Dizzy Reece.

View the film online at http://bit.ly/passing_through. Use headphones to get the full benefit of the film's spatial audio. And to be "fully immersed" in the film, watch with a VR headset: https://vr.google.com/cardboard/.

For more information, visit http://alphaboysschool.org/tantan360/

A 'BEACHES' COMEBACK ON TURKS &amp; CAICOS

The family-friendly Beaches Turks &amp; Caicos resort, temporarily closed after Hurricane Irma, has reopened, reported Sandals Resort International last week.

The resort, which reopened last Thursday, has expanded its Global Gourmet cuisine offerings Beaches' first Indian restaurant, Bombay Club. And there are also two new food trucks at the resort's waterpark — serving mac and cheese and Curls 'n Swirls ice cream.

"We know how important vacation time is and so we're just delighted that Beaches Turks &amp; Caicos is not only reopening its doors ahead of pace, but we've introduced some amazing new features making this award-winning resort better than ever," said Gordon (Butch) Stewart, founder and chairman of Sandals Resorts International. "The entire resort has been refreshed and our staff is eagerly awaiting the arrival of our guests."

For information on Beaches Turks &amp; Caicos, visit www.beaches.com/main/tc/tc-home/

Popular radio host Angela Yee of the WKTU radio (103.5 FM) Breakfast Club brought some holiday cheer to young patients at Brookdale Hospital Sickle Cell Children's Holiday Party in Brooklyn last Friday. Yee toured Brookdale's pediatric ward and presented gifts to patients in Brookdale's Sickle Cell program.

SAILORS AID DOMINICA HURRICANE VICTIMS

A $5,000 donation to the aid survivors of the Hurricane Maria on Dominica was made possible through a fundraising campaign by a group of Norwegian sailors.

"A number of Norwegian sailors have over the years enjoyed sailing in the Caribbean sea, visiting many of the wonderful Windward Islands," said "sailor Tuva Løkse.

"Some of us especially fell in love with the beautiful nature island of Dominica. We wanted to give something back to the warm and hospitable people of Dominica in their efforts to rebuild the Island after Hurricane Maria."

The sailors are donating to the Dominica Hurricane Maria Relief Fund — the islands official hurricane relief fundraising platform.

"We hope to inspire other sailing communities in Scandinavia to do the same. And we hope to visit again sometime in the future."

The sailors from Oslo, along with sailing enthusiasts, held an evening of Caribbean entertainment and talks — with topics ranging from sailing in the Caribbean, tropical hurricanes and the effects of climate change.

The Dominica Hurricane Maria Relief Fund is accepting donations at their website, www.dominiCARElief.org.