Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Tamar Lapin


		
		
		
		
	


									May 22, 2018 | 1:34pm
											| Updated May 22, 2018 | 3:11pm
												

That wiped the smile off her face.

A Florida woman, who flashed a wide grin in her mugshot for a DUI arrest following a fatal crash, was appropriately somber in her new mugshot Saturday — this time for manslaughter charges.

Angenette Marie Welk, 44, initially was charged with DUI and serious bodily injury for allegedly crashing her car while drunk on May 10 — rear-ending a Hyundai Elantra and sending it hurtling toward the tractor-trailer in front of it.

The woman in the Hyundai, Sandra Clarkston — who had just celebrated her 60th birthday — died at Ocala Regional Medical Center four days later from injuries sustained in the crash.

On Saturday, Welk was booked again for a far more serious charge of DUI manslaughter, the Ocala Star Banner reported.

After the crash, Welk told the trooper at the scene she lost control of her car because she dropped her cellphone while driving. But the trooper noticed her breath reeked of alcohol and her eyes were glossy. She also failed to pass a field sobriety test and her blood alcohol was more than twice the legal limit of .08.

Clarkston’s children had been upset and hurt by Welk’s first mugshot, which showed the woman who allegedly caused the car crash that killed their mother grinning from ear to ear.

On Saturday, they said they were happy Welk had been re-arrested — but not pleased that she was let out of Marion County Jail on $30,000 bond.

“She needs to be sitting in the jail. She needs to rot in hell. I want to spit in her face,” said Clarkston’s 18-year-old daughter, Shiyanne Kroll, who was driving the Hyundai.

“We didn’t get to spend any time with my mother. We have to mourn her death. She has no remorse. If she did, she would never get behind the wheel. She deserves no mercy,” said her older sister Keonna Sciacca.

It’s not clear Welk knew whether she allegedly killed or even injured someone when the first photo was taken.

Welk’s lawyer’s said she is “heartbroken” over the accident.

“Mrs. Welk is a good-hearted person, a wife, mother and friend who is devastated by what happened,” said Stacy Youmans of the law firm Blanchard, Merriam, Adel &amp; Kirkland. “Her heart breaks for the Clarkston family.”


			Read Next
		


			
				How baby powder is funding ISIS in Afghanistan			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				How baby powder is funding ISIS in Afghanistan			
		

Share Selection

136,264

64,039

54,598

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters