A year before the political assassination that triggered World War I, a delusional German named Heinz Schmidt marched to battle in his own personal crusade.

His enemy was the Society of Jesus.The Jesuits were the subject of sinister conspiracy theories in Imperial Germany, where many believed that a Vatican cabal played marionette to a network of puppet governments around the globe.

Like many of the believers, Schmidt, a Protestant minister's son, was influenced by Otto von Bismarck.

Fearing papal competition, the imperial chancellor imposed his Jesuits Law in 1872, restricting the order's ability to exercise their faith on German soil.

The law was intact in some form for 45 years. Jesuit paranoia festered long after Bismarck was dead.

And it was personified by Heinz Schmidt.

Sensing he was no match for the entire secret Jesuit government, Schmidt chose to attack a proxy: the 1,000 pupils of St. Mary's Catholic school in the northern German city of Bremen.

He arrived there on June 20, 1913, toting a briefcase sagging with as many as 10 handguns and scores of bullets.

By that date, Schmidt, age 30, had meandered farther and farther off the path of sanity.

He had worked as a teacher in Prussia before losing his job following a mental collapse in 1911. He was treated at an asylum and declared cured, although ensuing events would belie that conclusion.

Schmidt first arrived in Bremen about six months before the shooting, in December 1912. Described as shy and awkward, he sought several teaching jobs, using forged documents that obscured his biography — including a history of "persecution mania."

Denied a job, he blamed the unseen hand of the Jesuits.

Schmidt bought his arsenal of pistols and ammo during the spring of 1913. The bulk purchases and odd behavior prompted two separate gun shops to file reports with police, according to Der Spiegel, but cursory investigations led nowhere.

Meanwhile, Schmidt carped incoherently about Jesuits in his letters home, and his mother rushed to Bremen to urge further psychiatric care.

He waved her off and was soon bound for infamy at St. Mary's.

On the fateful day, teacher Maria Pohl confronted spooky Schmidt in a school corridor, demanding to know his business there. Schmidt replied with a pistol shot that whizzed past her head.

He fired indiscriminately at 36 girls lined up in a hallway. All of them were 8 or younger. As victims fell, he discarded depleted guns and grabbed replacements from his briefcase.

Shrieks echoed through the fortress-like stone school building.

One girl pleaded, "Uncle, please do not shoot us!"

But Schmidt's only mercy was a lousy aim.

A brave unarmed janitor grappled with the intruder, allowing many girls to flee. He was shot through the jaw but survived.

Schmidt moved to a window and fired randomly at boys fleeing across a playground. He hit five, though none fatally.

He was next confronted by teacher Hubert Möllmann, who was shot twice but also miraculously survived.

A legion of citizens alerted by the shots streamed toward the school, and several men, including a carriage driver armed with a pitchfork, managed to subdue the killer.

News reports said the "armed lunatic" was saved from lynching by officers who brandished sabers to hold back a mob as Schmidt was hurried to jail.

As he was hustled along, the killer bellowed that he had drawn first blood in a war against Jesuits.

"This may be the beginning," Schmidt cried, "but the end is yet to come."

He had killed five girls and wounded 21 other children and adults. It could have been much worse. He had fired 35 shots but was carrying another 100 unspent cartridges.

Schmidt refused to discuss his motive with police.

But his father had died just before the rampage, and Der Spiegel said Schmidt had blamed the minister's failing health on the Society of Jesus.

"The Jesuits did this," he wrote to his sister.

Germany's Jesuits Law was fully repealed four years later, in 1917 — not because of Schmidt, but because Kaiser Wilhelm needed the war support of all the nation's Catholics.

Schmidt was declared insane and confined for life to a mental hospital, where he died of tuberculosis in 1932.

His rampage is regarded as one of the world's earliest mass school shootings.

And while it has been overshadowed by the U.S. in both frequency and body counts, Germany has built its own dreadful record of these atrocities.

In 1964, psychotic Walter Seifert, 42, attacked a Catholic school in Cologne, using a lance and an insecticide sprayer converted into a flamethrower to kill eight students and two teachers.

In 1983, the suicidal Czech refugee Karel Charva killed five and wounded 14 in a school shooting near Frankfurt.

In 2002, Robert Steinhauser, 19, shot and killed 16 people and himself at a school in Erfurt where he had been expelled.

A classmate said, "I remember that he once told me that one time he wanted everybody to know him and just be famous."

Seven years later, another suicidal German teen, Tim Kretschmer, primarily targeted females in a gun attack on a school near Stuttgart. He killed 16, including himself.

During the siege, Kretschmer was asked by a hostage why he was committing murder.

He grinned and replied, "For fun — because it is fun."