Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Jackie Salo


		
		
		
		
	


									March 6, 2018 | 7:00pm
											| Updated March 6, 2018 | 7:18pm
												

The sister of a 20-year-old woman who was stabbed to death reportedly begged her alleged murderer to take names off his “kill list” before the brutal slaughter, police said.

Authorities testified Monday that Makyla Grote’s younger sister reported that teenage suspect Aiden von Grabow had a hit list weeks prior to the November murder at a Longmont, Colorado, home, KUSA reported.

The hearing, which is scheduled to last until Friday, will determine whether the now 16-year-old suspect should be tried as an adult in the murder case.

Police said Grote was not on the hit list, but that her younger sister was named first.

“Torture till she begs for mercy,” the note read, according to police.

Authorities suspect that von Grabow went to the victim’s house to kill the sister, but attacked the 20-year-old when she answered the door.

Lakewood Police Agent Brandon Saunders said that von Grabow, then 15-years-old, warned the victim’s sister in October about his “kill list” in Snapchat messages.

Von Grabow reportedly asked the girl to reveal a friend’s last name in order to be kept “off the list,” but she refused, according to police.

The younger sister allegedly begged him not to hurt her friend, saying she would do “anything” to keep her safe, KUSA reported.

Von Grabow also sent her concerning messages such as, “I don’t get how you think one officer can stop me when I’ve literally stabbed myself before,” according to the Longmont Times-Call.

The sister then notified police who confronted von Grabow the next day about the “kill list” — but he denied its existence, according to authorities.

The disturbing document wasn’t found in his bedroom when police initially searched, but was recovered there more than a month later after the murder.

Von Grabow faces charges of first-degree murder, as well as attempted murder for allegedly planning to kill Grote’s younger sister and two others on his “kill list.”


			Read Next
		


			
				Man charged with threatening daughter, boyfriend with AR-1...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Man charged with threatening daughter, boyfriend with AR-1...			
		

Share Selection

145,843

65,946

51,227

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters