A lone church bell tolled 26 times, a melancholy tribute to those killed five years earlier in a crescendo of gunfire inside the Sandy Hook Elementary School.

Once the ringing stopped, there was little indication of the grim anniversary around Newtown, Conn., with town officials even encouraging the media to steer clear.

The wintry Thursday began with town residents gathered inside the St. Rose of Lima Church for the annual Mass, where 26 white candles burned on the altar in honor of the dead — 20 innocent first-graders, six school staffers who died trying to save them.

MAP: Mass Shootings in the Five Years Since Newtown

Some in the congregation wiped tears from their eyes as the Rev. Krzysztof Kuczyinski delivered his eulogy before a crowd noticeably thinner than in years past.

"Brothers and sisters, we gather to remember the victims of the Sandy Hook tragedy," said Kuczyinski. "It can be difficult. But God does not withhold mercy ... I pray that this gives you much more hope."

The victims' names were written on a sign near the altar, with a red heart below the litany of loss. Those in the pews made the sign of the cross when they took their seats.

Among the missing this year was Msgr. Robert Weiss, who presided over a half-dozen funerals for slain Sandy Hook Elementary School students five years ago.

Weiss told the Daily News earlier that this year's anniversary was too much for him to bear.

"It is a day of sadness for all of us," Weiss wrote in the church newsletter. "Tears well up in us as we recall the horribly tragedy of that day ... The world joins us once again on this day five years later to remember and to pray."

The somber anniversary closed with more memorial services Thursday night, including one at Trinity Episcopal Church, on Main St. in Newtown, where about 100 people came together for an interfaith service. Rev. Matt Crebbin asked mourners to reflect on what it means to be part of a community, marked by heartache.

"I welcome all of you, all of us, to this place, on this day, five years of a journey, whose destination is still not certain, a journey of many twists and turns, many highs and many, many lows," he said. "We are here to remember, to celebrate lives shared among us, to grieve souls lost to us."

There were other, more subtle indicators of the day's dark history. Flags flew at half-staff, per the order of Gov. Malloy. Newtown offices closed between 9:30 a.m. and 9:45 a.m. in tribute to those killed inside the school.

"We are hoping for a period of quiet and peace, a time for our families and community to reflect, to remember, to honor with love and kindness," said a statement issued by Newtown officials.

Edgar Sandoval reporting in Newtown, Conn.