Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Entertainment
					

By Robert Rorke


		
		
		
		
	


									September 15, 2017 | 6:28pm
												

Sunday’s Emmy Awards are all-about honoring the excellence and artistry that is part-and-parcel of the world of television.

But while the Emmy nominees rehearse their speeches, speed-dial their psychics and fire their stylists before the awards ceremony, we’re hoping they realize how lucky they are not to have been part of these TV stinkers. They were television at its worst.

And they received no Emmy nominations. 

“Baby Bob” (CBS, 2002)
Panned by critics, this #creepy sitcom about a baby who talked like an adult debuted to strong ratings, but CBS cut its Season 2 order from 13 to 8 episodes, which languished until the summer of 2003. Afterward, the character of Baby Bob appeared in commercials for Quizno’s.

“Carnivale” (2003, HBO)
With “The Sopranos” an established hit, HBO was looking for its next big drama. This Dustbowl fantasy about a preacher (Nick Stahl) with strange powers wasn’t it — and HBO promptly cancelled the series after two seasons.

“Fat Actress” (Showtime, 2005)
This ungodly vanity project starring Kirstie Alley showed the former star of “Cheers” and “Veronica’s Closet” subjecting the unsuspecting public to her frustrations with her weight. Somehow, Showtime managed to squeeze seven episodes out of a very thin premise.

“Cavemen” (ABC, 2007)
So brilliant it lasted one month in the fall of 2007. Inspired by the silly GEICO cavemen commercials, creator Joe Lawson tried to make a buddy comedy out of a sight gag — where these early Homo sapiens were portrayed as the victims of racism. Lord have mercy.

“Hung” (HBO, 2009)
Mirculously, this series about a well-endowed high school coach (Thomas Jane) who resorts to prostitution to make ends meet aired for three seasons, ending in 2013). If HBO made this show about a well-endowed woman and called it “D-Cup” or “Jugs,” they’d never get away with it. 



“Lone Star” (Fox, 2010)
The first cancellation of the 2010-11 TV season, this story of a Texas con man (James Wolk, “Mad Men”) with a double life (and two wives to boot), tanked after two episodes. Co-star Jon Voight didn’t know that “Ray Donovan” was waiting in the wings.

“$h*! My Dad Says” (CBS, 2010)
The first sitcom inspired by a Twitter feed, “$h*!” was lame from the get-go — and not even beloved kitschy icon Wiliam Shatner could save the show from the fate it deserved. It left the planet Feb.17, 2011.



“Animal Practice” (NBC, 2012)
NBC tried to give this sitcom, set in a veterinarian’s office, a boost by airing its premiere after the 2012 Summer Olympics. It was gone two months later. Blame it on Crystal the Monkey (yes, an actual monkey), who phoned- in her performance as Dr. Rizzo.

“Guys With Kids” (NBC, 2012)
Whoa, this one was lame. The premise: Guys have to help raise their kids! Co-executive producer Jimmy Fallon must have thought this was a fresh premise in 2012. Audiences did not agree and “Guys” was gone in early 2013.

“1600 Penn” (NBC, 2012)
Maybe this 2012 sitcom about a dysfunctional family in the White House was ahead of its time — but not even the buzz factor of “Book of Mormon” star Josh Gad could draw enough viewers. Its foreclosure was announced in May 2013.


			Read Next
		


			
				Whimsical 'The Good Place' turned upside-down by shocking ...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Whimsical 'The Good Place' turned upside-down by shocking ...			
		

Share Selection

131,249

63,137

56,447

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters