The Gotti clan is begging a Brooklyn federal judge to show mercy on the grandson of the notorious gangster.

John J. Gotti is no tough guy in need of a lesson for his link to a 2012 car arson — he's a nice, young man who's battled demons, made mistakes and deserves a second chance.

That's the chorus from more than 20 relatives and friends speaking up for the 24-year-old who's looking at federal time on top of the eight-year state sentence he's already doing for peddling painkillers in Queens.

"He is my baby, I adore him and pray he will have the opportunity to be a productive member of society again," wrote his grandmother, Victoria Gotti, the wife of late Gambino boss John Gotti who died behind bars in 2002. Gotti, 75, said her "fervent hope" was to live long enough to see the day her grandson returns home.

The young man's uncle, John A. (Junior) Gotti, said his nephew was born with a last name, and all of its "connotations and condemnations."

"With this kind of pressure, with my nephew being a young individual of limited life experience, and subject to being easily influenced by those who might not have his best long term interests at heart, it is not surprising that he would find himself one day involved with the criminal justice system," his uncle wrote.

Gotti's father, Peter, said his first-born son "was a beacon of light and hope through our constant storms. ...Please consider the love and undying support he has from his family as we try to rise from the ashes."

The letters were filed Wednesday, while Gotti waits to be sentenced by Judge Allyne Ross after pleading guilty to arson in June. Some noted Gotti's jailhouse interview with the Daily News, where Gotti said he was "stupid, young and dumb."

Prosecutors said after a driver cut off 82-year-old wiseguy Vincent Asaro, the senior demanded underlings hunt down the car and torch it.

A Bonanno crime family associate roped in Gotti, then 18, who was the getaway driver once the offending vehicle was set on fire.

In Gotti's federal plea deal, he copped to his role in a Queens bank robbery weeks after the arson. He was also the getaway driver in the boneheaded bank caper.

The federal crimes happened four years before the state pill-pushing case. By 2016, Gotti was in the grips of an opioid addiction, according to his lawyers, and he said the arrest on the state charges saved his life by getting him the help he needed.

Gotti's lawyers already worked out a state sentence that would get the non-violent, first-time offender treatment and programs meant to shave off prison time. They worried what federal time would mean for their client trying to turn his life around.

Federal prosecutors haven't filed their own papers yet on Gotti's sentence. But it seems like they aren't asking Ross to throw the book at Gotti the way they want her to do with Asaro.

Gotti's federal plea deal has a special feature, according to the defense. The feds say they'll recommend to Ross that whatever sentence she imposes, half of it runs while the state sentence is running. If the judge goes along with the prosecution's recommendation, that means Gotti's extra prison time would only be half of the federal sentence.

"We respectfully urge the court to accept this recommendation," Charles Carnesi wrote.

Meanwhile, prosecutors argue Asaro should get at least 15 years.

Two years ago, Asaro beat a case accusing him of crimes including a role in the 1978 robbery at the John F. Kennedy International Airport's Lufthansa Airlines Terminal. It was a more than $6 million haul with a special place in mob lore.

Prosecutors say Ross can weigh acquitted conduct when she imposes Asaro's sentence. Asaro says he should get time served.

No date's been scheduled for either Gotti or Asaro's sentencing.