Steve Kerr apparently has a solution for everything. You want to keep LaVar Ball quiet? Stop covering him.

You want to win on the road without Kevin Durant in the lineup? Dare the Brooklyn Nets to cover Stephen Curry. And when Curry fouls out? Give the ball to Klay Thompson.

Sometimes, it's that easy.

Curry, the two-time MVP, scored 39 points and Thompson added 23, including two late jumpers to stall Brooklyn's comeback as the Golden State Warriors, the league's most talented team, escaped with a 118-111 victory Sunday night in Brooklyn.

"I thought (Curry) was brilliant in terms of scoring and shot making," Kerr said after the Warriors improved to 13-4. "He was having his way for a while."

Curry made 14 of 24 shots and added 11 rebounds and seven assists while Durant's replacement, Omri Casspi, scored 12 points — or half of Durant's production on a nightly basis.

"You have to find that scoring," Curry said of Durant missing the game with a sprained left ankle. "That's 25 points that are missing."

Golden State scored 64 first-half points and led by as many as 28 in the third quarter before Brooklyn staged a comeback. Curry sat the first five minutes of the fourth after picking up his fifth foul. His sixth came with three minutes remaining when he drove into Quincy Acy under the basket. Curry's last two fouls were on drives.

"I don't think I had one charge this year," Curry said.

The Nets closed to 107-103 but Shaun Livingston answered with a dunk and after Spencer Dinwiddie threw the ball away, Thompson's 22-footer made it an eight-point game.

The Warriors at times overwhelmed Brooklyn, which lost its best player, D'Angelo Russell, to a knee injury two weeks ago. Still, it was an impressive response for a Nets team that has already defeated Cleveland at home.

The Warriors, the odds-on favorite to repeat as NBA champs, do have defensive lapses. They either lose interest – and focus – for stretches or perhaps they are showing mercy on the opposition.

In Saturday's win against Philadelphia,the Warriors gave up 47 first-quarter points. On Sunday, the Nets scored 42 in the first half only to score 42 in the third quarter.

The Warriors will face a tougher challenge on Wednesday when Durant returns to Oklahoma City for the third time since leaving the Thunder and signing a free-agent contract with Golden State two summers ago.

The fans in OKC, and to some extent Russell Westbrook, have not forgiven Durant for abruptly leaving and for the way he handled his departure. It has not been a pleasant experience for Durant, who has been taunted with chants of "cupcake."

"We might just stay in New York for three days and forfeit the game in Oklahoma City," joked one Warriors official.

The Warriors will be in New York until Tuesday, when they will depart for Oklahoma City after holding practice at St. John's University. This two-day window would have given the club enough time to make its White House visit. But the Warriors, who weren't interested in making the trip under the current administration, had their invitation revoked by President Trump.

Kerr has been an outspoken critic of Trump; therefore, his pre-game press conferences occasionally turn political. On Sunday, he was asked about the war of words between LaVar Ball and President Trump, who had a role in Ball's son Li'Angelo, as well as two other UCLA players, being allowed to leave China after they were caught shoplifting.

The three players thanked the President for his assistance, while LaVar questioned the role that the White House played. It was inevitable that LaVar Ball and President Trump would collide and that social media crash took place over the weekend.

The President tweeted twice about LaVar on Sunday, saying he should have kept all three players in China.

When Kerr was asked about LaVar and the President he said: "Modern life people, you know. People seeking attention and they're both getting it. I'm sure both guys are really happy.

"You know it would help if all of you just stopped covering both of them. Is that possible? You could probably stop covering LaVar. I don't think you can stop covering the President. It would be nice for both of us if both of them would just be quiet. Wouldn't that be great?"

Allen Crabbe scored 25 and Dinwiddie added 21 for the Nets (6-10).