Advertisement

Supported by

By Benjamin Weiser

A plot to detonate bombs in Times Square and the New York City subway system and to open fire at concert venues last year was quietly thwarted, federal authorities disclosed on Friday.


The bombings and shootings, which were planned in support of the Islamic State, would have taken place during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan in 2016, which began in June, United States officials said in a statement.


Three men involved in the plot were arrested; one of the men, Abdulrahman El Bahnasawy, a 19-year-old Canadian citizen, has been in custody since his arrest in May of last year, and has pleaded guilty to terrorism offenses, the authorities said.


The two others — Russell Salic, a 37-year-old Filipino, and Talha Haroon, 19-year-old American living in Pakistan, have been arrested overseas, and they are expected to be extradited to the United States.

Mr. El Bahnasawy bought bomb-making materials in Canada for use in the attacks, including 40 pounds of hydrogen peroxide, a primary ingredient commonly used in improved explosive devices, the authorities said.


He also bought batteries, Christmas lights, thermometers and aluminum foil for use in constructing the explosive devices, the authorities said. He also helped to secure a cabin within driving distance of New York City, where the devices would be built and for staging the attacks, the government said.


The officials said that the men, communicating through internet messaging applications, intended to carry out bombings and shootings in heavily populated areas of New York last year.


The authorities say the plot was broken up by the F.B.I. and the New York Police Department. Criminal complaints unsealed in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Friday indicated that an undercover F.B.I. agent, who posed as an ISIS supporter, had convinced the men that he was prepared to carry out the attacks with them.


In a communication in April 2016, Mr. El Bahnasawy introduced himself to the undercover agent, saying, “I’m one of the guys from the U.S. project,” according to one complaint. It says he “conveyed his desire to carry out a terrorist attack in New York City,” and said “we will show them what they hadn’t seen in 2001.”

In May of last year, Mr. El Bahnasawy wrote about plans to detonate a car bomb in Times Square. “We need a really strong bomb,” he said.


He also identified as potential targets specific concerts scheduled to take place in the next month in and around New York City, the complaint says. “We should pick a concert in a closed area,” he said, adding that he was looking “for a concert hall that’s far away from cops.”


Mr. El Bahnasawy, in writing about attacking a concert, referred to terrorist attacks in 2015 at various locations in Paris, including at a concert hall.


“We just walk in with the guns in our hands,” he wrote. “That’s how the Paris guys did it.”


Mr. Haroon expressed his enthusiasm for a plan to attack the subway system, calling it a perfect target in a communication with the undercover agent in May 2016.


Mr. Haroon told the agent that they could get on a subway and, on the way to the next station, “kill all in the train.”


“Remember, do not stop shooting even if u see women or kids,” he wrote, according to the complaint. “No mercy is rule one.”


The government said that Mr. El Bahnasawy, of Mississauga, Canada, was arrested in New Jersey, after traveling to the United States from Canada and that Mr. Haroon was arrested in Pakistan in September 2016, and Mr. Salic in the Philippines in April of this year.

Mr. El Bahnasawy pleaded guilty in Federal District Court a year ago to charges including conspiracies to use weapons of mass destruction and to commit acts of terrorism transcending national boundaries. The case is being prosecuted by the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan.


Mr. El Bahnasawy is scheduled to be sentenced in December; some of the charges against him carry potential life sentences. His lawyer, Sabrina Shroff, declined to comment.


The announcement of the charges comes as the trial of another man accused in a terrorism case, Ahmad Khan Rahimi, has ended its first week in the federal courthouse in Manhattan.










Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS