Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Sports
					

By Marc Berman


		
		
		
		
	


									May 11, 2018 | 12:36am
												

One of Joakim Noah’s confidants believes the Knicks center and Jeff Hornacek made a bad fit from the start because the former coach didn’t prioritize defense and was not structured enough.

Whether new coach David Fizdale represents a new beginning for Noah may be too good of a fairy-tale story, but Noah’s high school coach, Bill McNally, isn’t ruling it out.

“I would say in his heart he would love to turn the page and have good memories here,’’ McNally told The Post. “Is that intellectually the best situation? Who knows? New York loves a disaster. They also like a comeback story.

“But if he gets his freedom, he can go to a contender to fill a niche role as a leader. There’s plenty of teams would like to have him in that capacity. Obviously [the Timberwolves’] Tom [Thibodeau] loves him and would love to have him back.”

McNally, who coached Noah for two seasons at Poly Prep in Brooklyn, said he hopes the 2014 NBA Defensive Player of the Year sticks as a Knick, but added he’s “at their mercy.’’

Noah was exiled in late January after attacking Hornacek at a practice in Denver. The skirmish occurred the day after Noah was benched until garbage time, then yanked quickly. Fizdale has replaced Hornacek and the Knicks now face a $72 million decision.

According to McNally, Noah has not been in New York during his exile. He has trained mostly in Santa Barbara, Calif., and spent time in Chicago, France and Hawaii — outposts where he has family.

“It wasn’t the worst thing in the world to have that time to recoup himself — the team was going nowhere anyway — to get better physically, mentally and recharge his battery,” McNally said. “I know he’s been working out to try to be ready for the next chapter. I know he doesn’t want to end on this note. Hopefully he’ll get another chance one way or another. I believe he’ll be a bull let out of a stall and try to be most improved player.’’

McNally said Noah, 33, could have signed with his former Bulls coach Thibodeau in Minnesota during 2016 free agency, but “really wanted to be a Knick.’’

The Hell’s Kitchen product wore Knicks jerseys and hats to school frequently, according to McNally. Noah’s famous father, Yannick, a former French Open champion, befriended Patrick Ewing, and Noah went to a host of Knicks games.

“I laugh all the time because he could’ve made more money in Minnesota,’’ said McNally, who was at MSG regularly in Noah’s first Knicks season. “He came here for less. I laugh at the Garden when everyone who has a hedge fund is complaining how much he’s making. But nobody who put on that jersey the first time was prouder than him.”

Noah appeared in just seven games this past season before charging at Hornacek — an incident that McNally said shocked him.

“He’s always been Mr. Coachable,’’ he said. “Off court, he’s a free spirit. He walks to his own drummer. When he steps on court, the guy’s a Marine. He really tried to be a pro, take the high road. It came to a tipping point. He was in a delicate place and you get mixed messages and it didn’t go well. That’s not really who he is. He’ll follow you into the fire.”

The morning of Jan. 23, at Golden State, Noah was told he finally would see action because Kristaps Porzingis and Kyle O’Quinn were injured. Noah wasn’t inserted until the fourth quarter of the blowout, then was yanked after committing a turnover. Noah was visibly upset after the game and it escalated the next day in Denver, leading to his banishment with pay.

“It was a bad day — not good judgment by anyone’s part,’’ McNally said. “I don’t think it was personal. Trust is a big thing. [The coach] says one thing, does another. But he’s the boss.’’

Noah, McNally said, received wishy-washy messages from Hornacek all season.

“Better off the coach says, ‘Look, you’re never going to play’ than to go back and forth,’’ McNally said.

Hornacek’s coaching style didn’t suit Noah’s game, McNally said.

“He’s done well in structured environments with Tom and Billy [Donovan in college at Florida],’’ McNally said. “When it comes kind of loose? He’s better off with ‘Tell me exactly what you want me to do and I’ll do it.’ You tell me one thing, you do another thing.

“But he really wanted to be a Knick. I feel badly. His family was so happy for him to be here. It wasn’t a fit for him with the style of play. It was a good homecoming story but not a fit from a structural standpoint. He would’ve been better off in San Antonio after coming from Tom where there was a lot of structure. It wasn’t a defensive-oriented style like in Chicago.”

Noah texted Fizdale to congratulate him, but management may decide to use the stretch provision on Sept. 1 to save cap space in 2019.

“It was smart [reaching out to Fizdale],” McNally said. “You try to make the first step and get off on the right foot.”


			Read Next
		


			
				Jeremy Lin and other Nets get together for workouts			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Jeremy Lin and other Nets get together for workouts			
		

Share Selection

1

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						