


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

For the last Sonoran pronghorn in the United States, the only hope for survival could be their greatest menace from the past century: Humans.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Workers with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service corral Sonoran pronghorn in December 2017 so the animals can be examined by veterinarians. Mark Henle/azcentral
    

Shawn Macgill, center, of the U.S. Fish &amp; Wildlife Service, releases a Sonoran pronghorn back into the captive breeding area on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge.
(Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

CABEZA PRIETA NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE — Through the summer of 2002, John Hervert cut open the stomachs of rotting or mummified Sonoran pronghorn corpses in the desert. 


They were full of cholla fruit, one of the few foods left for the pronghorn after months of drought, then worst on record in Southern Arizona. 


The plants they usually ate had dropped their leaves, said Hervert, a biologist for the Arizona Game and Fish Department. The cholla fruit had some semblance of moisture, but lacked the leaves’ nutrients.


He watched the animals “slowly starve to death.” They would lose weight, their muscles eroding away and bones protruding everywhere underneath their skin, until they’d lie down and die.


“We were within three to four weeks of losing the last few animals that were barely hanging on before the rains actually saved them,” Hervert said.


The pronghorn survived bad droughts in the past, but in 2002, the species was on the brink of extinction in southern Arizona. Westward expansion over more than a century had splintered, erased and dried up the majority of pronghorn habitat. The population grew smaller each year.


Shaun Macgill, left, Clay Crowder and Jeremy Pennell secure a Sonoran pronghorn after capture on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

For the last few Sonoran pronghorn in the United States, the only hope for survival seemed to be their greatest menace over the past century: Humans.


Sixteen years later, government wildlife managers have slowed the pronghorn's decline, increasing its numbers through captive breeding programs and, in some areas, willing water into the ground.


In the midst of that effort, the species' survival has moved to the center of American politics. The U.S.-Mexico border runs through the pronghorn's range and climate change promises worse droughts.


Although the nation is at odds over what the border will look like, how to respond to climate change and what to do about a dwindling water supply in the West, wildlife managers say these animals are on course to survive.   


The spindly shadows of the Sonoran Desert hide “prairie ghosts,” a name the pronghorn earned by eluding observers. And a lucky glimpse of their bushy tail skimming over cactuses and creosote bushes is fleeting.


Before the pronghorn's numbers dwindled, surveyors charting the U.S.-Mexico border in the late 1800s saw the agile ungulates in every valley from Nogales, Sonora, to Yuma.


Two Sonoran pronghorns are isolated in a boma, a sort of livestock enclosure, just before being netted and processed on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

The United States’ southern border in Arizona sat on the northern edge of Sonoran pronghorn habitat when it ran along the Gila River, but as the state expanded southward, the new line divided pronghorn territory between the two countries. 


Over the years, urbanization, railroads, highways, mines, livestock grazing, fences, agriculture, canals, transmission corridors and human disturbances have steadily blocked off habitat or erased it, halting pronghorn migration, isolating herds and severing access to rivers.


The resulting habitat fragmentation is now one of the most significant threats to Sonoran pronghorn according to a federal plan to recover them. 


A border wall like the one President Donald Trump has promised to build would add another obstacle, but Hervert said the damage is done. The habitat is already fragmented.


The threats date back decades. Sonoran pronghorn were among the original endangered species,protected in 1967 under the Endangered Species Preservation Act.


Even before the wall, Highway 2 in Mexico, which runs along the border, mostly severed migration, said Jim Atkinson, a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service biologist and the Sonoran pronghorn recovery coordinator. Interstate 8 in the United States has similarly blocked the pronghorn's movement.


THE WALL |  See the special investigation by USA TODAY Network


Trump's border wall would still harm the Sonoran pronghorn, said Dan Millis of the Sierra Club. Further bulldozing and fragmenting of their habitat would only undermine the species' recovery. 


Another border wall already cuts through a portion of pronghorn habitat, he said. At 15 feet tall, the “pedestrian barrier fence,” as the federal government calls it, stretches along 5 miles of border at Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument.


Sonoran pronghorn have bypassed it and crossed Highway 2 into Mexico. Hervert has seen a couple of radio-collared pronghorn do it over the years, although it is extremely rare.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

MORE: Border wall pushes jaguar to extinct | Ocelots try to survive as habitat fades | Building a different kind of wall to protect the land


While a wall stretching the entire border could cut off this movement into Mexico entirely, barriers to pronghorn don’t have to be walls or busy paved roads.  


People also block off habitat by disturbing the area. And the worst human disturbance pronghorn face is the cat-and-mouse game between Border Patrol and undocumented border crossers, according to the recovery plan.


U.S. border policing strategy pushed crossers away from urban areas to these remote parts, according to a National Park Service report, which assessed an increase in vehicle tracks across federal lands in Sonoran pronghorn habitat.


“To say that walling off an area will help the environment is wishful thinking”


Hervert said the Trump administration’s border wall could decrease disturbances behind the wall, if it reduces Border Patrol chases.


The agents are, after all, responding to undocumented border crossers, he said.


But, Millis said, “to say that walling off an area will help the environment is wishful thinking." 


The best way to reduce human disturbance along the border is to cut Border Patrol’s budget, he said. With the number of crossers down and the number of agents up, Border Patrol causes much more human disturbance.


Hervert has studied Sonoran pronghorn since the 1980s when he saw fewer agents and crossers. The “big picture,” he said, is that humans have harmed Sonoran pronghorn for a long time in all kinds of ways.


“That’s why I feel very strongly that we have to do what we can to mitigate all those harms,” Hervert said.


After a half century on the endangered species list, Sonoran pronghorn only occupy about 12 percent of their historical range.


"It all comes down to water”, said Atkinson, the wildlife service biologist.


Sonoran pronghorn can’t access it like they used to, or it’s mostly dried up.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The Gila, Colorado, Sonoyta and Sonora rivers, and the surrounding ribbons of vegetation on both sides of the border, likely sustained Sonoran pronghorn historically during times of scarce food and water, according to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.


Nowadays most of these rivers trickle or run dry, with the exception of the Colorado River.


During the 2002 drought, as Hervert tells it, Sonoran pronghorn mothers couldn’t drink enough water or eat enough moisture to produce milk. Their fawns died from starvation, then the mothers would starve to death, too.


MORE: 5 things to know about Arizona's drought this winter


SEE ALSO: Farmers and Coca-Cola join to fight drought along Verde River


In 2002, two radio-collared Sonoran pronghorn set out across Highway 85, apparently responding to the drought. Since 1972, no others had been confirmed that far east.


When the rains came, only one returned, while drought likely took the other.


The 2002 drought reduced the estimated Sonoran pronghorn population in the U.S. from 99 to 21.


And it triggered emergency measures. The multi-agency recovery team, tasked with saving the species, started breeding captive pronghorn to release into the wild.


They built large pens and stocked them with food and water. The captive pronghorn inside never have a bad day, Atkinson said.


A Sonoran pronghorn is given oxygen while being processed during a roundup in December on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

On a cold December morning, wind nipped at the desert, the perfect conditions to capture pronghorn. The wind would cool their body temperatures when they revved up like race car engines, attempting to dodge a crew of “muggers” and net handlers who would wrestle them into submission. 


Atkinson had lured them inside a corral trap from the pens days before. The crew would drag them out a couple at a time.After catching them, a veterinarian would process them before officials ultimately released most into the wild.


Netters and muggers move in on a Sonoran pronghorn in a boma, or livestock enclosure, on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. Netters capture the pronghorn and muggers secure them for vaccination and relocation. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

The motley looking crew, hair matted on some from camping nearby the night before, readied for the first capture. They lined up in Carhart jackets, camouflage, flannel, sweatshirts and government apparel, holding the net outside the tall corral trap draped in shade cloth.


A hush fell.


Pronghorn spook easily. If you’re nearby, you best stay quite, the organizers had instructed. Seemingly every government agency in the area had sent someone. Some manned veterinarian stations, complete with IV fluids and animal stretchers. Others watched and waited.


The crews are vigilant; the year before, one pronghorn ran into a metal post and broke its back.


A blindfolded Sonoran pronghorn is carried on a stretcher to the processing area on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge during an annual roundup. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

The first team rushed in, shuffling and juking. Dust bellowed from the cylindrical corral trap like smoke from stacks. The pronghorn bleated, their hoofs pounding the ground.


“Hold on! Get him out of the net!” someone yelled from inside.


“Get him up! Get him up! Get him up!” someone else said.


Pronghorn hit speeds faster than any other mammal in North America, so once an animal was secured, several hands lifted its hooves off the ground. The pronghorn's legs flailed, bruising the crew members. Some had wrapped duct tape around their pants strategically to prevent rips and tears from the hooves.


Workers blindfolded the pronghorn, drew blood, dug out fecal samples, shot them with a sedative and vaccinated them. The veterinarian made sure they were healthy.


Ole Alcumbrac of the White Mountain Animal Hospital uses a flashlight to check a Sonoran pronghorn on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle, Mark Henle/The Republic)

Officials helicoptered a male pronghorn to a breeding pen at Kofa National Wildlife Refuge and trucked others to herds nearby, Hervert said.


Sometimes the managers drive pronghorn to Mexico, but that requires a lot of paperwork. Atkinson, the recovery coordinator, missed the window this year, but he wouldn’t have taken them across the border when the time came anyway, due to poor conditions in Sonora, Mexico.


The habitat is generally better in Sonora, Hervert said, and the numbers show it.


As of 2015, the recovery team estimated well over 900 wild Sonoran pronghorn lived in Sonora, Mexico. In 2016, they estimated over 200 in the United States.


If the recovery plan meets criteria to de-list the Sonoran pronghorn by 2036, it will have cost $27.3 million. A small amount comes from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Atkinson said, while much of the money comes from other agencies, like U.S. Customs and Border Protection, ordered to mitigate their footprint on the habitat.


Once the captive pronghorn are out on their own, the recovery team is not done helping them. In fact, pronghorn may never survive without help again.


A Sonoran pronghorn is vaccinated during a roundup on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

The recovery team hopes to put their help on autopilot by building a network across federal lands of self-filling watering holes, which store rainwater, and irrigated plots to grow more forage.


Another severe drought will test the water network. One could be deepening its reach in the region already. Some areas in Sonoran pronghorn habitat haven’t received rain in seven or eight months, Hervert said. 


And the worst might be yet to come. Science in the species’ recovery plan predicts climate change will induce longer and more severe droughts throughout the region.


But some wildlife activists take issue with watering holes.


The annual Sonoran pronghorn capture, vaccination and relocation took place in December on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

The sites will attract mountain lions or other predators that aren’t otherwise adapted to the desert, said Robin Silver, co-founder of the Center of Biological Diversity. Ultimately, that puts the lions in harm's way due to predator control efforts by officials to protect pronghorn or game species like deer.


“There is always a little bit of truth about any theory,” said Hervert, the biologist for the Arizona Game and Fish Department. He looks regularly for evidence of predators killing pronghorn by these watering holes. “I understand their concerns.”


Predators, most likely coyotes, have killed two or three fawns near the watering holes, he said, but it doesn’t seem to happen to adult pronghorn.


Both Hervert and Atkinson have seen pronghorn and coyotes drinking together at the same watering hole many times.


Since building the watering holes, fewer adult pronghorn have died during moderate droughts, Hervert said.


Devorah Young, center, of the Phoenix Zoo, and other capture team members’ process and cool a Sonoran pronghorn by pouring water on it during a roundup on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle, Mark Henle/The Republic)

“My argument is, 'hey, we’re replacing the Gila River because I can’t fix the Gila River.'”


The recovery team sees the watering holes as crucial for bringing the pronghorn back.


Silver would rather see temporary watering troughs during an extreme drought.


But the recovery team chooses locations for permanent water holes by testing out temporary watering troughs first, Hervert said. That way once a drought comes the guesswork is over.


Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument hasn’t constructed a permanent watering hole, but it does have a temporary watering trough available for the pronghorn year round.


Tyler Coleman, a wildlife biologist at the monument, hasn’t seen a need for a permanent watering hole, he said. Deer mostly use the trough, whereas pronghorn tend to drink rainwater and eat food with moisture.


More than a month after the capture, Atkinson drove from his wildlife refuge south to Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument to release five captive-bred pronghorn into the wild.


The recovery team held them in an smaller pen for a while to wear off the sedative and acclimate them to their new surroundings.


A Sonoran pronghorn is released back into the captive breeding area on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

It wasn’t a grand moment of bolting freedom.


Park and refuge staff snipped some wires and disassembled the fence around them, quietly to avoid spooking them. The pronghorn fled to the far corners of the pen, pacing a few routes they’d traced through the dirt over the past month.


Once the staff rolled up two sides of the fence, the animals pranced off, bobbing up and down through the desert flora.


THE WALL | NEWSLETTER: Sign up to receive a free weekly email roundup of news about the border, immigration and the proposed border wall


They were healthy and free, bringing new genes to strengthen the wild population.


A few park staff started climbing to higher ground to watch the five pronghorn scamper off.


They'd keep an eye on these pronghorn as they explored their fragmented habitat. And with luck the pronghorn wouldn't run into Highway 85. 


“Not that we could do anything if they run to the highway,” Coleman said. 


Environmental coverage on azcentral.com and in the Arizona Republicis supported by a grant from the Nina Mason Pulliam Charitable Trust. Follow the azcentral and Arizona Republic environmental reporting team at OurGrandAZ on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.



    With support from the Nina Mason Pulliam Charitable Trust, azcentral.com examines the most important questions in Arizona. David Wallace/azcentral.com
    David Wallace/azcentral.com

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 
