


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Experts say unlike a border wall,  improvements and staffing at ports where legal border crossings occur would directly boost the nation’s economy.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    After 93 years, the Bracker’s Department Store in downtown Nogales, Arizona closed its doors. Owners blamed a steady decrease in the number of Mexican shoppers crossing the border amid long wait times at the border. Nick Oza/azcentral.com
    

The U.S.-Mexico border fence can be seen behind Bracker's Department Store in Nogales, Arizona. The decades-old store shut its doors in October amid declining traffic from Mexican shoppers.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

NOGALES, Arizona – Bruce Bracker watched as a half-dozen workers sifted last month through the remains of his family's nine decades in the department store business.


The crew was rushing to vacate the three-story Bracker's Department Store that has sold designer clothing to customers from both sides of the Arizona-Mexico border.


The crew sorted shelving, hangers, mannequins and other items that will be sold or repurposed. Everything else was going in a dumpster.


"There's 63 years of stuff to move," Bracker said between phone calls and questions from the workers.


His department store joins a string of border businesses that have called it quits over the past decade. Like thousands of businesses along the U.S.-Mexico border, Bracker's bottom line was highly dependent on Mexican shoppers. 


THE WALL: Explore 2,000 miles of border between U.S., Mexico


THE WALL: Vigilantes guard 'unsecured' U.S. border


But rising wait times and chronic staff shortages at the international border crossings are increasingly keeping would-be customers away. Since 2009, when the federal government strengthened passport controls, the number of pedestrians crossing through downtown Nogales — Bracker's customers — has dropped by half.


"It’s not local CBP (Customs and Border Protection), it’s the national people in Washington, D.C., who have not paid attention to what their staffings are in the southern border," he said. "They don’t realize how important Mexican nationals and the Mexican economy is to the economy of the southern border of the United States."


All that was left on the walls of Bracker's store were hand-painted murals depicting the history of Nogales, a history the Bracker family has helped shape since 1924. That's the year Charlie and Pearl Bracker, Bruce Bracker's grandparents, opened an army surplus store that expanded into clothing for men, women and children. The business moved several times before landing in 1954 at the current location, a block from the U.S.-Mexico border. 


As they clear out the building, co-owner Debbie Bracker Senday, Bruce's cousin, came across framed news clippings chronicling the store's grand-opening.


"They went through the Depression. They were really able to get through it," Bracker Senday said of her grandparents. "Unfortunately, this economy, it was just too overwhelming.


"Everyone thought that we were the ones that were going to last," she added. "Ninety-three years, we wanted to make it to over a hundred." 


President Donald Trump’s efforts to combat illegal immigration and drug smuggling, including plans for a border wall and to hire 5,000 new Border Patrol agents, focus on the long stretches of border between the nation's ports of entry.


But experts say money might be better spent on improvements and more staffing at the ports, where legal border crossings occur. It’s there, they say, that most illegal drugs enter the U.S. and there that funding could more directly boost the nation’s economy.


“That is where you have more than half a trillion dollars worth of commerce moving every year between the U.S. and Mexico. That is where the majority of the illicit substances are coming through as well. That is where you want to put your resources,” said Erik Lee, executive director at the North American Research Partnership, an Arizona-based nonpartisan think tank, and a cross-border trade and border security expert at the Wilson Center. “I don’t think the money on extra Border Patrol agents (or building a wall) would be well spent.”


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Truck traffic carrying goods from Mexico into the U.S. has risen 37 percent since 2003, according to Department of Transportation Bureau of Transportation Statistics. But in parts of the border, infrastructure and staffing at the ports of entry has not kept pace. What's more, the resulting long lines of vehicles and pedestrians are largely out of view of the American public and politicians in Washington, D.C.


Lee attributes that partly to optics: The important work in the ports of entry “doesn’t carry the same visual punch that being outside on the border does,” he said.


MORE:  Over, under and through: Testing designs for Trump's border wall


But inspection officers, who work for Customs and Border Protection’s Office of Field Operations, are just as crucial to national security. Over the past five years officers at ports of entry along the Southwest border have seized greater quantities of more-potent drugs such as meth and cocaine than agents patrolling between the ports, according to statistics from CBP.


The officers at the ports of entry are also responsible for facilitating legitimate trade and travel, while Border Patrol isn't, Lee noted. “In some cases, Customs has at least twice the work that Border Patrol does. And it has to be done fast.”



    U.S. Custom and Border Protection agents stop thousands of pounds of narcotics from crossing the border. Smugglers have come up with unique and creative ways to evade detection, including sneaking drugs through air-powered cannons and hidden in food.
    Wochit

For communities along the U.S.-Mexico border, there's a lot at stake in cross-border trade and travel.


Tony Tew is general manager of Foothills Packing, a company that harvests produce in the fertile Yuma Valley.


From October to March, the area calls itself "America’s Salad Bowl" because it supplies much of the leafy greens and other produce consumed across the country. And a majority of the people who harvest that produce are Mexicans who commute through the international border crossing at San Luis Rio Colorado.


“If you’re working 14- to 16-hour days, and you’re standing in line for four, that gives you a few hours to go home take a shower, get your lunch and food for the next day, and get back in line to get back across.”


“It does seem to have progressively gotten worse in about the past eight years,” Tew said of the waits to cross, which he said hurt productivity and worker safety.


“If you’re working 14- to 16-hour days, and you’re standing in line for four, that gives you a few hours to go home take a shower, get your lunch and food for the next day, and get back in line to get back across,” Tew said. Not to mention resting from the back-breaking work in the fields.


Nearly two-thirds of Tew’s 1,800 workers live in Mexico and cross the border each day, then board a company bus to the fields.


Maria Irma Lopez is one of these “alien commuters” — the federal government’s term for Mexican workers who either have green cards or visas, and work in the U.S. One day last March she approached the San Luis Rio Colorado port at about 3 a.m. She was on her way to work.


“I get here with plenty of time to spare,” she said.


Because of the hour and the harvest season was almost over, there were only a few dozen people in line. But Lopez said it’s common to wait up to three hours to cross the border.


During the winter, the port processes anywhere from 8,000 to 10,000 pedestrians a day.


“It starts in the early morning hours, it’s the seasonal workers,” said Assistant Port Director Miguel Valadez, who has worked at the port for more than 20 years. “And then it starts tapering off at around 5. And then like around 5, 6 you start getting the children that come across to go to school. And around 7, between 7, 8 you start getting the rest of the workers showing up.”


CBP expanded the San Luis pedestrian-processing facility, adding two booths and giving it a total of seven.


But Valadez acknowledged that increases in trade and traffic have already outpaced that expansion.


Another expansion is underway. But many Yuma-area companies and their employees  are skeptical they’ll see much improvement once the $5.7 million project is complete, in late 2018.


The expansion will add three lanes for pedestrians, for a total of 10.


Tew and others whose employees commute through the port say it will be moot if there isn’t a similar investment in more customs officers.


“If the staffing isn’t going to be created to manage the lanes, we’re really going to get nowhere,” he said.


Delays in commercial hubs like Ambos Nogales can also hurt local companies dependent on cross-border trade.


Jose Lopez, a trucker based in the Mexican side of the sister cities, has been driving across the border multiple times a day for nine years.


He knows that even a relatively short commute—15 miles in all—can take up to three hours when crossing an international border.


And the delays are getting longer. The combination of increased traffic and understaffing at commercial ports of entry along the southern border has sent wait times there soaring in recent years.


But there are far higher stakes than the rhythm of Lopez’s work day. The longer he waits, the fewer trips he makes and the higher the transportation cost tied to his cargo. That cost will, in turn, inflate prices for U.S. consumers.


READ:  Mesh added to slats of Nogales border wall to thwart smuggling


“It’s changed a lot here in the U.S.,” Lopez says of the customs process. “It expanded, but at times it is very slow.”


A 2008 study by the Department of Commerce predicted the cost of delays at border crossings would, by 2017, total $86 billion in lost output, wages, jobs, and tax revenue. The same report estimated Texas, California and Arizona — states that trade heavily with Mexico — lose a combined 11,000 jobs, $2.2 billion in output and $630 million in wages annually due to waits at ports of entry.


Another study, conducted in 2013 by the University of Southern California for the Department of Homeland Security, found on average each additional CBP officer generated $2.1 million for the U.S. economy and produced 33 American jobs.


“Think about that, you get a $2.1 million gain on average from adding an extra officer at a cost of about $150,000 to $180,000” — the cost of hiring a CBP officer with salary and benefits, said Bryan Roberts, an economist who co-authored the study. “When you lower the wait time ... that is going to stimulate economic activity.”


MORE:  Dearly deported: Day of the Dead in the shadow of the border


Customs and Border Protection officials estimated it had a shortage of 3,811 officers in 2013 and Congress approved funding to hire 2,000 additional CBP officers the following year. But hiring has fallen short. As of August, the agency had 1,400 vacancies, according to CBP officials. 


U.S. Sen. Jeff Flake, R-Ariz., introduced legislation intended to address the hiring shortfall by waiving a polygraph requirement for applicants who are former law-enforcement officers or military members. The bill is still making its way through the Senate.


Until there's a fix, commercial drivers like Lopez are at the mercy of seasonal fluctuations in traffic and wait times.


On a day last summer, during the slow season in Nogales' Mariposa crossing, his cargo included 49,000 cans of Mexican beer. It took him 20 minutes to reach and cross the U.S. border. 


But with the busy winter produce season now underway, his trip will become more unpredictable.


Even though the department store his grandparents founded has closed, Bruce Bracker opened a new store at a smaller location down the street. 


"We’ll be able to keep some of our employees employed," he says. "Not all of them, which is going to be very hard decision to make. But that’s where we go."


He hasn't decided yet if he'll keep the Bracker's name, and he doesn't know if his remaining customers will follow him. 


Regardless, he expects to face many of the same challenges that forced him to close the department store. But Bracker said he's undaunted.


"It’s in the blood. I was raised with retail. Retail has been really good for our family for multiple generations," he said. "I still believe that there’s business in downtown Nogales to be had. We’re the bottom of a down cycle and I think that we have nowhere else to go but up." 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 


READ MORE: 


Family of teen killed by Border Patrol agent denounces trial delays


Clock ticks for Nogales sewage leak, threatening produce industry
