Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Days after being reinstated following a two-game suspension, Auburn backup QB Sean White was arrested early Sunday morning on a public intoxication charge.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Auburn QB Sean White on his role as the backup in 2017.
    Matthew Stevens

Auburn backup quarterback Sean White was arrested at 2:45 a.m. Sunday on a public intoxication charge.
(Photo: Lee County Sheriff's Office)

AUBURN — Auburn backup quarterback Sean White was arrested early Sunday morning on a public intoxication charge.


According to the arrest report obtained by the Montgomery Advertiser, White was arrested by Auburn police at 2:45 a.m. after officers noted he was intoxicated. The arrest report noted White, 21, did not appear to be under the influence of any other substance than alcohol and the location of the arrest is listed as 141 N. Ross Street, which is the address of the city of Auburn police department. When asked for clarrification, Auburn Assistant Chief of Police William Matthews stated White was arrested around "the 100 block of N. Ross Street", which would be within walking distance of the police station. 


The arrest report also stated this was a first-time arrest for White, and according to the Lee County Sheriff's Office records White was admitted to jail at 3:28 a.m. and is being held on a $500 bond. 


READ THE REPORT: 


Arrest report for Auburn's Sean White, accused of public intoxication | Arrest | Arrest Warrant


Public intoxication is a violation in Alabama and normally carries a penalty of a fine along with court costs. The arrest report states White has an initial court date scheduled for Nov. 30. 


According to a statement from a team spokesperson, Auburn head coach Gus Malzahn "is aware of the situation" and "is gathering all of the facts and will handle this appropriately". 


More: QB Sean White among three Auburn players suspended for season opener


White was among three Auburn players suspended for the season opener on Sept. 2 against Georgia Southern for an undisclosed violation of team rules. The fourth-year junior’s suspension was the only one that extended into the second week’s matchup at No. 2 Clemson.


“We held out three of our players, Kam Pettway, Sean White and Kyle Davis," Malzahn said after the 41-7 win over Georgia Southern on Sept. 2. "That’s completely between me and them. Kam Pettway and Kyle Davis will be back next week, and Sean White will be back week three."


More: Malzahn says Auburn QB Sean White 'is our No. 2'


White was active for Auburn’s 24-10 victory over Mercer on Saturday but did not take a snap in the game.


Auburn quarterback Sean White (13) greets fans in Tiger Walk before the Auburn vs. Georgia Southern football game on Saturday, Sept. 2, 2017, in Auburn, Ala.  (Photo: Albert Cesare)

White, who was the incumbent starter at quarterback going into preseason practices last month after getting 11 starts in the 2016 season, completed 63.9 percent of his passes for 1,679 yards and nine touchdowns along with three interceptions last season. In 11 of his 17 career starts at Auburn, White has failed to throw a touchdown pass but led the Southeastern Conference in completion percentage in 2016.
