Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

His accuser lied. A killer named names. But justice was still denied to a black man murdered in Elmore County in 1901.

 Brian Lyman, Montgomery Advertiser

ABOUT THIS SERIES:In conjunction with the opening of the National Memorial for Peace and Justice and the Legacy Museum, the Montgomery Advertiser is running a series of stories titled "Legacy of lynchings: America’s shameful history of racial terror." Between 1877 and 1950, more than 360 African-Americans were murdered by mobs in Alabama and more than 4,000 were killed nationwide. The acts of racial terrorism, conducted in the name of white supremacy, were almost never punished; created untold human suffering, and helped contribute to the Great Migration out of the South. 


The series looks at the victims of lynching and the aftermath of their murders, the Advertiser’s indifference to the terror and the potential impact of the memorial, both on the city and in the long process of reconciliation.


Almost all we know about Robin White comes from his killers or those who watched his final moments. 


He was mobbed. He fought. He was overpowered, dragged into a swamp and murdered. 


He was black.



    The destruction wrought by lynching was far-reaching.
    Brian Lyman / Advertiser

In most lynching stories, that would be the end of the tale. But seven weeks after a white mob killed Robin White on July 2, 1901, one of its members — a white farmer described by the Montgomery Advertiser as “one of the best known and most highly-respected planters of Elmore County” — took the stand in a Wetumpka courtroom. 


George Howard proceeded to do something unprecedented in Alabama history. He not only confessed to murdering White, but named a dozen other members of the mob. 


One of the pillars at EJI's lynching memorial in Montgomery shows the name of Robert White. The 1900 Census listed Robert White as Robin. Most witnesses at the trials referred to him by that name, as did accounts of the murder after the sentencing. But the coverage immediately following the lynching called him Robert, as did a handful of witnesses. His brother Abe, who would play a major role in the events before and after the lynching, used both “Robin” and “Robert” in a letter dictated in 1902, suggesting, perhaps, that Robin was a nickname.(Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)


The testimony led to something almost unheard of in the United States in 1901: A white jury convicted four white men of the lynching of a black man, handing down sentences no Alabama court would match in a case involving the lynching of an African-American  until 1981.


But that was not the end of the story.


Like so many other lynchings, Robin White’s murder has faded into the numerical rows of crime statistics, a single voice in an awful, overwhelming choir. But the prosecution of his killers left trial transcripts and correspondence that lay forgotten in the Alabama Department of Archives and History for more than 115 years. 


The papers, discovered by the Advertiser earlier this month, provide a detailed and often horrifying look at a lynching unfolding in real time. They capture the chillingly matter-of-fact manner in which Howard described Robin White’s murder and the lynchers’ attempts at enforcing a code of silence. 


And, tragically, the documents also show the difficulties in reconstructing the lives of lynching victims, and the politics that finally denied justice to Robin White. 


The murder of Robin White: A note on sources


Not much can be said with certainty about White, not even his first name. 


"Robin" is traditionally a diminutive of "Robert." What he preferred is not known. The 1900 Census listed him as Robin. Most witnesses at the trials referred to him by that name, as did accounts of the murder after the sentencing of Howard and the others.


Robin White's entry in the 1900 Census, taken in June of that year. His wife Osillis is listed below. The Census did not record the Whites having children at that time.(Photo: ancestry.com)


But the coverage immediately following the lynching called him Robert, as did a handful of witnesses. His brother Abe, who would play a major role in the events before and after the lynching, used both “Robin” and “Robert” in a letter dictated in 1902. 


Newspaper accounts and the Census give the barest facts of White’s life. He was born in March 1874 — making him 27 years old at the time he was killed — and lived outside Tallassee. In 1896 or 1897, White married a woman named Osillis. As of June 1900, they had not had children.


His older brother Abe, born in 1871 or 1873, lived next to him with his wife, Lena, and their son Henry, about 2 1/2 years old at the time of the census. A description of Abe White from 1901 lists him as 5 feet 10 inches and weighing 185 pounds, with “nearly straight” black hair and brown eyes. No photograph or physical description of Robin White is known to exist. 


Both brothers were listed as illiterate and worked as tenant farmers for a “Mr. Goodwin,” likely Love Goodwin, a 61-year-old farmer listed on the same page as the White brothers in the Census and referred to as “Old Man Godwin” in the trials. 


White’s 82-year-old father, also named Robin, lived nearby with White’s mother, Mollie, 60 at the time of the Census. The elder White told the Census taker he was born in South Carolina in 1817, and he may have spent time in neighboring Tallapoosa County. A “Robin White” matching the elder White’s age appears in Tallapoosa in the 1866 Alabama Census, and a “Rubin White” shows up in 1867 voter registration records in that county.  Abe would later mention a brother living in Dadeville. 


One of the pillars at EJI's lynching memorial shows the name of Robert White. The 1900 Census listed him as Robert White as Robin. Most witnesses at the trials referred to him by that name, as did accounts of the murder after the sentencing. But the coverage immediately following the lynching called him Robert, as did a handful of witnesses. His brother Abe, who would play a major role in the events before and after the lynching, used both “Robin” and “Robert” in a letter dictated in 1902, suggesting, perhaps, that Robin was a nickname.(Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)


The elder Whites lived with a Carrie Russell — a daughter or daughter-in-law — a widow who was literate, and her two children.


In later efforts to win release for his killers, local whites would smear Robin and Abe's characters while trying to elevate those of his murderers, never offering evidence for either proposition. 


“The threats and bad character of the deceased negro, while perhaps not amounting to legal justification, does in our opinion greatly mitigate the offense,” said one undated petition, likely circulated around the time of the trials. “While the former good character of the parties involved and their dependent families present a strong appeal for mercy and clemency.”


A “B.L. Young,” who wrote to Gov. William Jelks in 1902, claimed the White brothers were “partly raised on my place” and claimed they were “both bad characters and have a bad reputation in the community.” 


There are no records of the Whites running into legal trouble — either in newspaper accounts or public documents — before the events of July 1901.


The White brothers had a neighbor named John Thomas, a 35-year-old white farmer. Robin White lived a quarter of a mile from Thomas. Abe White’s home was just 200 yards away from him. Thomas — standing about 5 feet 6 inches tall with gray eyes and “hair getting gray,” according to a later description — sold vegetables from his farm and ran a nearby store. 


The start of the "difficulty with one John Thomas a white man," as Abe White described it in his 1902 letter, had to do with chickens. In the wake of Robin White's lynching, the white press said Robin and Abe let their chickens run free on Thomas' land. Much later, a far different story would emerge: Thomas had allowed his chickens to destroy the White brothers' gardens, and refused to acknowledge their complaints. 


A portion of a letter dictated by Abe White in early 1902, indicating "a difficulty with one John Thomas" led to the lynching of his brother(Photo: Alabama Department of Archives and History)


Sometime before the afternoon of July 1, 1901, the Whites loaded at least one and possibly two shotguns with birdshot after Thomas' birds invaded their garden.


What happened next is unclear. Later newspaper accounts said Robin White fired at one of Thomas’ birds, with some of the shot hitting the white farmer’s house. In his 1902 letter, Abe White says the brothers stood 165 yards from Thomas — “wholly incapable of doing any great damage” to him — when Thomas “began shooting ... with a Winchester rifle or a Colt No. 45 revolver.” 


Robin White escaped injury, but Abe White was “badly shot” by Thomas. A record of White taken later that year mentions “a large burn scar on the right side of the neck” and “three scars on the right side of the stomach,” possibly — though not conclusively — wounds from the attack.  


Thomas, unhurt, went to his neighbors with a story that would dominate initial reports of the lynching. The White brothers, he said, attacked him. They had let their chickens roam free. They attacked his house with shotguns. They tried to kill him. 


By 11 a.m. on the morning of July 1, 1901, J.M. Fuller, a notary public, had issued arrest warrants for Robin and Abe White on charges of assault with intent to kill. 


The neighborhood whites formed a mob, organized to the point that some brought dogs with them. Thomas and Clap Taunton, the local bailiff, were in the crowd. 


Robin and Abe fled. The crowd chased Robin White at least seven miles. Taunton and Thomas later testified that they found White in a tree, and convinced him to come down, late in the day. Abe White, for the moment, escaped.


The Wetumpka jail was some 20 miles away, a long journey in a time of mule and horse-drawn buggies. The mob decided to detain Robin White for the night at John Thomas’ store.


Whites converged on the store throughout the night. Many later testified they planned to “hunt” — and possibly lynch — Abe White the following day. Bryant Nails, a local farmer, went over to the store at midnight. He said at the trials he wanted “to find out” what happened with Robin White. 


“I stayed the balance of the night, except a short time, when at the Negro’s request, he told us to go and tell his wife to bring him some clothes,” Nails later testified. 


The woods in Elmore County, Ala. near where Robin White was lynched in 1901.(Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)


By dawn, Thomas said, “there was a right smart crowd around there,” with mules and buggies converging on the store. Lemuel Strength, a 48-year-old “farmer and preacher” arrived that morning. His son John, 23, was also there. 


The plan, Taunton later testified, was to take White to the Wetumpka Jail down the Tallassee and Wetumpka Road, roughly equivalent to today’s County Road 14. 


“There was such a stirring there among the people,” Lem Strength later testified. “I heard Robert was there, and they said ‘We are about to get Robert off to jail.’ I said ‘That is the best thing to do.’ (They said) ‘The news is that Abe is at large and we want to catch him,’ and I said ‘That is best.’ ”


Also among the crowd that morning was George Howard, a 35-year-old farmer. Standing 5 feet 10 inches and weighing 155 pounds, Howard had blue eyes, dark hair and a large nose, with, according to a later description, his “fingers all turned in.” Howard later testified that he helped convey White into the carriage between 7 a.m. and 8 a.m. that day. 


Taunton got in the mule-drawn carriage — described as a “hack” — along with Marion Pittman, a justice of the peace who planned to make a statement to the local judge. They put themselves in the back. Nails, driving the mules, sat in the right seat in the front. White sat next to him. 


The hack pulled away from the store sometime about 8 a.m. 


By then, some in the store decided the carriage would not reach its destination. Howard said he talked “sorter (sic) privately” to Thomas before White left the store. According to Howard, Thomas said that Goodwin, who the Whites worked for, had sent a runner to Tallassee to bring out troops to protect Robin White.


“(Thomas) told me the Negro ought to be killed, and he said he would have killed him that night if he had been left alone,” Howard later testified. 


Meanwhile, White and the other men continued down the road. Shortly after leaving the store, they passed Love Goodwin’s house, where the farmer was sitting out “on the piazza” with his 16-year-old daughter Gwen. The carriage, Goodwin testified, came at a “common gait.” 


The farmer also recorded the only word known to come from Robin White’s mouth: “Goodbye.”


Within minutes of White’s departure, Howard and other members of the crowd began going down the road — all except Thomas, who for the moment stayed behind. 


“He said he didn’t have any way to go down there, and I told him he could get my mule and go down there ... to take the Negro, is what he meant,” Howard later testified.


Others at the store later testified they planned to go to the farm of Frank Timmerman, who lived about 10 miles away, to continue the search for Abe White. They brought dogs. As they traveled down the road, they met other men who joined the crowd. 


“Some of us were riding mules and some in buggies, and riding along,” Howard said. “It was said we would take the Negro and kill him.”


Meanwhile, the mules conveying White drove over a “tolerably good road” at different paces — “sometimes we trotted, sometimes we walked,” Taunton said. 


Nails, holding the reins, was near a place called Lazenby’s ford — about 8 1/2 miles from Thomas’ store — when, he said, Howard suddenly emerged from behind the carriage and grabbed the lines “in front of my hands.” 


The four men saw a crowd of 15 to 20 whites bearing down on the carriage. At least one and likely many others carried a firearm. It is not clear from the record if Taunton, Pittman or Nails had guns. Even if they had, the crowd had the drop on them. 


The mob engulfed the hack and tried to pull White out of it. “They said ‘We have got to have our boy,’” Pittman later testified. Taunton remembered Howard saying “he was going to have the Negro.”


Robin White fought back. Howard said the mob had “to make tracks around the hack to get the Negro out.” Jim Pugh, a member of the mob, took out a pistol and beat White over the head with it. It took three minutes to pull him out. 


A portion of George Howard's testimony in the trial of John Thomas in late August of 1901. At the end of the excerpt, Howard says "Dave Parker tied the rope around his neck, and climb(ed) the tree and tied it to a limb, and the rest of us raised him up and turned him loose."(Photo: Alabama Department of Archives and History)


“They took the Negro out of the buggy and told us to get and we asked them to let the man alone,” Pittman, the justice of the peace, said. “Pugh said, ‘We don’t blame you gentlemen for objecting to this.’ ” 


Beyond talk, though, none of the three men driving with White said they tried to stop the assault. Nails, sitting next to White as he struggled to fight the mob, said he never let go of the reins. Taunton, the bailiff, simply said “they told us to git, and we got.”


As Taunton, Pittman, and Nails fled, other buggies began arriving. Whether they stumbled upon the lynching or were active participants in it became a source of controversy later. Martin Fuller, a 29-year-old in-law of the Strengths, who like Nails had been at the store all night, later said he drove up with another man, Will Still, as the mob pulled Robin White out of the carriage. 


Fuller claimed he fled the scene: “I didn’t want to be in it or have anything to do with it,” he said. Will Still claimed they were “so surprised we reined up and left.” 


Lem and John Strength said that they arrived as the mob was tying White up.  


“Someone said, ‘come on boy,’ ” Lem Strength later testified. “And I said, ‘No boys, you all know my standing and I cannot participate in such as that.’ And I remained out there with my son.” 


John Strength said he got out of the carriage and “ran down the road” upon seeing the mob. At some point, Lem Strength testified in later trials, a member of the crowd — possibly Howard — said “the man that gives this away will go like the damned Negro.” 


“And therefore, I was afraid to go away,” Lem Strength said. “I was afraid some of them might shoot me.”


The preacher got out of his buggy and stood on the ground, his hands gripping his team. 


Howard remembered things very differently. 


The woods in Elmore County, Ala. near where Robin White was lynched in 1901.(Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)


Fuller and Still, he said, were “10 to 15 paces” behind him when they overtook the carriage containing White. 


Lem Strength, he said, was there when the crowd overtook Robin White. And John Strength ran up the road, he said, to act as a lookout. 


“John Strength was left to watch the road,” Howard said. “That was what he was there for.”


The mob — whoever belonged to it — took White and dragged him at least 100 yards south of the road through “dense growth,” according to one witness, so no one passing by could see what was about to happen. It was not yet 10 a.m.


Near an oak tree, Howard testified, Dave Parker, a member of the mob, tied a rope around White’s neck. He took the other end and climbed the tree. As he tied it to a branch, the other men in the mob lifted Robin White off the ground. When the rope was taut, the mob dropped White.


The fall didn't kill him. Robin White slowly strangled to death. 


Howard said he left before White died. One by one, the mob walked back to road.  


“There was not a single word,” Lem Strength later testified.


 


Taunton, Pittman, and Nails went about a half-mile past the spot where the mob took White. They had no plan to pursue White's killers. 


On the way back, they encountered John Thomas, who incited the mob but was only now going up the road to join the hunt for Abe White at Timmerman’s farm. 


“(Thomas) says, ‘What have you done with the Negro?' ” Pittman said. “And we told him that a crowd had taken him away from us, and went down in the swamp with him. He said he didn’t know anything about that.”


“(John Thomas) says ‘You were most too hasty. I wish I had got there sooner, and I would have done the work for you.'”


Thomas drove on to the farm of Frank Timmerman and joined others there, including Howard, Dave Parker and the Strengths. It was about a half-hour after the murder of White when, Howard said, he saw Thomas. 


“He said, ‘What has become of our Negro?’ and I told him,” Howard said. “He says ‘You were most too hasty. I wish I had got there sooner, and I would have done the work for you.”


The mob went from Timmerman’s farm to the house of Abe Miller, a local black farmer, where they thought they might find Abe White. 


But White was not there. Later that day, a group of men found Abe White in the woods “near the scene of the difficulty with Thomas,” far from the mob. They arrested him and “hurried” Abe White to the Wetumpka Jail. 


Timmerman and Dr. H.M. Lett, a physician who lived nearby, found Robin White’s body at about 1 p.m. that day. Lett later testified that he examined White's corpse and, afterward, “I assisted in part in carrying the darkey up to an outhouse there.”


The news of the lynching spread through central Alabama and made the front page of the Montgomery Advertiser a few days later. The narrative reflected John Thomas’ claims that the Whites had been the ones unable to keep their chickens in and that they had caused the trouble. 


“The negroes, heavily armed, attacked Thomas, firing six shots at him,” the Advertiser said.


The Advertiser headline from July 4, 1901 that reported on the lynching called Abe White "Winston White" and reflected John Thomas' version of events.(Photo: Montgomery Advertiser)


But even an editorial board nominally opposed to lynching but usually indifferent to it found a man getting lynched over a chicken dispute too much. 


"There was no use for the lynching of that Negro victim of that gang of lawless white men, and everyone engaged in it ought to be indicted and punished to the fullest extent of the law," the newspaper wrote. "There was no assault in this case on a white woman."


On July 11, 1901, the Weekly Herald (predecessor of the Wetumpka Herald), the “organ” of the dominant state Democratic Party in Elmore County said that “this was one of the times the mob was without the semblance of an excuse in summarily executing Robert White.”


“Gov. Jelks is very much wrought up over the unfortunate occurrence and says every member of said mob must be run to earth and tried for murder,” the Herald wrote. 


The Weekly Herald wrote on July 11, 1901 that "every member of said mob" that lynched Robin White "must be run to earth and tried for murder."(Photo: Newspapers.com)


Jelks offered a $200 reward for the capture of the lynchers — a common practice — but also suggested the local judge, Nimrod D. Denson, and prosecutor S.J. Brewer convene a special court to investigate the murder. 


Grand juries in lynching cases were routine, as was their consistent failure to return indictments. In 1898, a mob led by “some of the best and most prominent citizens of Elmore and Coosa counties” attacked the Wetumpka Jail, using chisels and crowbars to break down the doors holding four black men, who were immediately kidnapped and — despite the pursuit of militia — lynched. No one was ever charged with the crime. 


The men who killed Robin White or saw it maintained the code of silence. John Strength said later he “talked over the matter” with his father “and we did not agree to keep it secret, but we were not going to tell it.”


In Denson, 45 years old at the time, the lynchers faced a well-connected judge — a former state legislator considered for a congressional run the previous year — who may have wanted to make an example of them. 


In 1898, months after the lynching in Wetumpka, Denson gave a lengthy charge to a grand jury demanding they do their best to bring charges against the lynchers. If they did not act, he said, “it may not be long before upon your own door sill you will hear the strange, mysterious step, the low soft whisperings that betoken evil to you and your little ones.”


“Mobs are not cool and clear-headed enough to decide questions of guilt or innocence,” he said. “They make mistakes, nor will they confine themselves to one class of cases. Obnoxious and friendless persons will always be in danger in communities where mob law prevails. Such barbarous deeds give a State a bad name all over the world, and mildew our civilization.”   


A photo of the old, now replaced, Elmore County Courthouse in Wetumpka, Ala.(Photo: Contributed)


Despite Denson's charge, the 1898 grand jury returned no indictments. There was little reason to think the jury seated in a hot, stuffy room on Tuesday, Aug. 20, 1901, in Wetumpka’s red, two-story courthouse would return any other result. Nevertheless, Denson, the Advertiser reported five days later, gave a “vigorous charge” to the grand jury “in which he dwelt at length on the trivial offense of the Negroes, and the consequent lack of excuse of the lynchers.”


The court summoned witnesses, the first being Taunton, Nails, and Pittman to give their account of what happened in the carriage. The three men refused to appear. Pittman later testified that Howard and two other members of the mob threatened him, saying “I could go like the Negro if I divulged it.”


Denson threw all three in jail. Two days later, the men made bail and promised to testify before the grand jury. By Aug. 24, the grand jury indicted Howard, Thomas and a third member of the mob. Other arrests followed, including the Strengths; Martin Fuller and Will Still.


Dave Parker, who tied the rope around White’s neck; and Jim Pugh, who pistol-whipped White, fled the county, as did many other lynchers. Somehow, the authorities locked all the remaining defendants up with one another. John Strength and Martin Fuller later claimed that Howard promised them he would say they were not at the lynching. Howard said he never did so. 


“A great crowd thronged the courtroom” on Aug. 28 when Howard appeared. According to the Advertiser, there was a “whispered conference” between Howard and his attorney, A.E. Williams. Williams then said Howard would make a “voluntary statement” about the lynching. 


“Without hesitation and in a clear voice” Howard testified in detail about the crime and named 12 other men who participated in it. Among them: John Strength and Martin Fuller. Pittman would later testify that he saw John Strength and Martin Fuller in the mob that overtook the carriage. 


“If you hated it so bad, why didn’t you tell these men not to do it?”


The defendants, whether out of sincere conviction or adhering to the omerta of the lynchers, denied any knowledge of a plan to kill Robin White. Thomas said he told Taunton, Pittman and Nails that he “hated it that the Negro was hung.” That brought an incredulous response from E.J. Jones, a Montgomery attorney who assisted the state’s prosecution.


“If you hated it so bad, why didn’t you tell these men not to do it?” he asked.


“Because the postal man had come from that direction, and I didn’t want to know about it,” Thomas replied.


Lem Strength, also under indictment, was asked why he didn’t try to stop the lynching, particularly in his role as a preacher. 


“Well, it does look like a minister of God ought to have the power to quell a mob, but someone called out whoever gives this away will go like the Negro,” he said. “Yes, I remained because I was afraid they would shoot my head off.” 


That fear may still have gripped the witnesses. When asked the identities of the members of the mob, most men on the stand — notably Fuller and Still — would only name Howard and the men who fled the county. The Advertiser described Fuller, tried with John Strength, as “confused in his responses.” 


Howard’s motives for confessing remain a mystery, but not for a lack of questions during the trial. During Howard's testimony in the Strength and Fuller trial, Jones asked Howard why he became a witness.


“You told me that I was under indictment, and there was no law to make me tell anything and that whatever I told would be used against me, and I said it is a burden on me and I want to get rid of it,” Howard said.


Howard also repeatedly denied getting anything in exchange for his testimony: “No one said it would go lighter with me,” he said at one point from the stand. 


But doubts persisted. Howard gave his statement after Taunton, Pittman and Nails agreed to testify, and it is possible that Howard — knowing the men in the carriage could identify him — turned state’s witness hoping to ease his punishment. 


Defense attorneys had no doubt there was a deal, and in closing remarks compared Howard to Judas Iscariot and Benedict Arnold. Many in the public also suspected him.


“The opinion is rapidly proving George Howard has become the prosecutor in these cases, and that his motive is for gain, either financially or executive clemency or both,” the Herald wrote on Sept. 5, 1901. 


There is no record in the available public documents about whether Howard agreed to a formal plea deal — which a newspaper would likely have reported — or if he received any compensation. 


What is clear is the lack of sympathy for Robin White, his brother Abe — imprisoned but never called to testify — or any members of their families. Attorneys and witnesses called Robin White “the Negro” more than they called him by his first name. Even Jones, working for the prosecution, referred to the murder victim on at least one occasion as “the darkey.”


The Herald, even as it congratulated Elmore County on the “great awakening in the minds of all our people to mob violence,” declared that “the black race as individuals bring the punishment on their own heads, by their own individual acts.”


“The Negro must in some way be taught that the wages of sin is death, and the same is true with his physical life as with his spiritual life,” the newspaper wrote.


It took just four days to finish the trials. After Howard made his statement on Aug. 28, the jury deliberated for 2 1/2 hours and convicted him. Denson later sentenced him to life. 


“The verdict was evidently a great surprise to Howard and his friend(s) but Howard gave no sign of emotion while listening to its reading,” the Advertiser reported. 


The Montgomery Advertiser headline from August 29, 1901 announcing the conviction of George Howard.(Photo: Montgomery Advertiser)


Over the next three days, the jury convicted Strength, Fuller and Thomas, almost entirely on Howard’s testimony. Each got 10 years in prison.


The verdicts received editorial approval across the nation. The New York Evening Post called the news “novel and gratifying.” The Pittsburgh Chronicle-Telegraph called the verdicts “cheering news.”


“It shows there (are) spots in the South where people are beginning to think that it is a crime to hang a black man without process of law,” the editorial said. “Let the idea spread. It is a good one.”


But some could not give their endorsement without employing the ugly racial language of the day. 


“The Negro displays the brutality of the untamed savage,” wrote Joseph Pulitzer’s New York World in praising the verdict. “The communities that burn and torture and mutilate show the brutality of the degenerating civilized man. The greatest problem of the South is not the negro problem, but the problem of degenerate whites.”


Howard, Strength and Fuller went into Alabama’s convict-lease system, first at the infamous Pratt Coal Mines in Jefferson County. The Advertiser reported the men “had very little to say” upon their departures. By Dec. 14, authorities had transferred them to the Hand Lumber Company, near modern-day Bay Minette. 


A portion of the convict file for George Howard (spelled "Hawood" in the files) shows his life sentence for murder and physical characteristics.(Photo: ancestry.com)


Thomas, the only convicted lyncher to file a formal appeal, remained in jail, along with Abe White. Thomas did little to help his legal prospects. Around Sept. 15, Thomas tried to kill White a second time but was somehow prevented. Both the Elmore County Sheriff and Abe White later made reference to the incident but did not describe it in detail. 


On Sept. 25, as the sheriff’s son and an assistant were delivering Thomas fresh water, the prisoner sprung out of his cell, closed the door on him and — managing to secure “a piece of iron,” according to a later Advertiser account — “was fast working his way through the thin brick wall of the jail” while threatening to kill the assistant. A crowd formed around the jail, and Thomas was disarmed and returned to his cell.


Abe White, meanwhile, languished. When the court returned for its regular session in Elmore County in November, White — even though he had been Thomas' victim twice over — agreed to a plea deal, getting two years in prison. White later said he did so because he could not afford an attorney and "could not have the semblance of a fair trial before a white jury in Elmore County."


On reporting to prison, a corrections official took note of Abe White’s physical characteristics. White told the official his parents were still living in Elmore County. He also said he had a second child, born sometime between June 1900 and November 1901. 


And, White told the official, he was now a widower.


White said he had a major reason for the plea: The “great and intense hatred” directed at him following the lynchers' convictions. 


As quickly as the three men went to prison, the tide of opinion in the local white community coalesced into a tsunami in the opposite direction. 


The Herald — which had so forcefully condemned the lynching in July — wrote on Sept. 5 that “public sentiment has shifted wonderfully in the last few days” and said that “some of our best people believe the pendulum of justice has swung a little too far the other way.” The following week, the newspaper complained that Howard, Strength and Fuller went to the coal mines “without being examined” to see if they could perform the brutal work. 


Abe White's convict report, dated Nov. 9, 1901.(Photo: Alabama Department of Archives and History via ancestry.com)


By November, the alleged murder of a white man by a black man had turned the Herald against the convictions entirely. 


“The white people of Elmore must stand together on this question, and do all in our power to get Gov. Jelks to pardon Howard, Strength, and Fuller,” the newspaper said. 


Petitions began circulating, one signed by the jurors who convicted the men. By December, the Advertiser was reporting that one demanding a pardon had made its way to Montgomery.


What caused the shift? Some believed Strength and Fuller were innocent. W.E. Striplin,  superintendent of Tallassee Public Schools, wrote to Gov. Jelks on Feb. 14, 1902, saying “Thomas is to blame very largely and the people are willing for him to suffer” but that the governor should reduce sentences for the other men.


“We must have public sentiment behind (the) law to enforce it,” he wrote Jelks. “If you are not careful justice cannot be secured in the future. I am here and know the feeling of the people.”


Tallassee Public Schools Superintendent W.E. Striplin wrote Gov. William Jelks on Feb. 14, 1902 asking for a pardon for John Strength and Martin Fuller. "If you are not careful justice cannot be secured in the future," he wrote. "I am here and know the feeling of the people.”(Photo: Alabama Department of Archives and History)


The shift also came as white politicians entered a statewide campaign to rob black people of their votes. Days after the convictions of Howard, Strength, Fuller and Thomas, a convention sent a new state constitution — aimed at disenfranchising blacks and poor whites — to the public for consideration. The Advertiser and Herald both pushed hard for ratification, with both reporting on — and making — racist appeals for it. 


“The stationery to be used by the (Montgomery County Campaign) Committee contains the slogan of the campaign: ‘A vote for the new Constitution is a vote for white supremacy,’” the Advertiser reported on October 3, 1901. 


When the Constitution won approval the following month — largely through fraud — the Advertiser’s front page shouted that voters declared “for white supremacy and purity of ballot” and, in a slightly smaller headline, “The Putrid Sore of Negro Suffrage Is Severed from the Commonwealth.” Jelks told the Advertiser "it was a clean cut victory for white supremacy." Lynching convictions would be hard-pressed to withstand such a toxic environment.


And it may have been as simple as bone-deep racism, immune from political or social winds — a white community unable to tolerate the thought of a white person suffering for harming a black person.


More letters arrived in Jelks’ office in early 1902. In February, Strength’s wife and Fuller’s mother wrote to Jelks on the same day. Strength’s wife wrote that she was “worser than an orphanage” trying to raise two small children. 


“I know I will rejoice to here(sic) that you have pardened(sic) him.”


“Now, will you please think of my condition, and of my innocence(sic) husband and let him come home to me,” she wrote.


Fuller’s mother said Jelks would be “reward(ed) from one who moves all things” if her son received a pardon. 


“I know I will rejoice to here(sic) that you have pardened(sic) him,” she wrote.


In May, Lizzie Howard — George’s wife — asked Jelks to pardon her husband. Like members of the other families, she stressed her difficulties at home but also said “if you will only accept the money for the expenses of the State for his part I will give it freely.”


“Governor you can not sympathize much in this trouble I know with me but I do hope and prey(sic) that you will grant him a parden(sic) in the near future I am here in the agony of trouble of home affairs &amp; his trouble too,” she wrote. 


Jelks waited. It was not out of compassion for the White family. The governor's racist beliefs long predated the lynching trial. As a newspaper editor in the 1880s, he had called for blacks in Alabama to be deported to other parts of the country. Jelks had also defended lynching and spread myths about black rapists. 


The official reason Jelks gave for waiting was John Thomas’ appeal, which eventually moved to the Alabama Supreme Court. When the high court decided it, he said, he would ask Judge Denson and Brewer, the local prosecutor, to give their opinion. 


If there were other motives, they cannot be determined with certainty. Most of Jelks’ official papers and Denson’s collection of private and legal correspondence are silent on the lynching trial. 


But political calculations may have been a factor.  Jelks, who took office in 1901 after the previous governor died, was seeking a term in his own right and might have been seeking votes. Denson, too, may have been thinking of moving up. When approached to run for Congress in 1900, he refused — but said he might reconsider if it was necessary for party harmony. 


“I am a poor man and have to depend on the salary that I get from my office for the support of my family, this is one of the reasons that I have written above, that I would make the condition as to the resignations,” the judge wrote. “Of course if I were nominated and the necessities of the situation should require my resignation, we could consider that afterward.”


When the Alabama Supreme Court finally turned down Thomas’ petition in May 1902, the stated obstacle to pardons disappeared. And the letters from the prosecutor and the judge came in. 


“I believe to ‘temper justice with mercy’ by the pardon of those named above is right and I sincerely trust that you will pardon them,” S.J. Brewer wrote to Jelks on June 6. 


Denson — who had warned about the murderous fickleness of mobs; who said the friendless person was always their victim; who called such deeds barbaric — wrote to Jelks on June 7, 1902.


He worded the letter carefully.  Denson noted that Howard had given his testimony voluntarily. The judge denied the existence of any bargain. 


“(Howard) sought to have an interview with me about the case and I positively declined to talk with him about the case in any shape,” Denson wrote. 


The judge wrote that Howard testified against Strength and Fuller, and that it “showed that Strength and Fuller were nearby if not present at the killing and tended to show that they were participants in the conspiracy to kill White.” 


But, the judge said, Strength and Fuller denied involvement. The three men, he wrote,  had families to support. The “very best citizens” of Elmore County, Denson wrote, wanted them pardoned.


“Some of them are of the opinion that if further punishment is insisted upon the just administration of the law in the future will be jeopardized,” he wrote. “That is to say, the sentiment that so strongly favored the trial and conviction of the persons engaged in the mob, will be turned against conviction in such cases in the future.”


Denson wrote he did not share “in all the opinions advanced.” But under this dubious reasoning, the judge recommended the governor undo the court’s work, and the sentences he once believed just.


“I have reached the conclusion that it will subserve the ends of justice if a parole is granted to the three, George Howard, John Strength and Martin Fuller,” Denson wrote.


On June 9, 1902, Jelks pardoned Howard, Strength and Fuller. 


The Weekly Advertiser headline from June 13, 1902, announcing the pardons of George Howard, John Strength and Martin Fuller.(Photo: Montgomery Advertiser)


“I am led to this course by the appeal of the judge trying the case, the solicitor of the circuit, and a petition from the jurors who tried the cases, and a very large number of the best people of Elmore County and surrounding counties,” he wrote. “The fact is the three men were led to commit this crime by reason of an exaggerated report of the offense of Abe and Robin White. Let full pardons issue.”


The three men were swiftly released from the Hand Lumber Company, and boarded trains headed north. At a Montgomery train station, Howard — who never denied his involvement in the murder — was met by his attorney and Willis Brewer, a former congressman trying to win his seat back that year. The Advertiser and the Herald both gave Brewer credit for winning the men’s release. (Brewer campaigned on the release but there is no correspondence from him about it in the existing pardon files.) 


“As George Howard leaned back on the soft cushions of a modern carriage opposite his friends, Colonel Brewer and Mr. Williams, his face was the picture of happiness,” the Advertiser wrote. 


On June 10, Howard, Strength, and Fuller arrived in Wetumpka. Many people in Eclectic came out to see them and give a “joyous welcome,” the Advertiser wrote. 


“A cry of joy, a cry so unrestrained that it was almost shriek” erupted when George Howard appeared out of the train, the newspaper said. “The welcome touched Howard and Strength to the deep and their eyes were dimmed by the tears they could not restrain.” 


The Alabamian reported that Willis Brewer headlined a “barbecue to the returned prodigals” which it called “an undoubtedly strong card to play” in the contest, “for the people were greatly concerned and greatly in earnest in wanting them out.” 


Jelks would go on to win the Democratic nomination for governor, but Brewer’s bid for Congress failed. Both men lost Elmore County. 


Three days after pardoning Howard, Strength and Fuller, Jelks quietly released Abe White. Robin's older brother had dictated a letter to Jelks in January or February asking for a pardon. He said he was “impoverished by sickness and driven from his home.” And he noted that Thomas had shot him, not the other way around.


“Petitioner has spent five months more or less in jail in Elmore County and nearly three months in the penitentiary, which would seem to petitioner to be adequate punishment for the offense charged against petitioner, especially since petitioner was the only person injured in the trouble between Thomas and himself,” White wrote.


Denson recommended the pardon, saying the “peculiar circumstances” of the case favored it. 


“The Judge trying the case recommends that he be pardoned,” Jelks wrote blandly. “It is therefore ordered that full pardon be issued to him.” 


The releases touched all save one: John Thomas. At first, it seemed like public opinion would keep him in prison. Howard’s attorney said “Thomas misrepresented the extent of Robin White’s offense” and that he would probably serve out his sentence. 


But soon, petitions circulated to get Thomas out. The letters and petitions, like those for the other three men, inevitably focused on his wife and seven children left without support. George Howard signed one. 


“The condition of the family arouse the sympathy of the people,” B.L. Young wrote to the governor on July 22, 1902. “(Thomas) has a wife and several children who have to live from their daily labor and has one little girl about sixteen who is said to be loosing(sic) her mind on account of her father being in prison.”


Denson hesitated. On Sept. 18, 1902, he wrote to Jelks saying that many people asked him to recommend clemency for Thomas, but that he felt “the time for his pardon has not yet arrived.” 


“If it is time that you are ready to pardon and want recommendation, write me to that effect and I will take up the matter and consider it,” the judge wrote.


Inevitably, Denson came around. On July 13, 1903, the judge wrote to Jelks asking for Thomas’ pardon, arguing — again — that public sentiment was calling for it. 


“The same reason for extending clemency to the other convicted (men) who were pardoned for this offense, exists in favor of Thomas,” Denson wrote. “I respectfully recommend that clemency be extended to John Thomas.”


Jelks never pardoned Thomas. Nothing in his papers or Thomas' pardon files shed light on the governor's thinking or show any engagement with Denson or the petitions on Thomas’ behalf. Safely re-elected to office in 1902, Jelks was term-limited and may not have seen anything to be gained. 


The correspondence on Thomas’ behalf stops after September 1903. On Jan. 3, 1906, while working at the Hand Lumber Company, Thomas was killed by a falling tree in a windstorm. 


The convict file for John Thomas, recording his intake in June 1902.(Photo: ancestry.com via Alabama Department of Archives and History)


Denson sat on the local bench for about two and a half years after the trial. At the end of July 1903 — two weeks after recommending Thomas’ pardon — Denson told a grand jury investigating a peonage case that there was “no warrant for any of our citizens to mistreat the Negro, nor for us to leave unpunished white men who may mistreat him.” 


“All right-thinking people regret that such violations of law, and invasions of human rights, have occurred in our State, and since condign punishment has fallen upon some who were actors in the lamentable drama, doubtless in their more reflective moods, they, too, regret their misdeeds,” Denson said.


In the April 1904 Democratic primary — effectively the general election of the time — Denson won second-highest number of votes for Alabama Supreme Court. He was the single-biggest vote-getter in Elmore County. Denson stepped down from the Alabama Supreme Court in 1909 to return to private law practice. He returned to the local bench in 1923, and died four years later. 


Jelks, somehow, developed a national reputation as an anti-lynching crusader, despite comments to a Memphis newspaper in 1905 that he believed murdering black men accused of rape was justified. The following year, sharing a stage with the educator Booker T. Washington at the Alabama State Fair, Jelks delivered a “very forceful address to the Negroes,” according to the Montgomery Times, where he denounced education for blacks.  He finished his single term in office and later went into insurance in Birmingham. He died in 1931. 


Lynching continued throughout Alabama, and in Elmore County. In 1915, a mob stormed the Wetumpka jail, pulled out Edward and William Still, two black men inside, and killed them. Despite criticism from the governor of Alabama, the local sheriff said “there was no chance for me to do anything but submit to the mob’s demands.” No one was ever prosecuted.


The principals in the Robin White trial, for the most part, faded from history. Martin Fuller appeared now and then in arrival and departure announcements in the local newspaper. He died in 1928. 


John Strength, who George Howard said was the lookout for the lynchers, was elected Elmore County Sheriff in 1918. Two years later, Strength was put on trial for alleged drunkenness and failure to enforce prohibition laws. Strength was acquitted. He died in Chambers County in 1952. 


The pardon granted Abe White on June 12, 1902, is the last definite trace of the White family. There are hints that some family members moved — or fled — to Tallapoosa County in the wake of Robin White’s lynching. The Alexander City Outlook reported on March 8, 1907, that “old Uncle Robin White” had died at the age of 92, which would roughly match the elder Robin White’s age in the 1900 Census.  There are possible matches for Robin White’s mother and Carrie Russell, his sister or sister-in-law, in Tallapoosa in the 1910 Census. 


Osillis White, Robin White’s wife, vanishes after the 1900 census. Robin White’s final resting place is unknown. 


Abe White may have been dead by 1910. He may have changed his name. Or he may be one of the Abe Whites who appear scattered around the country in the 1910 census and the one in 1920. From public records, it is impossible to say with certainty what became of the Whites after the murder of one of their own.


The grave of George Howard in Elmore County, Ala.(Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)


George Howard made a few more appearances in the Wetumpka Herald. There was a 1909 squib announcing the birth of his youngest son, and a brief mention of a visit in 1913. He remained a farmer in Elmore County through 1930. By 1935 had moved to Texas with his youngest son and his wife. 


On Oct. 21, 1957, at 5:30 p.m., Howard, aged 92, died in Malone, Texas. A brief notice in the Advertiser mentioned Howard’s six children and 23 grandchildren. His family returned Howard's body to Elmore County and buried him next to his wife, not far from the site where, 56 years earlier, he brought a young man’s life to a violent end. 


The cause of death was senility.


    
        © 2018
    
    
         www.montgomeryadvertiser.com. All rights reserved
    


Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

His accuser lied. A killer named names. But justice was still denied to a black man murdered in Elmore County in 1901.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.