Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

✓ Unlimited access to trib.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (866) 981-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:27 pm

Kyle Martin, 20, of Riverton appears in Natrona County District Court in March. Prosecutors filed six felony charges against him in connection with the kidnapping of a 95-year-old woman.

Crime and Courts Reporter

Kyle Martin, 20, of Riverton appears in Natrona County District Court in March. Prosecutors filed six felony charges against him in connection with the kidnapping of a 95-year-old woman.

A Riverton man pleaded not guilty Thursday to charges alleging he kidnapped a 95-year-old Casper woman and fled from police while driving her car.

Kyle M. Martin, 20, entered his pleas to six felonies in Natrona County District Court. If convicted of kidnapping, he could face up to life in prison.

Casper police say they arrested Martin in Evansville on the afternoon of March 20 following a pursuit that began at the Eastridge Mall in Casper.

Police did not know Martin was driving a stolen car. It was impounded. Five hours after the pursuit ended, police received information that they should check the car’s trunk. They found the woman inside with cuts on her head and face. She told them two men pistol-whipped and kidnapped her, according to court documents.

In court Thursday, Martin appeared in jail scrubs with shackles restricting his arms and legs. He looked down at paperwork on the lectern, gripping the left side of the podium with his hand. While Judge Catherine Wilking read through the charges he faces, Martin occasionally lifted his head to glance at District Attorney Mike Blonigen.

When Wilking asked Martin to enter a plea, he responded in a calm voice:

“Not guilty, your honor.”

Martin’s public defender, Kerri Johnson, declined the opportunity to ask for a bond lower than the half-million dollars Martin is being held in lieu of. The defendant shuffled back to a bench and looked straight ahead as the judge moved to the next case.

Martin now awaits a trial date when he will face counts of aggravated kidnapping, conspiracy to commit aggravated kidnapping, aggravated robbery, conspiracy to commit aggravated robbery, aggravated burglary and conspiracy to commit aggravated burglary.

In March, Martin and another man drove a stolen Chevrolet Silverado to a neighborhood near Nancy English Park, which was swarming with police, court documents state. The two men entered a house, where the 95-year-old woman was asleep on a couch. After the two men left the living room and cleared off a car they wanted to steal, Martin noticed the woman was awake, he told investigators.

The unnamed man then bound the woman with duct tape and put her in the trunk of her car, the documents state Martin told police.

After the unnamed man drove to the Fox Hill Apartments, he got out and Martin drove to the mall, the documents state. Police then spotted Martin, beginning the final pursuit.

A police detective spotted Martin, who was wanted in relation to burglaries and auto theft, around 1:30 p.m. at the Eastridge Mall. After police approached Martin, he got in a vehicle and sped away, according to court documents.

Police chased Martin into Evansville, where the vehicle got stuck in the mud. Although Martin tried to run away, police caught up and arrested him, the documents state.

Investigators did not find the woman until 6:30 p.m. The vehicle was sealed after Martin was taken into custody and police did not inventory it until someone called and told dispatchers to search the trunk, according to the documents.

Over the course of two interviews at the police department, Martin said a friend had given him stolen car keys. The friend would tell Martin where the vehicles were located, and he would go steal the vehicles, he told police.

Police had initially believed Adam R. McClure, 22, of Casper, was the second man, but he was instead charged in relation to a different incident.

Police do not yet have a second suspect in custody, a Casper Police Department spokesman said Wednesday morning.

Follow crime reporter Shane Sanderson on Twitter @shanersanderson



A Casper police detective spotted a suspected burglar and auto thief on March 20 outside Eastridge mall. 

Crime and Courts Reporter

Shane Sanderson is a Star-Tribune reporter who primarily covers criminal justice. Sanderson is a proud University of Missouri graduate. Lately, he’s been reading Cormac McCarthy and cooking Italian food. He writes about his own life in his free time. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Shane Sanderson  posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

How is the 95-year old woman doing? I hope she has recovered ok. 

I certainly hope the Judge gives this vermin the sentence he truly deserves,  too bad the death penalty means nothing in this state.  Throw this creep in a cell with Eaton.

[beam][beam]


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 