Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

✓ Unlimited access to trib.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (866) 981-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

A few thunderstorms this evening. Mostly clear skies late. Low 63F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 7:27 pm

Montiano Like

Crime and Courts Reporter

Montiano Like

A man accused of breaking into a north Casper home, stealing from it and setting it on fire pleaded guilty to a burglary charge Tuesday in Natrona County District Court.

A felony accessory before the fact charge against Isaiah Montiano Like, 19, was dropped as part of a plea agreement reached by prosecuting and defense attorneys.

As a condition of the plea agreement, prosecutors will ask for a maximum prison term of four to six years. Absent the agreement, Montiano Like could have faced up to 10 years in prison for the burglary charge.

Montiano Like appeared in court Tuesday wearing jail clothing. He has been held in Natrona County Detention Center in lieu of a $200,000 bond since he was arrested in June.

Law enforcement began investigating the case after determining that a home in the 300 block of North Jefferson Street was set on fire May 31.

Prosecutors claimed that security footage showed Montiano Like entering the house with a gas can and carrying various items out of the house.

A second man charged in the case, Stacy Clark, 46, remains in Natrona County Detention Center awaiting trial.

Follow crime reporter Shane Sanderson on Twitter @shanersanderson



Montiano Like

The criminal case against two men accused of breaking into a north Casper home, stealing from it and setting it on fire will continue in Natro…

Crime and Courts Reporter

Shane Sanderson is a Star-Tribune reporter who primarily covers criminal justice. Sanderson is a proud University of Missouri graduate. Lately, he’s been reading Cormac McCarthy and cooking Italian food. He writes about his own life in his free time. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Shane Sanderson  posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

They started a fire, were charged with burglary AND arson.....he gets a plea deal for the burglary charge only.  These Natrona county plea deals have to stop.

You do realize this is a quick way to dispose of cases, if you litigate every case it would take a minimum of 5 years to resolve each case, it's efficient when you get guilty pleas, so prosecutors and public defenders will usually try to work it out. Plus there's no doubt this guy is guilty, it would be foolish to go to court over this and waste everyone's time. Second, we don't know the exact circumstances, perhaps there was some aggravating circumstances motivating the defendant in this case and he has since resolved the issue, something like drugs or mental illness.  It's impossible to read a 1/2 page article and understand all the reasons behind the plea deal,they probably did it for a reason in addition to judicial efficiency.  

I suppose the female ex-casper cop who got probation through a plea deal or the Mills town clerk who also got probation through a plea deal  is the best and quickest and cheapest way to "dispose" of cases? Really?   How about the upcoming Cercy case....probably another plea deal for probation.  Justice seems to be metered out unequally in Natrona county in relation to who you know.  I don't like plea deals.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 