Gallery: Phil Murphy has roundtable discussion


    
        
            By Susan K. Livio

slivio@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Gov. Phil Murphy, a multimillionaire former Goldman Sachs executive, confirmed Wednesday he will be accepting the $175,000-a-year salary that comes with his new job.

The Democratic governor, sworn in on Tuesday, had just finished talking with a group of working-poor people who explained what life was like earning $8.60 an hour, the minimum wage in New Jersey, or to hold a job that does not offer sick pay.

Murphy campaigned on a platform to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour and promised to sign legislation into law that required employers to offer some sick pay.

But when reporters who attended the "Minimum Wage and Paid Sick Leave Roundtable" at Grace Community Lutheran Church in the Ironbound section of Newark asked about Murphy's wages, he seemed taken aback. Murphy said he had not been asked that "en vogue" question since the campaign.

"Yes, I will be accepting a salary," he replied.

When asked to clarify whether he would be taking the standard governor's salary of $175,000, he replied, "I answered the question -- I'll take the salary for the job."

Phil Murphy gives media 2-hour window to view his tax returns

There is precedent for accepting less than the job pays under state law. Gov. Jon Corzine, who made his fortune at Goldman Sachs, accepted only $1 a year.

Gov. Chris Christie, Murphy's predecessor, accepted the full salary.

The off-topic question rankled Newark Mayor Ras Baraka, who asked reporters to keep the focus of their questions on the working people struggling to make ends meet.

Murphy approved.

"Let me say to the mayor in a house of worship, bless you," Murphy said, the room erupting in applause.

Murphy and his wife, Tammy, made $4.6 million and paid about $1.5 million in taxes in 2016, according to his tax returns.

The Murphys made a combined $35.8 million from 2010 to 2016, according to a summary provided by Murphy's campaign. They also paid $11.3 million in taxes in that time, paying a tax rate that has ranged from 31.99 percent to 39.08 percent. Their 2016 tax rate was 32.7 percent.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        