
    
        
            By Ted Sherman

tsherman@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Sometime on Christmas Day, after all the presents under the tree have been opened, a small group of people will get one last unexpected gift from Dr. George F. Heinrich that will change their lives.

It's nothing that's been wrapped. There will be no ribbons or bows. And none of them know yet that this will be a holiday they never forget.

Heinrich will be calling to tell them they have been accepted to medical school.

Each year, Heinrich, the associate dean for admissions for Rutgers New Jersey Medical School in Newark, takes it upon himself to call every future doctor accepted into the school and gives them the news himself.

This school year, he expects to make more than 300 of those calls before the class of 2022 is finally set.

And in an ongoing tradition for him, at least six will be called on this Christmas Day.

"When I applied to medical school, I lived at the mailbox. A thick envelope was good news, and a thin envelope was bad news," he recalled. "I want to talk personally to every student."

He may be one of the few college deans who does that. Students at New Jersey Medical School, both past and present, had no recollection of getting calls from a dean at any other school where they were accepted.

Admissions decisions at the Rutgers school are made on a rolling basis each week. Heinrich said he does not like to hold off letting candidates know they have been accepted. He will make calls even if he is away, once a selection is finalized.

Over the years, Heinrich estimates he may have made 100,000 calls telling M.D. hopefuls that they were in-- on holidays, on weekends, on any day of the week. And always on Christmas Day.

He has connected with prospective students when he was in London and Tokyo. He has tracked down one traveling in India.

"I'll reach them anywhere in the world," he laughed, during an interview in his sparse office on campus.

But he said he especially likes to make calls on holidays like Christmas and Thanksgiving, when most are likely to be together with family and close friends.

"Medical school is a family activity. Students need support," Heinrich said.

The reactions run the gamut. Some scream. Some cry. Some don't believe it is actually the dean calling, and are only convinced after he makes reference to personal information in their applications.

"It gets very emotional. There are clearly moments where we're changing people's lives," said Heinrich, a silver-haired, soft-spoken man who has served as dean of admissions for 25 years. He reached one student recently who was at the airport when he reached him on his cell phone.

"I'm so glad you called," the student told him.

Heinrich said he understood.

"No, you don't understand," the student said. "I'm boarding a plane for a flight to another medical school interview."

He never got on his flight.

Whitney Smith received her call from Heinrich on Christmas Day in 2007. Now an M.D. in her final year of a residency in urology at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, Smith remembered being at her mother's house in Deptford in South Jersey when the admissions dean connected with her.

"Everyone was opening presents. It was about 11 a.m. and I wasn't thinking about getting accepted to medical school," she said.

When her cell phone rang, she thought at first it was a telemarketer. Even when Heinrich got on the phone, it did not click at first who she was talking to.

"I was calm and cool on the phone. I was more in shock," said Smith. "My mom cried."

Christmas Day of 2006 was when Rana Mady, now an ophthalmologist in private practice in Clifton, received her phone call.

"You are generally waiting for a letter. That was my expectation," said Mady, recalling a joyful moment in her parents' home in Hillsdale. "It's not your average way of getting into medical school."

Her mother and father shared in the emotion of the call.

"They were ecstatic. They were so happy for me," she said. "They had seen how much had gone into the whole process. The community service work you do. The application and interviews. They were happy. And relieved."

It was four days after her birthday.

Mady said Heinrich is well aware how much the individual acceptance calls mean for students and their families.

"He knows it's going to have a huge impact on a person's life," she said.

Mady was also not the only one in her family to get a call from Heinrich. Her twin sister, Leila, was also accepted into New Jersey Medical School the very same year. She got the news with a separate call from Heinrich on another day.

Adam Handler, who is Jewish, does not celebrate Christmas. So he was on the job in the emergency room of St. Vincent's Hospital Manhattan, where he then was working as a clinical information manager when Heinrich reached him on his cell phone on Christmas Day in 2006 to tell him he would become a doctor.

"There's a few things in life where you know where you were at when something happens. I remember the exact location where I answered the phone in the corridor in the ER," said Handler, who is now a pediatrician. "It was in the middle of my shift."

Two minutes later, Handler called his father, who is also a pediatrician and a graduate of New Jersey Medical School.

The emergency room staff that night celebrated his news by calling out for Chinese food--the only place open on Christmas. Given his financial situation at the time, Handler, who is now in practice with his father in Parsippany, is pretty sure it was the attending physician in the ER who picked up the check.

It's no easy task to get into medical school. It is a highly competitive process, with only a fraction of those who want to be doctors realizing their dreams.

"You can't wake up one morning and say you're going to go to medical school," said Heinrich. "You have to be a very committed person."

Last year nationwide, more than 50,000 prospective students applied to U.S. medical school, according to the Association of American Medical Colleges. Only about four in 10 got in.

At Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, there were 5,075 applications for the Class of 2022. Only about 700 will be invited for interviews. Not all who get a call of acceptance from Heinrich take the offer. Ultimately, 178 are expected to enroll.



Passion, said Heinrich, is one of the things Rutgers New Jersey Medical School seeks.

"We look for people committed to our community who understand we're not treating disease. We're taking care of people," he said.

The six people who will get a call from Heinrich this Christmas still have no clue they will hear from him. If they do not answer their phone, he will leave a message and a number to call him back. Each will hear about their admission from him directly.

"The most frustrating thing is to hear your mailbox is full," he said. "But I'm determined."

Ted Sherman may be reached at tsherman@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TedShermanSL. Facebook: @TedSherman.reporter. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        