
    
        
            By Kristen Keller


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

Fall is currently in full swing in Hudson County. Although the weather is getting colder, there is still plenty for people to do throughout the week.

Kids take over Museum tonight; exhibit closes Sunday

Kids 5 and older can hang out at the Hoboken Historical Museum from 6 to 9 p.m. today. There will be crafts, snacks, and the movie "Babe." The cost is $25 per child or $20 for a member's child. Reservations are required for this event.

The closing day for the exhibit "Hoboken Watercolors by Frank Hanavan" will be Sunday. People will get to see his watercolor works on display at the museum. Hanavan will also hold a workshop tomorrow from 2 to 4 p.m. where he will share his watercolor techniques. The cost is $25 for adults and $15 for children. Children must be accompanied by an adult for this event.

The museum is located at 1301 Hudson St. in Hoboken. For more information or to register, visit hobokenmuseum.org/calendar.

LSC offers 'after dark'

On the third Thursday of every month, Liberty Science Center holds LSC After Dark, a 21 and older event. This month, the theme is "Game of Thrones." There will be a whiskey tasting and experiments inspired by the plots in the series. Also offered will be $5 plates. Tickets are $20 in advance and $25 at the door. For an extra $10, guests can see the "Star Trek" exhibit.

Liberty Science Center is located at 222 Jersey City Blvd. in Jersey City. For more information or to purchase tickets, visit lsc.org/explore/lsc-after-dark.

Christie Mystery on stage

The performance of Agatha Christie's "And Then There Was None" will take to the stage at the Academy of the Holy Angels for four performances. The play will star West New York resident Nora Jacobi. The performances will take place today at 7:30 p.m., tomorrow at 2 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m. Tickets for this event are $15.

The Academy of the Holy Angels is located at 315 Hillside Ave. in Demarest. For more information or to purchase tickets, visit aha.booktix.com.

Nimbus Has annual gala

Nimbus Dance Works will host the annual gala at the Mack-Cali Harborside Atrium tomorrow at 7:30 p.m.

The event will present "Depth of Experience," an evening of dance featuring performances of new and classic pieces throughout the night. There will drinks, light fare and both live and silent auctions.

The gala will honor Matt Weinreich of Hopkins Group, LLC. and Nimbus Company dancer Hannah Weeks. The cost is $85 in advance and $95 at the door. For more information or to purchase tickets, visit nimbusfallgala2017.bpt.me.

Drawing Rooms closes latest exhibit tomorrow 

The closing party for the exhibit, "Sup-A-Genius," will take place tomorrow from 3 to 6 p.m. The exhibit featured the works of five guys who celebrated art as the artist-as-inventor. The artwork moves, responds to human presence, requires viewer interaction and other specifications set by the artist. The Drawing Rooms are located at 180 Grand St. in Jersey City. For more information about the exhibit, visit drawingrooms.org.

Retired teacher opens exhibit

Charlann Meluso, a retired Bayonne art teacher who worked in the school system for over 39 years, is opening the exhibit, "Shared Visions," on Sunday and it will run until Jan. 6. The show will feature her photographs and paintings by Elliot Appel, a Bayonne resident. The opening reception on Sunday will take place from 2 to 5 p.m. and refreshments will be served.

There is no cost for the exhibit which is at the Bayonne Jewish Community Center at 1050 JFK Blvd., open Monday through Thursday from 9 a.m. to 10 p.m. and Saturdays and Sundays from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m.

Series starts new season

The latest UBS Atrium Series will begin again Wednesday at 12:30 p.m. The hour-long set will feature The Django Festival All-Stars, who honor the works of jazz guitarist Django Reinhardt while adding their own twist. The group is made up of Dorado Schmitt, his sons Samson and Amati, violinist Pierre Blanchard and accordionist Ludovic Beier.

The Django Festival All-Stars have played top venues, including the Kennedy Center, the Newport Jazz Festival, and the Montreal Jazz Festival, and twice a year at their New York City home, Birdland.

The concert is free. The Atrium is located at 1000 Harbor Blvd., Weehawken. For information, visit hrpac.org or call 201-716-4540.

Dancer speaks at NJCU

Judith Jamison, an iconic dancer, choreographer and the current Artistic Director Emerita at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, will speak at New Jersey City University this Wednesday. She will reflect on her life and the importance of the arts in today's world. There is no cost for this event but you do need to RSVP. The talk will take place in the School of Business Skyline Room located at 200 Hudson St. in Jersey City. For more information or to register, visit njcu.edu/arts.

Hinder at White Eagle Hall

The rock group Hinder will perform at White Eagle Hall at 7 p.m., Wednesday. The group has headlined over 15 tours and sold over 4 million albums. Opening will be Josh Todd &amp; The Conflict, Adelitas Way and Wayland. Tickets are $25. White Eagle Hall is located at 335-337 Newark Ave. in Jersey City. For more information or to purchase tickets, visit WhiteEagleHallJC.com.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        