Gallery: Tenant files class-action lawsuit against Newark landlord over rat-infested homes


    
        
            By Karen Yi

kyi@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

NEWARK -- At a recent City Council meeting, a short, wiry woman approached the podium with her four young children. Yanira Cortes told the council her daughter had a question for city leaders. 

"Why do my mom and my brothers and sisters have to live in an apartment with rats?" the little girl asked, stretching on her tippy toes to reach the microphone.

For years, Cortes said she's lived with her children in a leaking, rat- and cockroach-infested apartment and has been battling her landlord to fix the uninhabitable conditions.

Cortes filed a class-action lawsuit against Pueblo City Housing Company, which that owns the federally subsidized building, alleging a host of health and safety violations and the landlord's failure to fix them. 

"1 a.m., 4 a.m. my children run into my bedroom and tell me, 'Mommy, there's a rat running in my room.' 3:45 a.m., on a school night," Cortes said during the September meeting. "How can I provide them a good education when they have to worry about rats?"

The lawsuit filed last month alleges, among other things:

A woman who answered the phone last week at the offices of Virginia-based Realty Management Associates, which manages Pueblo City Housing, said she could not comment on the allegations because the company had not been served with the suit. She declined to give her name but said she was a company employee.

Cortes and her attorney declined to comment on the lawsuit. 

"It's a positive move as far as quality of life, sustaining housing for everyone," said Felicia Alston-Singleton, the city's Fair Housing Officer, who has worked with Cortes to fight for better living conditions. "It's going to inspire a lot of people to raise the bar on their standards. She is brave and courageous to step out there. Everyone knows that these (landlords) are notorious, their behavior is so egregious, they are over the top."

The 20-unit building on 86 Brunswick St. at the center of the suit receives federal subsidies so low-income residents can afford to live there. Tenants pay about 30 percent of rent and the U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department (HUD) pays the landlord the rest of the unit's fair market price. 



The building has been cited in multiple inspections by the Bureau of Housing Inspection for unhealthy living conditions, infestations and hazardous violations, the lawsuit said. The Real Estate Assessment Center, which inspects properties on a scale of 1-100, gave the building a score of 10. A passing score is 60. 

The class-action suit extends to those who have lived in the building in the last six years. The suit is asking a judge to grant rent abatements and place the property in receivership which would appoint a receiver to oversee rehabilitation and rents. 

'I've never seen anything like it'

Sen. Jennifer Beck, R-Monmouth, who is spearheading efforts to overhaul housing conditions for low-income families, described Cortes' apartment as "beyond deplorable."

"I've neer seen anything like it ... literally the kids stomp their feet before they go into the kitchen" to scatter the rats, she said. "There is a systemic failure of this landlord to propertly care for these units."

Beck, together with Sen. Ronald Rice, D-Essex, have proposed the Safe Sanitary Subsidized Rental Housing Bill of Rights that would hold landlords accountable for poor housing conditions by withholding federal subsidies until such repairs are made. It also improves coordination between federal, state and local agencies to ensure properties are being routinely inspected and tenants are protected.

Beck cited the investigation by The Asbury Park Press that found HUD continued to pay rental subsidies to landlords despite deplorable living conditions and failed inspections. 

"It should be a shot across the bow to all those bad actors and slumlords that have been taking advantage of our families for decades to know that we're coming for them," Beck said. "And give families hope and strength that they can speak out and see results and see change."

Wayne and Denise Fox, lead executives at Realty Management Associates, also operated Aspen Stratford Apartments at 2 Stratford Place. Mayor Ras Baraka condemned the building in 2015, citing ongoing problems at the property that stretched on for decades. 

But it took months to transition residents to new homes and secure housing vouchers for them. Wayne Fox also sued the Baraka administration, claiming his company was being blamed for conditions in the building caused by crime and other social ills in the area.

The case was settled and dismissed in 2016. The Foxes own at least 18 other properties in the city, housing advocates said. 

Alston-Singleton said better city and federal coordination would have prevented the well-intentioned effort from taking so long to help residents and could have prevented the low-income building's closure. 

"We need to start at the federal level and each government agency should be responsible," she said. 

Karen Yi may be reached at kyi@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter at @karen_yi or on Facebook. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        