NEWARK — The ball wobbled through the night air, and as it headed toward an uncertain destination, the same crazy thought was hanging there with it:

Newark East Side was going to win a football game. Finally.

The Red Raiders were one play — a 23-yard Hail Mary pass on 4th-and-goal — from fulfilling their destiny last Thursday night against Kearny High. They were seconds from doing the unthinkable and snapping a 53-game losing streak, what is believed to be a state record.

The streak had lasted 2,168 days. It had spanned five consecutive winless seasons. It had dated to a victory over Newark West Side on Oct. 1, 2011, when President Barack Obama was in his first term and every current East Side player was in elementary school.

Now, it was about to be broken.

The player who had endured more losing than anyone else on the field scrambled after the ball. The coach who had taken the job three months earlier to fix an un-fixable situation stared from the sidelines. And the athletic director tasked with righting the program held his breath near the team’s bench.

The ball dropped from the sky toward a crowd of players, their arms outstretched and flailing.

The unimaginable was about to happen.

* * *

Three hours earlier, the senior bounced through warmups, knowing deep in his chest this was the night his team would make history.

Romaine Johnson, the senior running back and linebacker, had been a member of the Red Raiders longer than any other player, long enough to lose every single high school football game he had ever played. Long enough to play for three head coaches over the past three seasons, as one man after another tried and failed to find a way to win in a place that never wins.

All told, East Side’s 53 straight losses had spanned five years, 11 months and six days. It included countless merciless beatings, like the 76-0 trouncing by Union City last season, the 61-0 shellacking by Millburn in 2014, the 70-0 destruction by Weequahic in 2013.

But last Thursday felt different to Johnson. He had thought about it as he fell asleep the night before, and all day leading up to the game against Kearny at Newark’s Schools Stadium. This was going to be the game the Red Raiders did the impossible.

RELATED: These 50 public high schools are the best for sports in New Jersey

“I want to snap the losing streak so bad,” Johnson says hours earlier. “I want to end it for my school. I want to make my coaches proud, make my younger teammates proud and the East Side alumni, I really want to make them proud that we ended the losing streak.”

Snapping the streak was a major motivator for Johnson, but it was more than that. He suited up for East Side and absorbed the constant beatings because football gave him purpose, friends and camaraderie he hadn’t otherwise found. It kept him focused on his grades and eyeing college.

Decked in a black uniform and pants with red trim and a black bandana wrapped around his head, Johnson led his team out of the locker room and was the first player to burst through a banner held by cheerleaders that read, “Let’s go Raiders!”

As East Side kicked off to Kearny at 7:05 p.m., 26 people hung in the towering metal bleachers on the Red Raiders side. Thirteen East Side cheerleaders danced and twirled and hollered on the field. The temperature hovered at 70 degrees, the sun hanging crooked in the bottom of the sky.

Johnson still felt the feeling, deep in his chest. This was his night, his team’s night.

Winning was inevitable.

* * *

The coach stomped off the field at halftime Thursday night, a bundle of mixed emotions. East Side trailed Kearny, 7-0, but his team was in striking distance. It just needed a couple breaks.

“First thing’s first,” Brian Meeney says to his assistant coaches as they huddled on the field. “What’s gashing us? What’s the remedy for that?”

Meeney lived for moments like this. For the challenge of it. It was the reason why he forged a career coaching at underdog places such as East Side, rather than trying to latch on at a fancy private school with an unlimited athletic budget.

“I do feel there are a lot of coaches that can be successful at, like, Don Bosco Prep,” Meeney says. “There are hundreds of coaches that can do well at those places. But not every coach can coach at Newark East Side. That’s a fact.”

Meeney grew up in Woodbridge, the son of a truck driver and waitress. “A family of workers,” he says. He played basketball and football at JFK-Iselin and then Perth Amboy Tech, where he led the basketball team to a state championship in 1993.

RELATED: Ranking N.J.'s top 25 high school sports dynasties of all-time

After graduating from Rowan six years later, Meeney started coaching football. His first head job came in 2003 at McCorriston High — now Trenton Catholic Academy — which had finished 0-10 the previous season. His first year, Meeney led the team to a 5-5 record.

Next, he turned around losing programs at Memorial High in West New York and Bergen Tech, becoming something of an Underdog Whisperer.

“You go into every situation thinking that you can change it,” Meeney says. “Thinking that you can make an impact.”

At East Side, Meeney’s challenge is greater than all the others. The team has never made the playoffs in the modern era, and most can’t remember the last time the Red Raiders had a winning season. Since 2003, the team has won 12 games against 124 losses.

Meeney, 42, spends much of practice teaching the rules of the game.

“Everything from having seven guys on the line of scrimmage to blocking rules,” Meeney says. “Like, telling them you can’t hold when you’re on offense. It sounds so elementary, but it’s something we revisit every single day.”

Meeney sees a group of kids at East Side desperate to win, and a skeptical school community that wonders if it can actually be done. All of it fuels him.

The coach gives a fiery speech at halftime Thursday night.

“Those breaks are going to go our way!” he screams. “Get your heads right!”

A new East Side team sprints onto the field for the second half. Midway through the third quarter, Carlos Martinez, a sophomore quarterback, scores on a 20-yard run, then finds Jisir Fullenwider in the end zone for the two-point conversation.

All of a sudden, East Side has the lead, 8-7.

* * *

The athletic director nervously paces on the sidelines, watching the victory slowly come into focus. Adrian Bosolasco has been coaching and teaching at East Side for 12 years, but he’s only been in charge of athletics for the past three.

As much as anyone, he feels responsibility for seeing the team snap the losing streak. Bosolasco says when he was named athletic director in 2015 there was serious talk of dropping the football program to the junior varsity level or folding it all together. He and others wouldn’t let it happen.

“Financially it’s a big cost to have a football team, and our numbers were never really that strong to say hundreds of kids were going to be affected,” Bosolasco says. “But I said, ‘We still have kids that love to play. We still get kids that go out every day and bust their chops to do better.’

“I didn’t care if it was three kids or 100 kids; I was going to fight for those kids.”

RELATED: These are New Jersey's most unbreakable high school records

The team ultimately stayed and so did the relentless losing. Bosolasco says the program bottomed out his first year, in 2015, when East Side failed to score a single point in five games and lost all nine of them by a combined score of 414-24.

“The whole system was broken,” Bosolasco says. “We said, ‘All right, there needs to be change here, this is not going in the right direction.’”

Bosolasco helped East Side select a new coach in 2016 and the team saw modest improvements, scoring in every game except one and losing to Kearny in the season-opener by a single point. But the coach stepped down after the season, placing the program’s future in jeopardy again.

Then Bosolasco tabbed Meeney for the job, feeling like he finally found the perfect solution for the Red Raiders.

East Side has the ingredients to win now, Bosolasco says. It has a robust student population of more than 1,600 students, according to the state athletic association’s latest group classifications. This year’s freshman class is nearly 500 strong, Bosolasco adds. The school also has strong basketball, soccer and volleyball programs.

“It can be done here and that’s really my belief,” Bosolasco says. “That’s also why we brought Coach Meeney on board. He believes the same: It could be done here. There’s no reason why it can’t be done here.”

As Bosolasco fidgeted on the sidelines in the third quarter, the game took another turn. Martinez, the quarterback, hit Deandre Speight in the end zone for a 17-yard touchdown. Once again, East Side added the two-point conversion, pulling ahead of Kearny, 16-7, with the third quarter drawing to a close.

Bosolasco could hardly contain his excitement.

“It’s still early,” he says through a cautious smile. “There’s still a lot of game left.”

* * *

The game is securely in favor of East Side as the seconds tick off the clock in the fourth quarter.

Eleven minutes to go. Then eight. Then six. Then four.

East Side still leads by two scores.

Excitement builds at Schools Stadium. The 26 fans at kickoff have nearly tripled. The cheerleaders squeal with glee.

Then, suddenly, it all starts to crumble.

Kearny scores a touchdown and adds the two-point conversion with 2:51 remaining, cutting the Red Raiders lead to 16-15.

But it’s still East Side’s game. The team takes over on the next possession and Kearny only has one timeout remaining. The Red Raiders can effectively drain most of the game clock.

Then the unbelievable happens: East Side fumbles on its first play, giving the ball back to Kearny on the Red Raiders’ 37-yard line with 2:43 left. It’s a devastating mistake. The visitors immediately drive down the field, reaching the 5-yard line with a minute to play.

Kearny lines up for the game-winning field goal on third down but — miraculously — it’s blocked by East Side. Kearny recovers and gets one final play: Fourth-and-goal from the 23-yard line.

The Hail Mary play.

Johnson, the player, lines up in the middle of the field, ready to rush the quarterback. Meeney, the coach, labors on the sidelines, barking final instructions. Bosolasco, the athletic director, paces near the bench, lips tightly pursed.

Kearny snaps the ball and the quarterback scrambles back. He heaves a pass down the far sideline. The ball hangs in the air. People in the crowd scream and gasp. A tangle of players converge in the end zone and jostle for position.

The ball, somehow, navigates the crowd and falls into the hands of Kearny’s Diego Torales.

Touchdown, Kearny. Twenty seconds on the clock. The game is all but over.

The visitors tack on a final score on the ensuing kickoff, recovering a fumble in the end zone.

Final score: Kearny 28, East Side 16.

Incredibly, the losing streak survives, growing to 54 games.

Afterward, East Side’s players smash their helmets into the turf and collapse on the field. Tears erupt from their eyes. Meeney takes in the tragedy before him, unsure what to say. Even for a team used to losing, this one is especially cruel.

“I know it hurts,” Meeney tells his players. “You’re making great strides and you know it. The things that we need to do to improve are so crystal clear — and we can fix them. We have a lot of football ahead of us.”

East Side’s players and coaches trudge to waiting buses outside the stadium. The player, the coach and the athletic director and everybody else will mourn the loss for the next few days, replaying the events over and over.

A week will pass and another opponent, tonight, will line up across from East Side.

It will be East Side’s game to win, its chance to snap the losing streak once and for all.

Deep in the hearts of the players and coaches, they all believe it will happen.

Matthew Stanmyre may be reached at mstanmyre@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattStanmyre. Find NJ.com on Facebook.

See More Sports News »


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        