
    
        
            By Karen Yi

kyi@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

NEWARK -- An Essex County College administrator was placed on paid leave as public pressure for her immediate resignation reached a boiling point during a marathon meeting Tuesday.

The Board of Trustees approved paid administrative leave for Joyce Wilson Harley based on a recommendation by President Anthony Munroe. The reason for her leave was not disclosed but her attorney, Karen Brown, said it was not Harley's decision.

"Dr. Harley has done nothing wrong, the only thing she is guilty of is having the intestinal fortitude to speak up and speak out about wrongdoing," Brown said, adding that she was being "punished for doing her job."

The move caps weeks of outcry over allegations of political interference at the college revolving around Harley and a gnawing fear that the college may lose its accreditation as it struggles to stabilize.

"There are persons in this house who are obstructing academic justice as (Munroe) tries to move this institution forward," the Rev. H. William Rutherford, of Irvington, said as a packed audience waited for the Board of Trustees meeting that started nearly three hours late. 

A group of clergy leaders have denounced what they call political hires like Harley and said her undue influence on the institution is preventing Munroe from doing his job. 

Shaken out of retirement by the college's troubles, President Emeritus A. Zachary Yamba also attended Tuesday's meeting. Yamba, who is widely revered for his decades-long tenure at the college and became acting president while the institution searched for a new leader this year, expressed support for president Munroe. 

"Essex cannot afford to have multiple leaders, we have to have one leader at a time," Yamba said. He said the board is "enabling two concurrent presidencies" and needed to stop. "At the end of the day, the leadership on the board needs to change," he told NJ Advance Media. 

Faith leaders who began publicly chastising "political shenanigans" at the college last month say Essex County Executive Joseph N. DiVincenzo Jr. exerts too much influence on the institution -- to its detriment.

DiVincenzo appoints most of the 10-member Board of Trustees and previously favored Harley to become the college's president. Clergy members say such backing gave her unchecked influence over the board and college matters.

DiVincenzo declined to comment through a spokesman.

"Joyce Harley is not the cause of the college's problems," Brown said, listing a series of allegations against former and current employees accused of wrongdoing and violating policy. She included Munroe whom Harley previously alleged changed the organizational chart without permission when trying to hire a new chief financial officer. "Dr. Harley has no problem supporting the president," Brown said. "It does not mean you abdicate your responsibility ... At the end of the day, you will be vindicated according to your righteousness, according to your integrity."

The meeting, originally scheduled for 4:30 p.m., didn't begin until 7:10 p.m. after the board's closed-door meeting spilled over. The board was discussing Harley's leave which does not have an end date. 

"Shame on you!" the packed auditorium yelled as the board walked in nearly three hours late. 

.@EssexCountyNwk board meeting was supposed to start at 4:30. Board still in executive session, public growing frustrated pic.twitter.com/Nr5fsr96wh

Nine board members voted in favor of placing Harley on leave with board member Safanya Searcy abstaining.

Still, the public railed against the measure, seeking answers to why and how long Harley would be on leave. A petition circulated the room calling for Harley's resignation and the resignation of Board Chair Bibi Taylor and board member Searcy, both appointed by DiVincenzo. 

"You have no place here," Lev Zilbermints, a graduate of 1993, said to Harley during public comment. "This school is not Joe DiVincenzo's toy. We are our own masters."

"Dr. Munroe deserves to have his own employees surrounding him," Rev. Ronald L. Slaughter, pastor of Saint James AME Church in Newark, said shortly after 10 p.m. as the meeting came to an end. "Let's leave the past in the past. Allow Dr. Munroe to be the president."

Slaughter, who has led the recent surge of support for Munroe and calls for the end of political influence at th college, sent a letter to William Fitzpatrick, acting United States attorney for New Jersey, last week, asking he open an investigation into possible corruption at the college and "inapprorpiate political interference."

Munroe said three visitors from The Middle States Commission on Higher Education, the institution's accrediting agency, will visit the college next month to assess the school's compliance with three standards that were found deficient.

Last year, Middle States warned the college that its accreditation was in danger. It's rare for an institution to be striped of its accreditation but if it is, students would not receive federal aid -- essentially closing the school.

"That would be to our eternal shame and eternal damnation," Yamba said, warning the community to stay vigilant and invovled. 

"It is critically important that we band together as a community and as a family to ensure that this institution is around and available with open doors for the next 50 years," Munroe said. "We have a lot of work to do, this is very challenging and daunting times but we will persevere."

Karen Yi may be reached at kyi@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter at @karen_yi or on Facebook. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        