Gallery: Devils vs. Red Wings | Jan. 22, 2018


    
        
            By Chris Ryan

cryan@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

BOSTON -- Following a players-only meeting following Monday's 3-0 loss to the Detroit Red Wings at the Prudential Center in Newark, the Devils will have a quick chance to show a response.

Going against the red-hot Boston Bruins at 7 p.m. on Tuesday at TD Garden, the Devils will aim to address some of the lacking areas of their game that have seen them fall to 2-5-3 over their past 10 contests.

Players speaking in a group isn't an uncommon occurrence in the Devils' room, but with the Metropolitan Division race tighter than ever -- three points separate second and seventh place -- the team has some extra incentive to turn things around sooner than later.

"You just have to re-assess. Especially, lot of times, the guys that are talking, you've got to hold yourself accountable, too," forward Brian Boyle said. "It's an important bounce-back game, especially the guys that stood up and said something. We have to respond. We have to make an effort to improve and it's every detail of our game."

What Devils have lacked in losses

Coach John Hynes has talked about the character of the Devils' group since the start of training camp, and he pointed to that as one of the reasons the meeting was held. Now the coach needs to see it have an impact on the ice.

"It means they care. It's always a good thing," Hynes said. "They understand that the play isn't where it needs to be to win. I think they understand we've had practices that have worked on those areas, we've had meeting ad nauseam about what needs to happen, how hard we need to play.

"It translates into what needs to happen on the ice, and I think when you have guys that hold each other accountable and players buy in to what we're doing, but it's not translating onto the ice or into productivity, it's important the group gathers themselves and starts to hold each other accountable and value the things it takes to win. You can't just play this time of year. You have to compete."

 Chris Ryan may be reached at cryan@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisRyan_NJ. Find NJ.com Devils on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        