If you are a subscriber: Simply log in for unlimited access. 
                            If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now. 
                            Check out your options: tulsaworld.com/subscribe.-->
                            

If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Journalism worth your time and money. Join us for only 99 cents.

A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible early. Partly cloudy. High 99F. Winds light and variable..

A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible early. Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Cates

Cates

Okmulgee County sheriff’s deputies say a man came to the Sheriff’s Office to ask about security for a town forum where a state senator was speaking and made threats toward the legislator.

Steven Cates, 60, reportedly came to the Sheriff’s Office on Feb. 15 and inquired about the forum, which featured Sen. Roger Thompson, R-Okemah.

Tulsa World journalism makes a difference. Be part of the story. Join us. Start a digital subscription for only 99¢. 





“While Cates was speaking with deputies, he then began making threats towards the senator’s safety and attempted to leave in order to go to where … the senator was speaking,” Deputy Duston Todd said in a news release.

Deputies arrested Cates as he attempted to leave. He allegedly resisted and made threats toward officers.

Cates was arrested on complaints of assault and battery on a police officer, resisting arrest and two counts of threatening to perform an act of violence.

He was booked into the Okmulgee County Jail and was being held in lieu of a $310,000 bond.

Thompson, elected in November 2014, represents Senate District 8, which includes Okmulgee and Mcintosh counties and parts of Okfuskee and Muskogee counties.



Cates

Harrison is an Arkansas transplant in Oklahoma who does his best to keep Tulsa World's readers up to date on breaking news from 5 a.m. to 1 p.m. Phone: 918-581-8369


                                    
                                        Whenever Staff Writer Harrison Grimwood posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.