If you are a subscriber: Simply log in for unlimited access. 
                            If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now. 
                            Check out your options: tulsaworld.com/subscribe.-->
                            

If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Journalism worth your time and money. Join us for only 99 cents.

Mostly clear. Low 74F. Winds light and variable..

Mostly clear. Low 74F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Off-duty Tulsa Police Capt. Cathy Reynolds checks out the inmate accommodations during a tour of the new Tulsa municipal jail on Wednesday. MIKE SIMONS/Tulsa World

Off-duty Tulsa Police Capt. Cathy Reynolds checks out the inmate accommodations during a tour of the new Tulsa municipal jail on Wednesday. MIKE SIMONS/Tulsa World

A week and a half into the life of the new municipal Tulsa jail, all signs indicate that it’s running smoothly.

The 30-bed lockup has not exceeded capacity. Police are spending an average of 30 minutes booking in an inmate, a job that could take as long as 90 minutes at the Tulsa County jail. And the bonding process has been expedited, meaning inmates are getting out of lockup sooner.

Tulsa Municipal Court Administrator Kelly Brader said having the municipal Tulsa jail and municipal court in the same building has made all the difference in the world. The city constructed its jail inside the Police-Courts Building, 600 Civic Center.

Tulsa World journalism makes a difference. Be part of the story. Join us. Start a digital subscription for only 99¢. 





“I think, generally speaking, we are in charge of our own destiny,” she said. “I am a big change proponent, and this way we will have the ability to look at procedures and have the ability to make those changes.”

For instance, Brader plans to ask judges if they would be willing to see more inmates on Mondays, when inmate counts can run high.

“I have judges here from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. every day, and our normal dockets always run in the morning; then we have a 2 o’clock docket; then they are open,” Brader said. “The people who have been arrested on Thursday or Friday, we are going to try to get them down there on Monday afternoon to do it then.”

The municipal Tulsa jail — officially it’s a lockup, because inmates can be held there only up to 10 days — opened to great fanfare March 1.

The city’s decision to operate its own facility ended a decades-long dispute between the city and Tulsa County over how much the city should pay to hold its municipal inmates in the David L. Moss Criminal Justice Center — the Tulsa County jail.

Mayor G.T. Bynum cited several reasons for his decision, including cost, efficiency and a desire to put the city and county spat behind him so the parties could work together on more productive ventures.

Among the concerns voiced by critics of the new jail was that it was too small. So far, that has not proved to be the case. In the first seven days of operation, 107 inmates were booked into the jail.

The city has contracted with the Okmulgee County jail to hold inmates should the city jail be over capacity or in those instances when an inmate is sentenced to a term longer than 10 days. City officials could not provide the exact number of inmates sent to Okmulgee but said the figure was small and included only those serving extended sentences.

Amy Brown, Bynum’s deputy chief of staff, said the jail’s overnight inmate population in the first week averaged about 18. Of those, 53 were held less than a day; 20 were held more than one day but less than two days; and 14 were held more than two days but less than three days. The average time inmates were held in the jail was 20 hours and 49 minutes.

The three most common charges among those booked into the jail were public intoxication (20 percent) followed by suspended or revoked driver’s licenses and shoplifting.

The public intoxication number is a big one for the city, which recently announced that it will open a Sobering Center for those charged only with public intoxication. Once it opens in the spring, the municipal jail inmate population is expected to be even lower.

Brown said the city is working with officers to remind them that that option will soon be available.

“We want to make sure they are bringing those people to the Sobering Center and not just to the jail just because they are used to it,” Brown said.

Mike Brose, executive director of Mental Health Association Oklahoma, said having inmates in the same building as the municipal courts could make it easier for them to access another jail diversion program: the Special Services Docket.

The program, a collaborative effort between the municipal court and nonprofits such as MHAO, gives people who have committed misdemeanors the chance to avoid jail and have their fines and fees dismissed. In return, they must get the treatment and assistance they need and show up for periodic court dates.

“I would anticipate as the lockup gets its sea legs, so to speak, we are going to have a chance to see how that Special Services Docket can maybe interface with that,” Brose said.

City and county officials were once close to signing a short-term agreement that would have had the city paying $1.4 million a year to holds its inmates in the Tulsa County jail. That was twice as much as the city was paying but far less than the $3 million to $4 million one county commissioner was asking for.

So city officials see the $1.5 to $2 million a year the city expects to spend to operate its own facility as a good investment, especially with the jail diversion services coming online.

“The new city jail is operating as we hoped it would,” Bynum said. “When both of these facilities (the jail and the Sobering Center) are operating in tandem, it will be a great thing for Tulsans.”



Kevin Canfield has covered local government in Tulsa for nearly two decades. He also has reported on downtown development, zoning and community planning.


                                    
                                        Whenever Staff Writer Kevin Canfield posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.