Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Joshua Rhett Miller


		
		
		
		
	


									April 30, 2018 | 2:29pm
											| Updated April 30, 2018 | 3:02pm
												

A California man is facing up to life in prison after allegedly waterboarding his wife while holding her captive for six hours inside their home, court records show.

Richard David Schlosser, 36, was charged in January with torturing his bride of just two months inside their Newport Beach apartment, where he allegedly attacked the 65-year-old woman while under the influence of drugs and alcohol.

“He did this for hours,” Orange County Senior Deputy District Attorney Mark Geller told City News Service. “He kept her captive in the apartment for hours … He actually waterboarded her.”

The woman, who was not identified, managed to get in touch with a friend, who called police after Schlosser “sobered up,” Geller said. She was later hospitalized for her injuries, City News Service reported.

Geller could not be reached for comment Monday, but a representative from the Orange County District Attorney’s Office told The Post that a motion to increase Schlosser’s bail, as well as a domestic violence protective order, have been sealed in the case.

Schlosser has pleaded not guilty to charges of torture, corporal injury on a spouse, false imprisonment and criminal threats, according to court records cited Monday by the Los Angeles Times.

Police in Newport Beach went to Schlosser’s apartment on Jan. 6 after someone called the department to ask for an officer to check on the woman at the residence, police spokeswoman Jennifer Manzella told the newspaper. Cops then entered the home after finding a “reason to believe a crime had occurred,” Manzella said.

Schlosser’s wife alleged that he assaulted her for six hours starting late on Jan. 5 and ending sometime early on Jan. 6, according to a request for a restraining order filed in Superior Court. Schlosser punched and kicked her, hit her with a candelabrum and cut her with scissors, she told police.

Schlosser also choked his wife and shoved a towel down her throat, police alleged in court documents obtained by the Los Angeles Times.

Schlosser, who faces up to life in prison if convicted, also faces possible sentencing enhancements, since he was out of jail on $50,000 bail for a separate 2016 domestic violence case in Riverside County at the time of the alleged attack on his wife.

Schlosser has also pleaded not guilty in the earlier case, according to court records. He remained in custody as of Monday at Orange County Jail in lieu of $2,050,000 bail, jail records show.

His court-appointed attorney, Robert Kohler, declined to comment when reached Monday by The Post.


			Read Next
		


			
				Netanyahu: Iran 'brazenly lied' about secret nuke program			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Netanyahu: Iran 'brazenly lied' about secret nuke program			
		

Share Selection

131,249

63,137

56,447

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters