The wife of jailed immigration activist Ravi Ragbir blasted his arrest as "state-sponsored crime" at a Saturday rally urging federal officials to turn her spouse loose.

"The impact of having my husband locked up in jail has been devastating," said Amy Gottlieb at a rally outside the Javits Federal Building in lower Manhattan.

"I cry every day," she continued. "It's a crisis and it's traumatizing."

Ragbir, 43, was arrested Jan. 11 during a scheduled appointment with federal officials. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers held him for a speedy deportation to his native Trinidad and Tobago.

Rep. Nydia Velazquez (D-N.Y.), who plans to bring Gottlieb along to President Trump's State of the Union address Tuesday, charged that Ragbir was targeted because of his work as an immigration activist.

"Our government is saying if you stand up for your rights or speak out for your community, then you run the risk of being detained or deported," said Velazquez.

"Our government is saying, 'We will separate you from your family if you don't sit down and shut up.'"

As the head of the New Sanctuary Coalition, Ragbir assisted thousands of people facing detention and deportation — and now finds himself in the same position.

He is currently in custody in upstate Orange County, where several supporters plan to visit him. Ragbir was initially transferred to a Florida detention center.

A hearing was set for Monday at which lawyers for Ragbir will challenge the legality of his detention and argue for his release.

On Friday, Velazquez and Rep. Joseph Crowley demanded a sitdown with ICE officials regarding "the rash of enforcement actions against immigrant rights leaders."

The two were joined by 29 other legislators writing in the wake of Rabgir's arrest.

Crowley, speaking to dozens of sign-waving Ragbir supporters Saturday, encouraged the crowd to take a stand against the federal government's attempts to deport the activist.

"If you'll go after someone like Ravi, you'll go after just about anyone," said Crowley. "What is happening to Ravi and to others right now isn't justice. I believe they are targeting these individuals."

Ragbir, a 27-year resident of the U.S., was arrested during a routine check-in with ICE. Officials declared he had exhausted his legal appeals to remain in the country.

He was initially granted permanent residency in 1994, although it was revoked after a wire fraud conviction six years later.

Ragbir argued that bad legal advice led him to plead guilty to an aggravated felony, putting his residency status at risk.

"It's more traumatizing than I can ever say to have your husband taken away from you in handcuffs," said Gottlieb. "Honestly, I do feel like I've been a victim of state-sponsored crime."