Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Doctors and staff at the two Broward Health System hospitals that took in patients from the Parkland school shooting Wednesday were prepared for the carnage in part because of other recent mass shootings, officials said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Dr. Jerry Brooks, chief medical officer of emergency services for Broward Health, and his staff received trauma patients following the school shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, seen Thursday, Feb. 15, 2018, at Broward Health North in Pompano Beach. Dr. Brooks said staff learned from 2017's Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport shooting and the Las Vegas massacre, helping them be better prepared for Wednesday's event.
(Photo: LEAH VOSS/TCPALM)

POMPANO BEACH, Florida — Doctors and staff at the two Broward Health System hospitals that took in patients from the Parkland school shooting Wednesday were prepared for the carnage in part because of other recent mass shootings, officials said.


“We try to stay ahead of the curve and the Fort Lauderdale mass casualty incident was a learning experience and we felt really good about the response,” said Dr. Jerry Brooks, chief medical officer of emergency services for Broward Health System, referring to a mass shooting at Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport a little over a year ago.


“We ramped up with exercises and code green drills,” he said, referring to the code for mass casualties. “We used that information to try to make the response for any further mass casualties better. So it definitely helped.”


A total of 16 patients, including the alleged shooter, were sent to Broward Health North in Pompano Beach and Broward Health Medical Center in Fort Lauderdale Wednesday. By Thursday afternoon, one patient was in critical, seven in fair and one in good condition, officials said. Two patients died Wednesday, they said.


More: Las Vegas shooting: In hospital, 'you are just stopping the dying'


More: Las Vegas shooting: Hospital workers recall 'controlled chaos' as victims surged in


More: 49 dead, a 36-hour shift and a daily reminder: Pulse 6 months later


Staff at the Broward hospitals also learned from the Las Vegas shooting in October that left 58 dead and hundreds more injured, Brooks said.


“Unfortunately, we can’t predict when the next mass casualty will occur, but we’re always trying to stay ahead of the curve and plan for what could happen,” he said.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Brooks said he learned the most from the Las Vegas shooting with information about the response being shared in medical journals.


“We had multiple, multiple casualties and the trauma center there in Las Vegas had already thought about it and they already had a plan, so when something like that did occur, they were ready,” he said. “They retrofitted what was occurring to keep the flow of the patients through the system. They had many more casualties and injuries. It was a learning tool that I used to teach the trauma center medical directors in the system To have a plan, have it ready and make changes when things occur.”



    Dr. Jerry Brooks, chief medical officer of emergency services for Broward Health, and his staff received trauma patients following the school shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, seen Thursday at Broward Health North in Pompano Beach. Dr. Brooks said staff learned from 2017's Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport shooting and the Las Vegas massacre, helping them be better prepared for Wednesday's tragedy.
    LEAH VOSS/TCPALM

The majority of victims had penetrating injuries to their torsos and extremities, Brooks said.


Because authorities needed time to search the school for victims, not all patients arrived at the same time, he said. 


“And that time of searching the school allowed more of a metered kind of a response,” Brooks said. “Different from getting all of them at one time. So it was better for the patients.”


 
