Orange County Sheriff's spokeswoman Ingrid Tejada-Monforte talks about the lockdown at Windermere High School Wednesday afternoon. The lockdown was lifted after no threat was found.



Orange County Sheriff's spokeswoman Ingrid Tejada-Monforte talks about the lockdown at Windermere High School Wednesday afternoon. The lockdown was lifted after no threat was found.

A lockdown was lifted at Windermere High School after a threat was discovered to be unfounded Wednesday afternoon.


About 11:30 a.m., a parent received a message saying somebody was in a bathroom with a gun, said Orange County sheriff’s spokeswoman Ingrid Tejada-Monforte.


“There are guys in the bathrooms and hallways with guns in Windermere High School. We are afraid help, please call 911 now,” the text message said.


The Orange County School Board and school resource officers were notified of the threat, and the school was immediately locked down to allow deputies to search the school thoroughly.


The Orange County Sheriff’s Office, Florida Highway Patrol and Ocoee, Winter Garden and Windermere police departments all responded. Traffic was blocked on roads leading to the school for a few hours as authorities prevented anybody from entering or exiting school grounds.


The lockdown at the school, which has a combined student and staff population of 3,000, was lifted about 2:15 p.m. Nothing suspicious was found, and students were allowed to leave at the regular dismissal time of 2:45 p.m.


Avery Clark, a sophomore, said he was in class when he heard a voice over the intercom: “Code red, code red, code red.”


He said he and his classmates immediately hid under their desks. They remained there, in the dark, for the next 45 minutes.


“It was a mix of a lot of emotions,” Avery said. “Fearful for yourself. Fearful for others. Fearful for everyone.”


Candi Clark, his mother, said she felt a sense of dejá vu when she received a text from her son saying the school was on lockdown.


“It just happened here six weeks ago,” she said. “SWAT teams and cops and helicopters and news crews. It’s becoming unreal that this is happening so frequently.”


On Sept. 20, text messages warning of a school shooting at Windermere High School prompted a four-hour lockdown. Two students were questioned by authorities and later released.


If the perpetrator of Wednesday’s threat is discovered, that person could be charged with disruption of a school function, Tejada-Monforte said.


Wednesday’s incident comes a day after a Lake Minneola High School student fatally shot himself before a fire drill at the school’s bus loop. The shooting prompted a lockdown. No one else was injured.


Staff writers Bianca Padro Ocasio and Caitlin Doornbos contributed.


Michael Williams can be reached at miwilliams@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5022.