Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Peter Wang died helping fellow students get to safety in Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. The community wants a burial fit for a military hero.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Peter Wang is seen in this photo near a memorial in Parkland, Fla., Friday, Feb. 16, 2018. Wang, a student at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., was killed when former student Nikolas Cruz opened fire at the school Wednesday, Feb. 14, 2018. (AP Photo/Allen Breed)
(Photo: Allen Breed, AP)

PARKLAND – Peter Wang died in his Junior ROTC uniform while helping fellow students get to safety as shots rang out inside Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on Valentine's Day.


The Parkland community wants the 15-year-old to have a burial fit for a military hero.


An online petition filed Feb.16 on whitehouse.gov calls for Congress to allow for Peter to have a full honors military funeral.


The online petition states: "Peter Wang, 15, was one of the students killed in Florida this past week. He was a JROTC Cadet who was last seen, in uniform, holding doors open and thus allowing other students, teachers, and staff to flee to safety. Wang was killed in the process. His selfless and heroic actions have led to the survival of dozens in the area.


Wang died a hero, and deserves to be treated as such, and deserves a full honors military burial."


The petition needs 100,000 signatures by March 18 to get a response from the White House, according to the website. By Sunday evening, 17,491 people signed the petition. 


More: Numerous missed opportunities before Florida shooter killed 17 at Broward high school


More: Florida school shooting: Hundreds rally for stricter gun laws after massacre


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Wang’s funeral will be Tuesday, Feb. 20, at 1 p.m. at Kraeer Funeral Home, 1655 University Drive in Coral Springs. He will be laid to rest at Bailey Memorial Gardens in North Lauderdale.


See the petition at https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/allow-cadet-peter-wang-receive-full-honors-military-burial.


More: Florida school shooting: Judge orders social service records for Nikolas Cruz released


More: Florida school shooting: Lauderdale airport attack survivor grateful son was safe in Parkland



    Several of  the Florida high school shooting  survivors say they will not go back to school until Congress takes action by passing new gun legislation.
    Buzz60

 
