Nikolas Cruz was purposeful and well armed when he killed 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. Here is a detailed look into the timeline of the massacre.



Nikolas Cruz was purposeful and well armed when he killed 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. Here is a detailed look into the timeline of the massacre.

As a young middle-school student, school shooter Nikolas Cruz regularly got in trouble for using foul language, insulting people, disobeying teachers and disrupting classes.


But problems only escalated when Cruz got to Parkland’s Marjory Stoneman Douglas High, disciplinary records obtained by the South Florida Sun Sentinel show.


In January 2017, Cruz assaulted someone and received a one-day internal suspension. The school asked for a “threat assessment,” on him, the records indicate.


School officials can request that the district’s Psychological Services department do such assessments on students if they feel like the student is a danger to himself or others, a former school security official told the Sun Sentinel.


It’s unclear whether the assessment was done for Cruz.


READ MORE


As a young middle-school student, school shooter Nikolas Cruz regularly got in trouble for using foul language, insulting people, disobeying teachers and disrupting classes.

School officials met with his mother. And counseled him. And referred him to family counseling. And gave him detention. And...

Here are other developments:


-- State attorney says now isn't time to discuss plea deal


Broward State Attorney Mike Satz said Saturday that now is not the time to discuss whether his office would seek the death penalty or make a plea deal for Nikolas Cruz, the 19-year-old accused of shooting and killing 17 people at Parkland’s Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School Wednesday.


But he left little doubt that the death penalty would be an appropriate penalty for the massacre at the high school.


“This certainly is the type of case the death penalty was designed for,” Satz said Saturday in a statement. “This was a highly calculated and premeditated murder of 17 people and the attempted murder of everyone in that school. Our office will announce our formal position at the appropriate time.”


Satz’s statement comes after Broward Public Defender Howard Finkelstein said Friday that Cruz would plead guilty in exchange for taking the death penalty off the table.


READ MORE


Broward State Attorney Mike Satz said Saturday that now is not the time to discuss whether his office would seek the death penalty or make a plea deal for Nikolas Cruz, the 19-year-old accused of shooting and killing 17 people at Parkland’s Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School Wednesday.

But he...

-- Cruz seen on Snapchat with cuts on arms


After a break-up with his girlfriend, Parkland school shooter Nikolas Cruz posted images of himself on Snapchat in 2016 cutting his own arms and expressed a desire to buy a gun, according to records obtained by the South Florida Sun Sentinel.


The posts on the digital social network prompted an investigation by sheriff’s deputies and adult welfare investigators from the Florida Department of Children &amp; Family Services.


“Mr. Cruz has fresh cuts on both his arms,” the DCF report reads. “Mr. Cruz stated he plans to go out and buy a gun. It is unknown what he is buying the gun for.”


Nikolas Cruz cut his arms on Snapchat and said he wanted to buy a gun in September 2016, more than a year before he was accused of killing 17 people in a school in Parkland, Florida, records obtained by the South Florida Sun Sentinel show.

The incident on the digital social network prompted an...

Investigators concluded there were “some implications” for Cruz’s safety but determined he was receiving adequate support from his school and outpatient care from Henderson Mental Health in Broward County.


His mother, Lynda Cruz, told investigators that her son had been diagnosed with autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. He was being treated for depression, had a behavior disorder and had been taking medication for the ADHD, the report said.


Cruz’s mother said her son did not have a firearm. She said she had confiscated his air gun because he didn’t follow house rules about only shooting it “within the backyard and at targets.” READ MORE


-- Cruz to offer guilty plea: Defense attorneys for Cruz plan to meet with prosecutors and offer a guilty plea in exchange for life in prison, Broward Public Defender Howard Finkelstein said Friday.


“There is only one question: Should this young man live or should he die by execution?” he said. “We believe it’s in nobody’s best interest to go through a circus of a trial.”


Though Broward County state prosecutors have not yet formally charged Cruz, the defense lawyers said they were certain that the Broward State Attorney’s Office would seek the death penalty. In Florida, a 12-0 jury vote is required to sentence a convicted defendant to death. READ MORE


-- Trump heads to Broward hospital: President Donald Trump went to Broward Health North hospital in Deerfield Beach on Friday evening, where victims of the Parkland school shooting remained hospitalized.


After visiting patients, the president, joined by first lady Melania Trump and Dr. Igor Nichiporenko, spoke briefly to reporters.


“The job they’ve done is incredible and I want to congratulate you,” Trump said, as he shook the doctor’s hand.


“It’s sad something like that could happen,” Trump said.


He said he was impressed with the speed with which first responders reacted, calling it “record-setting” and “in one case 20 minutes.”


He did not respond when asked if the nation’s gun laws need to be changed and then walked into another room.


In a televised address to the nation Thursday, he said he plans initiatives to address school safety and mental health but did not mention gun control. Many South Florida residents have criticized the president for inaction on guns, in wake of the massacre.


“Multiple of my classmates are dead,” wrote Sarah Chadwick, a student at the school where the shooting happened, in a tweet that went viral Thursday. “Do something instead of sending prayers. Prayers won’t fix this. But gun control will prevent it from happening again.” READ MORE

-- Killer was known to law enforcement: About 20 calls about Cruz came to the Broward Sheriff’s Office over the past few years, Sheriff Scott Israel said at a news conference late Friday afternoon.


The sheriff provided no details on the calls, saying some of them may have resulted in the dispatch of a deputy, and others not. But he said the department will investigate what happened with them.


The FBI ignored a tip last month that said accused Parkland, Florida, school killer Nikolas Cruz was at risk of committing a school shooting and has opened an investigation into what went wrong, the agency said Friday.

“On January 5, 2018, a person close to Nikolas Cruz contacted the FBI’s Public...

“Every one of these calls for service will be looked at and scrutinized,” he said. “If we find out that one of our deputies or call takers could have done something better, or was remiss, I’ll handle it accordingly.”


When Cruz, who had been expelled from the school for disciplinary problems, came on campus Wednesday, Israel said, school security personnel tried to contact him.


Asked whether the shooter had targeted any particular people, the sheriff said, “We have no reason to believe that right now.” READ MORE


-- FBI fumbles warning: The FBI ignored a tip last month that Cruz was at risk of committing a school shooting and has opened an investigation into what went wrong, the agency said Friday.


Attorney General Jeff Sessions ordered a review. Gov. Rick Scott called on FBI director Christopher Wray to resign.


The shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland on Wednesday claimed 17 lives. Many of the victims’ friends and relatives have taken to social media to remember and pay homage to their loved ones.

JAIME GUTTENBERG

Jaime Guttenberg was a student at the school. Her father, Fred,...

The FBI said in a news release, “On January 5, 2018, a person close to Nikolas Cruz contacted the FBI’s Public Access Line (PAL) tipline to report concerns about him. The caller provided information about Cruz’s gun ownership, desire to kill people, erratic behavior, and disturbing social media posts, as well as the potential of him conducting a school shooting.”


The FBI said “the information provided by the caller should have been assessed as a potential threat to life. The information then should have been forwarded to the FBI Miami Field Office, where appropriate investigative steps would have been taken.”


Robert Lasky, special agent in charge of the Miami field office, said the tip never reached the Miami field office.


“On behalf of myself and over 1,000 employees of the Miami field office, we truly regret any additional pain that this has caused,” he said. “The men and women who work in the Miami field office are part of this community. We walk the same streets, our children attend the same schools, to include Stoneman Douglas. We worship the same places. We are part of this community. As this community hurts, so do we.” READ MORE


-- School building may be demolished: The three-story freshman building that was the site of the massacre will be torn down if the school district and the Legislature approve the money, Broward Schools Superintendent Robert Runcie said Friday.


“Parents and students have resoundingly told me they can’t go back into that building regardless of what we do,” Runcie said. “The other piece I heard is that that building will be used as evidence in any type of legal process that goes forward, so we won’t be able to access the building for a while anyway.”


The school district has proposed tearing down the freshman building on the campus of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School where 17 people were killed.



The school district has proposed tearing down the freshman building on the campus of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School where 17 people were killed.

Runcie said the district also plans to erect a memorial around the site the current building. Runcie and School Board members Robin Bartleman and Donna Korn visited the building after it was cleared.


“The three of us just wanted to hold hands and say a prayer. Just looking at that building and talking about it now, I have goosebumps out to my head,” Runcie said. “I don’t know how teachers, students could get back in that building. I don’t even know how we’re going to open the whole campus, period.” READ MORE


-- Funerals: Alyssa Alhadeff was warmly remembered by her family, friends and the community. About 400 people attended her funeral and burial at Star of David Memorial Gardens Cemetery and Funeral Chapel in North Lauderdale. The 14-year-old Stoneman Douglas High School student was described as a go-getter and a great soccer player.


Family and friends remembered Meadow Jade Pollack as a princess whose smile lit up the room. They were angry with the cruelty of the 18-year-old’s death that was no fairy-tale ending. "You killed my kid,” her father Andrew Pollack told the congregation at the funeral. “‘My kid is dead’ goes through my head all day and all night. I keep hearing it over and over.”


Seventeen people were killed and many others wounded in a shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, a horrific episode of school violence that ended with the arrest of a former student.

The suspect was identified as Nikolas Cruz, 19, who had been expelled from the school....

The 17 victims ranged in age from 14 to 49. The others killed were Scott Beigel, 35, Coral Springs; Martin Duque Anguiano, 14, Parkland; Nicholas Dworet, 17, Coral Springs; Aaron Feis, 37, Coral Springs; Jamie Guttenberg, 14, Parkland; Chris Brent Hixon, 49, Hollywood; Luke Hoyer, 15, Parkland; Cara Loughran, 14, Coral Springs; Gina Montalto, 14, Parkland; Joaquin Oliver, 17, Coral Springs; Alaina Petty, 14, Parkland; Helena Ramsay, 17, Coral Springs; Alex Schachter, 14, Coral Springs; Carmen Marie Schentrup,16, Parkland; and Peter Wang,15, Parkland. READ MORE ABOUT THE VICTIMS




The scene at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, where multiple people were killed in a mass shooting.

-- Guns shows to go on: Despite the shooting Wednesday, a pair of weekend gun shows will take place in Hollywood and Miami.


Sponsored by the Gun Show Team of Boca Raton, the Hollywood show is taking place at the German-American Society, 6401 Washington St., from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Items for sale include new and used guns, ammunition, scopes, knives and various accessories. Concealed weapons permit certification classes also will be offered.


Another show in Miami is running simultaneously at the Fair Expo Center, 10901 SW 24th St. The organizers, Florida Gun Shows of Apopka, confirmed to the Miami New Times that the 600-booth show is proceeding as planned from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday and 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sunday.


-- Dolphins coaches, staff donate $17,500: Darren Rizzi, Miami Dolphins assistant coach/special teams, was acquainted with Douglas assistant football coach Aaron Feis, one of the victims. Feis has been credited with saving lives of students by pushing some to safety and shielding a ninth-grade girl before he was struck by bullets.


On Friday, Rizzi presented a check for $17,500 to the Feis family after organizing a collection among Dolphins coaches and other employees.


“As a coaching staff we got together on the morning after the tragedy and started talking about that we really wanted to do something for coach Feis and his family. Next thing you know we had close to 50 people that donated money,” Rizzi said. READ MORE


Broward sheriff booking mugshot of Nicolas Cruz, 19, who is accused in the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Plantation, Florida, on Feb. 14, 2018.

Broward sheriff booking mugshot of Nicolas Cruz, 19, who is accused in the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Plantation, Florida, on Feb. 14, 2018.

Shooting hoaxes multiply: After seeing news about the shooting, a string of false threats after the massacre is terrorizing schoolchildren at some other schools in South Florida. Students hide under desks amid the hoaxes as they watch officers’ safety sweeps of schools.


“Kids are scared,” said student Logan Mazor, a 15-year-old freshman from Hollywood.


At Mazor’s South Broward High, a post with a picture of gunman labeled “Round 2 of Florida tomorrow” made the social media rounds Thursday night. As a result, a class of 30 kids in one English class had just 14 on Friday, Mazor said. READ MORE


-- Airport shooting survivor experiences new nightmare: A woman who survived last year’s mass shooting at Fort Lauderdale airport lived through a similar nightmare this week when her son went through the school shooting in Parkland.


Annika Dean was at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport on Jan. 6, 2017, when Esteban Santiago walked through a terminal firing a handgun, killing five people.


Dean’s son, 14-year-old Austin Foote, was at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School when the shooting started. He survived unhurt.

“I had just finished teaching my classes, I was looking at my phone and my son began texting me about what was happening at Stoneman Douglas,” said Dean, an art teacher at Indian Trace Elementary in Weston. “He said this is not a drill, this is actual, and my heart just sank. I knew what he was going through.”


“I was grateful he was texting me,” Dean said. “It was difficult being in a room with a man shooting a gun, but having my son being there was much more terrifying for me.” READ MORE


Stoneman Douglas High School students Sawyer Garrity and Andrea Pena talk about their song "Shine," which they wrote after the tragic Feb. 14 shooting. They performed the song during CNN's town hall at the BB&amp;T Center.



Stoneman Douglas High School students Sawyer Garrity and Andrea Pena talk about their song "Shine," which they wrote after the tragic Feb. 14 shooting. They performed the song during CNN's town hall at the BB&amp;T Center.

Parkland school shooting survivors David Hogg and Sari Kaufman join Rosemary O'Hara in the South Florida Sun Sentinel studio along with Ellie Branson, a junior at South Broward High School to discuss the #NeverAgain movement, returning to Marjory Stoneman Douglas, gun legislation and other topics during this hour long Facebook Live conversation.



Parkland school shooting survivors David Hogg and Sari Kaufman join Rosemary O'Hara in the South Florida Sun Sentinel studio along with Ellie Branson, a junior at South Broward High School to discuss the #NeverAgain movement, returning to Marjory Stoneman Douglas, gun legislation and other topics during this hour long Facebook Live conversation.

-- Hospitals: Two more victims were released from the hospital, a spokeswoman for Broward Health said. Seven people remain at Broward Health North and Broward Health Medical Center, one in critical condition and six in fair condition. READ MORE


-- Survivors of previous massacres offer advice: Parents who lost children in previous mass shootings have advice for the friends and family members of victims in the Parkland massacre.


“Everybody’s path is going to be very different and unique, and they need to be respected in that path and the choices that they make,” said Nichole Hockley, whose 6-year-old son, Dylan, was one of 26 people shot to death on Dec. 14, 2012 at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn. “Grief can express itself in so many ways and cycle through multiple points during the day: shock, denial, anger, blame, sadness. And really, in my opinion, the best way is to follow their lead and listen more than talk. And just be there.”


Staff writers Larry Barszewski, Aric Chokey, Jake Cline, Rosemary O’Hara, Marci Shatzman, Dan Sweeney, Megan O’Matz and Stephen Hobbs contributed to this report.


dfleshler@sun-sentinel.com, 954-356-4535