Romance isn't dead after all.

Dustin F. Pedersen of Ohio has been charged with aggravated robbery for allegedly stealing from a local bank on Dec. 16 in order to afford an engagement ring, according to the Journal-News.

The day after the robbery, the 36-year-old is said to have proposed to his girlfriend. Police believe his desire to present her with a ring motivated the alleged robbery.

In court on Wednesday, Detective Sean Gill presented records which confirmed that Pedersen purchased a ring worth just under $4,500 less than an hour after the bank was robbed.

The Journal-News reported that Gill told those present in court that during the crime the bank robber walked into the bank and paced for some time. Witnesses said he was wearing glasses, a jacket, white gloves and an orange Titleist hat.

"He passed a note asking for $20,000 with no dye packs," Gill said, adding that the suspect suggested he had a bomb strapped to his body.

The teller counted the money, putting it into stacks, according to the outlet. The robber apparently grew impatient, however, and ran off with just the first stack.

All told, he got away with a mere $8,800.

According to the Journal-News, Pederson was not a suspect in the crime until Dec. 22 when a second bank was robbed.

Gill said he received a tip from a woman claiming she'd seen Pederson wearing the same hats as the robber in both incidents.

Additionally, a neighbor reported seeing Pederson on their security cameras leaving his home in the exact same outfit as the robber in the Dec. 16 heist.

In court, Gill said Pedersen vehemently denied robbing the first bank, but admitted there was a striking similarity between him and the suspect.

He claimed he got $2,000 from his mother via Western Union.

The outlet reported that during questioning, it was revealed by Gill that Pedersen and his fiancée had been discussing both robberies in phone calls he made from jail.

He also revealed that police found sunglasses, gloves and hats in Pedersen's car. They believe the items were worn during both robberies.

Pedersen is being held in Middletown City Jail, where he's been since Dec. 16, on $250,000 bond.

He's slated for transfer to Butler County Jail where he'll await grand jury consideration.