Advertisement

By JULIE TURKEWITZ, PATRICIA MAZZEI and AUDRA D. S. BURCHFEB. 16, 2018


Students at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., hid in closets as a gunman fired a semiautomatic weapon into their classrooms. Seventeen people were killed.

PARKLAND, Fla. — Grief and raw anger were palpable on Friday at the first funerals for students who died in one of the deadliest shootings in modern American history earlier this week.


“You,” said Andrew Pollack, directing his fury at the man who authorities have identified as the gunman who killed his daughter, Meadow Pollack, 18. “Killed. My. Kid. My kid is dead. It goes through my head all day. And night.”


As the burials began for the 17 victims, the F.B.I. acknowledged that it had failed to act on a warning last month that Nikolas Cruz, the suspect in Wednesday’s shooting, might kill people at a school. On Friday evening, President Trump and the first lady, Melania Trump, made an unannounced visit to meet with law enforcement officials and medical workers who helped in the wake of the shooting.


The consequences from the shooting have reverberated far beyond school, Marjory Stoneman Douglas High in Parkland, Fla., as schools around the nation closed Friday, or canceled activities after receiving threats. A teacher in Denver said she moved items from a closet in her classroom “to make more space for 9-year-olds to hide.”


Advertisement

Here’s the latest:


• Mr. Cruz is being held without bond at the Broward County jail, where he has been placed on suicide watch, according to Gordon Weekes, the county’s chief assistant public defender. He faces 17 counts of premeditated murder.

Advertisement

• A federal law enforcement official on Friday said that Mr. Cruz fired more than 100 rounds during the shooting.


• Sheriff Scott Israel of Broward County said that his office had received about 20 calls about Mr. Cruz over the past two years, though cautioned that some of the calls may not have resulted in a response by officers.


• More than 2,000 students have been interviewed as part of the investigation, the sheriff said. He added that Mr. Cruz did not have a gas mask or smoke grenades, as had previously been reported.


• In Florida, an AR-15 is easier to buy than a handgun. Read more on how the AR-15 became one of the weapons of choice for mass killers, and the research that tries to explain the high rate of mass shootings in the United States.


• Sign up for the Morning Briefing for news and a daily look at what you need to know to begin your day.


The F.B.I.’s admission that it failed to act on a tip in January from a person close to Mr. Cruz prompted Gov. Rick Scott of Florida to call for the bureau’s director to resign.

At a candlelight vigil Thursday night for the 17 people killed in a Florida school shooting, attendees chanted, “No more guns.”

The bureau, which was already under considerable political pressure because of its investigation into Mr. Trump, faced calls for even more scrutiny following the massacre.


Advertisement

Mr. Scott said that Christopher A. Wray, the director of the F.B.I., should step down and that the bureau’s failure to act on the tip about Mr. Cruz was “unacceptable.” “Seventeen innocent people are dead and acknowledging a mistake isn’t going to cut it,” Mr. Scott said in a statement.


In an unusually sharp public rebuke of his own agents, Attorney General Jeff Sessions said Friday that the missed warnings had “tragic consequences” and that “the F.B.I. in conjunction with our state and local partners must act flawlessly to prevent all attacks. This is imperative, and we must do better.”


Robert F. Lasky, the special agent in charge of the F.B.I. field office in Miami, said the agency advised the victims’ parents about the misstep in a conference call on Friday.


“We will be looking into where and how the protocol broke down,” he said. Read more here.


At the first funeral, Alyssa Miriam Alhadeff, 14, was remembered for her joy and kindness, traits that had attracted a wide circle of friends. Hundreds of mourners filled the Star of David Funeral Chapel in North Lauderdale, Fla., spilling outside.


Among the youngest victims, Alyssa, an honor student and a player for the Parkland soccer club, was buried in the Garden of Aaron at Star of David Memorial Gardens.


Her mother, Lori Alhadeff, urged Alyssa’s friends to stay in touch, but also let their future success be her daughter’s legacy. “Live, breathe for Alyssa,” she said.


At a synagogue just a mile from where she had been gunned down, Meadow Pollack, 18, lay in a plain wooden coffin, closed in accordance with Jewish tradition.


Before her were hundreds of mourners, seated in row upon row and crowding every wall and corner: her cousins, her classmates, the governor and so many others. She is survived by many family members, including her brothers and her grandmother Evelyn.


Her father stood in a black suit before the crowd.


“How does this happen to my beautiful, smart, loving daughter?” Mr. Pollack said. “She is everything. If we could learn one thing from this tragedy, it’s that our everythings are not safe when we send them to school.”


Advertisement

The room heaved with sobbing teenagers, and mourners wheeled out Ms. Pollack’s coffin, to be buried in a nearby cemetery.


The Trumps arrived Friday evening at a hospital in Pompano Beach that took in eight of the shooting victims, accompanied by John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, and Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida.


The president and Mrs. Trump visited the Broward Health North Hospital “to pay their respects and thank the medical professionals for their life-saving assistance,” according to a statement related by a White House spokeswoman on Friday evening.


When asked if he met with victims, Mr. Trump said: “Yes, I did. I did indeed.”


“It’s sad something like that could happen,” he said.


Mr. Trump did not respond when he was asked if gun laws needed to be changed. He then walked into another room.


Later, speaking during a meeting with law enforcement officials at the Broward County sheriff’s office, the president thanked first responders for what he called an “incredible job,” according to a White House press pool report.


Mr. Trump said he had met with the parents of some of the victims, and also spoke with a female victim at the hospital who he said had been shot four times and was saved because emergency workers got her to the hospital quickly.


Advertisement

The authorities were still investigating reports of shots fired on Friday morning at Highline College, about half an hour’s drive south of Seattle, said Capt. Kyle Ohashi, a spokesman for the Puget Sound Regional Fire Authority. No physical evidence of a weapons discharge — including shell casings or damage to any structure — had been found, he said. The school said in a statement on Facebook that the situation was cleared about three hours after a lockdown began. Several other agencies, including the federal Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, had also responded.


The Gilchrist County School District in Florida shuttered its schools after receiving an email threat, and the Nutley Public School System in New Jersey also said it would be closed because of a security threat. A high school in Colorado Springs canceled a pep rally.


What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.

Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

View all New York Times newsletters.

Schools also wrestled with how to proceed with lockdown drills, which have become as routine as fire drills as students prepare for the possibility of a shooting. Some schools opt to make the drills feel partially authentic — an approach several schools backed off from this week out of fear they would stir already heightened anxieties.


At Dysart High School in El Mirage, Ariz., the principal took extra steps to make sure students knew its previously scheduled drill on Thursday was, in fact, just a drill. The reminder was included in the morning announcements, and she reiterated it on the public address system several times throughout the day, said Zachery Fountain, a district spokesman.


Eureka High School in Eureka, Calif., postponed its drill that had been scheduled for Thursday, partly because officials were concerned about the mental state of students, said Fred Van Vleck, the district superintendent. Typically, the school doesn’t announce that the lockdown is a drill, telling students only that there could be a drill within a one-week window, he said. Read more about the school closings.


During the horror at Stoneman Douglas High on Wednesday, Carly Novell, a 17-year-old senior who is an editor for the school’s quarterly magazine, hid in a closet and thought about an awful family tragedy from before she was born. Her mother had told her about how her grandfather had survived a mass shooting in 1949 in Camden, N.J. His family had not made it.


“My grandfather was 12, and his grandma and his mom and dad were killed while he hid in a closet,” Ms. Novell said. “They heard gunshots on the street, so my great-grandma told my grandpa to hide in the closet, so he was safe. But he didn’t have a family after that.”


Interviewed on Thursday, she said: “I was thinking of him while I was in the closet. I was wondering what he felt like while he was there. My mom has told me he was in shock after it, too — that he didn’t remember how he got to the police station, or anything like that. I didn’t forget anything, but I was in shock and I didn’t understand what was going on.”


                A gunman armed with a semiautomatic AR-15 assault rifle and “countless magazines” killed at least 17 people at his former high school in Florida in February.            

In an orange jumpsuit and shackled around his hands, feet and waist, Mr. Cruz was asked if he understood the circumstances of his appearance in court. “Yes, ma’am,” he whispered.


Nikolas Cruz, shown with a public defender, was ordered to be held in jail without bond.

“He’s sad. He’s mournful,” his public defender, Melisa McNeill, said afterward. “He is fully aware of what is going on, and he’s just a broken human being.”


Advertisement

Mr. Weekes, the chief assistant public defender, said lawyers were still trying to piece together the details of Mr. Cruz’s life. He has a “significant” history of mental illness, according to Mr. Weekes, and may be autistic or have a learning disability. But Mr. Weekes was not ready to say whether he would pursue a mental health defense.


Howard Finkelstein, the chief public defender in Broward County, said the case would present a difficult question: Should society execute mentally ill people?


“There’s no question of whether he will be convicted of capital murder 17 times,” he said. “When we let one of our children fall off grid, when they are screaming for help in every way, do we have the right to kill them when we could have stopped it?”

Elected and law enforcement officials — from Mr. Trump to the Broward County sheriff — have ramped up their demands for expanded authority over the mentally ill who pose a danger. In doing so, they stepped into a long and complicated balancing act in the United States between public safety and the right to bear arms for people with mental health issues.


Others, including some gun control and mental health advocates, point to the increasing number of states that allow law enforcement officers or, in some cases, family members or others to petition a court to temporarily take guns from people who pose a danger to themselves or others.


The measures, known as “red flag laws” or extreme risk protection orders, have shown evidence of reducing suicides in Connecticut, where the first such law was passed in 1999, and in recent years have also been passed in California, Washington and Oregon. Eighteen states, including Florida, and the District of Columbia are considering such laws this year, according to a list compiled by Everytown for Gun Safety, a nonprofit advocacy group.


Red flag laws “provide a path to remove guns from somebody in a temporary crisis,” said Avery Gardiner, the co-president of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence. And, she said, even if a family decides not to seek a gun restraining order, the fact that the option exists can prompt frank conversations with struggling relatives. Read more about the debate around mental illness and gun ownership.


Audra D.S. Burch and Julie Turkewitz reported from Parkland, and Patricia Mazzei from New York. Reporting was contributed by Neil Reisner from Parkland; Katie Rogers from Pompano Beach, Fla.; Timothy Williams, Jonah Engel Bromwich, Daniel Victor and Benjamin Mueller from New York; and Eileen Sullivan from Washington.

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

Go to Home Page »