Advertisement

Supported by

By Andrew R. Chow

A cyberpunk movie from Duncan Jones comes to Netflix. And HBO’s “2 Dope Queens” wraps up with the fourth episode, featuring Uzo Aduba and Tituss Burgess. 


MUTE on Netflix. The filmmaker Duncan Jones spent much of his childhood in Berlin while his father, David Bowie, created his fabled Berlin trilogy. Mr. Jones revisits that city in this new film, which is set in 2052. Alexander Skarsgard, who took home plenty of awards for his terrifying turn in “Big Little Lies,” stars as a mute bartender. When his girlfriend goes missing, he plunges into the underbelly of the cyberpunk city to find her, turning to seedy characters played by Paul Rudd and Justin Theroux for answers.

UGLY DELICIOUS on Netflix. The chef David Chang just keeps stacking projects. In addition to managing his Momofuku restaurants around the world and serving as a culinary correspondent for NBC at the Olympics, he has created a Netflix series with Morgan Neville, who won an Oscar for “20 Feet From Stardom.” This docu-series takes them around the world as Mr. Chang talks with (and eats with) chefs like Jessica Koslow and Alex Raij and cultural figures like Ali Wong and Jimmy Kimmel. His adventures include eating Viet-Cajun cuisine in Houston, Neapolitan pizza in Tokyo, and home cooking in Copenhagen.

2018 PYEONGCHANG OLYMPICS 8 p.m. on NBC. Tune in for Alpine skiing, men’s snowboarding, four-man bobsled and men’s speedskating. The American speedskating team is led by Shani Davis, the first African-American to win an individual gold medal at a Winter Olympics. But his fifth Olympics have been hampered by controversy and an underwhelming performance. He and another veteran skater, Joey Mantia, will hope to right the ship in the 1,000-meter race.


GREAT PERFORMANCES 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). AARP’s Movies for Grownups Awards will honor Helen Mirren and feature appearances by Gary Oldman, Annette Bening and more.

ALI SIDDIQ: IT’S BIGGER THAN THESE BARS 11 p.m. on Comedy Central. Most stand-ups hone their chops in nightclubs and bars, but Ali Siddiq found his comic voice in jail: He was incarcerated at 19 and stumbled into comedy while trying to make the best of his six years in the Texas state penitentiary system. “I was doing two or three shows a day because I was working in the laundry with 15 people and I was the one who was saying stuff,” he told Splitsider in 2016. In this one-hour special, Mr. Siddiq heads to Bell County Jail in Central Texas to talk to inmates and perform for them.


2 DOPE QUEENS 11:30 p.m. on HBO. This uproarious, no-holds-barred talk show hosted by Jessica Williams and Phoebe Robinson brings its season to a close on Friday with an episode themed around “black nerds.” Two scene stealers from Netflix shows — Uzo Aduba (Crazy Eyes from “Orange Is the New Black”) and Tituss Burgess (Titus Andromedon on “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt”) — stop by to chat and ham it up over drinks.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS