Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Tamar Lapin


		
		
		
		
	


									April 10, 2018 | 2:51pm
											| Updated April 10, 2018 | 6:10pm
												

A Scottish hypnotherapist was busted in Florida for having sex with a 14-year-old boy who paid her $480 for a hotel tryst, police and a report said.

The Orlando teen said he was searching Quora.com and found Sophia Belle — later identified as Sarah Louise McGill by her UK passport, according to her arrest report.

Orange County police said the teen and McGill, 28, began to text and met in person at a Marriott hotel, where he paid her $480 for sex, in a mix of $50 and $20 bills.

After speaking with the boy and his father, cops went to the same fourth-floor hotel room Saturday and found McGill there with another man, they said.

The room’s safe was allegedly filled with cash, condoms and used condom wrappers, according to the arrest report.

McGill was a professional clinical hypnotherapist, according to her website and Facebook profile, and ran her own business in Edinburgh, Scotland, according to the Daily Mail. She did not immediately return emails.

She was charged with lewd or lascivious battery and was freed from Orange County Jail on bond Monday.

McGill was also ordered to turn over her UK passport to make sure she stays in the Sunshine State.


			Read Next
		


			
				'Somebody killed my mommy': 7-year-old boy's horrifying 91...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				'Somebody killed my mommy': 7-year-old boy's horrifying 91...			
		

Share Selection

145,843

65,946

51,227

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters