Advertisement

Supported by

California Today


By Matt Stevens

Good morning.


(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)


Today’s introduction comes from Marc Tracy, who covers college sports for The Times.


The U.C.L.A. sunglasses-stealing saga concluded Wednesday, not with a bang, but with a whimper.


Last week, three Bruin freshman basketball players — including LiAngelo Ball, the middle son of a famous and aptly named basketball-playing family — were arrested in Hangzhou, China, apparently for stealing designer sunglasses from a Louis Vuitton store. This happened two days before they were to play in an annual showcase game in Shanghai put on by the Pacific-12 Conference.


The players’ passports were revoked, U.C.L.A.’s athletic director, Dan Guerrero, said Wednesday, and U.C.L.A. dictated that they stay in the team hotel while their teammates left for Shanghai, beat Georgia Tech and departed the continent.


President Trump, who was in China on diplomatic business, raised the issue with Chinese President Xi Jinping, asking, according to John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff: “Do you know anything about these knuckleheads that got caught allegedly stealing?”

Mr. Trump’s intervention appeared to work. The players admitted they had broken the law, according to Mr. Guerrero, and were told that the charges had been dropped. Paparazzi gave them a Los Angeles welcome when they arrived at L.A.X. Tuesday night.


On Wednesday morning, at a time when many in the sports world have been outspoken in opposition to him, Mr. Trump asked on Twitter whether credit would be given where it seemed to be due:

As it turned out, yes. At a news conference Wednesday, the players in separate statements thanked the president and expressed contrition. They took no questions. Coach Steve Alford announced that they were suspended from the team indefinitely, and Mr. Guerrero disclosed that they had in fact shoplifted from three stores during 90 minutes of what Mr. Guerrero called “free time, if you will.”


Writing a few days ago in The Daily Bruin, columnist Hanson Wang predicted the leniency with which China’s criminal justice system treated the players, noting that the drunken driver who had killed his own grandfather in China six years ago had received a prison sentence of four months.


Mr. Wang demanded that U.C.L.A. suspend the players for at least the entire season, in order to “send the message that no player — or players — can be let off the hook for violating foreign laws and making a fool out of the school, the Pac-12 and the U.S.”

(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)

• The authorities said on Wednesday that they had discovered the body of the wife of the gunman who went on a shooting rampage in Northern California. The body was found hidden under the floor of the couple’s house, increasing the shooting’s death toll to five. [The New York Times]


• Aides to Janet Napolitano, the University of California president, interfered with a state audit of her office by suppressing criticism of the office’s services and operations. Investigators said there wasn’t enough evidence available for them to conclude that Ms. Napolitano was aware of what her aides had done. [The Los Angeles Times]


• Sacramento has mistakenly issued more than 3,900 parking meter tickets this year. Officials have acknowledged problems with their parking app and the city’s auditor has launched an investigation. [The Sacramento Bee]


• California’s bullet train has hit another snag. The state’s rail authority now says it will not complete the project’s environmental reviews by 2018 as planned; officials are now targeting 2020 — long past the original deadline. [The Los Angeles Times]

• A lawsuit against Oakland will proceed after a Superior Court judge ruled that city officials must act when they discover an unsafe building like the Ghost Ship warehouse. That means the city can be sued for what it did and didn’t do, before a fire killed 36 people at the warehouse last year. [The San Francisco Chronicle]

• Frank Sinatra’s Cal Neva Lodge &amp; Casino once played host to the A-list: President John F. Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe and Joe DiMaggio to name a few. Now Oracle co-founder Larry Ellison is scooping it up for $35.8 million. [The Mercury News]


• Following a disappointing earnings report, the parent company of Snapchat has announced a sweeping shift in strategy. The app will get a face-lift and will soon include a personalized feed. [The New York Times]

• The wildfires that ravaged Wine Country last month struck a blow to Napa Valley’s tourism business. But officials say they’re back on their feet, and now hotels are offering attractive deals to entice people to return. [The New York Times]


• A Newport Beach developer who died in 2013 bequeathed a collection of California art worth tens of millions of dollars to the University of California, Irvine. A new museum will be built on campus house it, turning the research university into a destination for art lovers. [The Orange County Register]


• Sixty years ago, a group of University of Southern California students pulled off one of the most high-profile pranks in the history of the school’s rivalry with U.C.L.A. With Saturday’s annual football game on the horizon, the identities of the top-secret pranksters have finally been revealed. [The Los Angeles Times]

Ever since World War II, when officers would train on its steep hills and entertain themselves before going off to sea, active duty members of the military have been allowed to go to the San Diego Zoo for free. And in a city that continues to serve as a national naval hub, the perk remains popular as ever. More than 100,000 active duty members of the military visited the world-renowned zoo in 2016 alone.


But seeing the elephants is more expensive these days. An adult ticket costs $52, and as the zoo’s chief development officer said, “no one can predict the future” — or guarantee that the zoo’s revenue will always be steady.


So, last weekend, officials were happy to announce what the development officer, Mark Stuart, called a “transformational” gift from an army veteran and his wife. The donation, the exact size of which officials did not disclose, will guarantee that active duty armed forces personnel can go to the San Diego Zoo and its safari park for free — forever.


California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.


California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS