Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Elizabeth Zwirz, Fox News


		
		
		
		
	


									May 30, 2018 | 1:04am
											| Updated May 30, 2018 | 8:41am
												



Authorities in Florida said they arrested a police officer on Tuesday who allegedly sent “threatening messages” in order to obtain “nude photographs” from a woman in Georgia.

Orange City police officer Joshua David Fancher, 25, was arrested at the department on a felony warrant from Georgia “charging him with making terroristic threats,” according to a news release from the Volusia County Sheriff’s Office, whose detectives made the arrest.

“The victim reported receiving numerous threatening messages from an unknown person attempting to extort her for nude photographs,” authorities said.

Among the messages allegedly sent by Fancher, “which started via Instagram, included threats to kill the victim and kill and/or rape her family members if she didn’t provide the photos,” the sheriff’s office said.

The arrested officer’s residence in DeLand, Florida, was searched by detectives to help the Lowndes County (Ga.) Sheriff’s Office, which is handling the investigation, authorities said.

Fancher quit his job at the police department amid the charges and was brought “to the Volusia County Branch Jail, where he was to be held without bond,” according to the sheriff’s office.


			Read Next
		


			
				LAPD investigating 52 sexual misconduct complaints against...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				LAPD investigating 52 sexual misconduct complaints against...			
		

Share Selection

131,249

63,137

56,447

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters