A man who appeared to be obsessed with pop singer Lana Del Rey was arrested Friday after Florida police say he planned to kidnap the star following a concert in Orlando.

The Orlando Police Department said Saturday they thwarted Michael Hunt's alleged plan after acting on a tip they considered a "credible threat" to the singer.

Hunt, 43, was arrested for aggravated stalking with a credible threat and attempted kidnapping with a weapon, and is currently being held in the Orange County Jail on no bond.

Police nabbed him just one block away from Del Rey's scheduled performance at Orlando's Amway Center and found he had a ticket to the concert and a 3-inch folding knife in his possession. He did not make it into the venue and did not have any contact with the "Summertime Sadness" singer, police said.

Hunt's plan was foiled after a caller alerted police to "cryptic and threatening" social media posts on his Facebook account that appeared to show a fixation with the singer, according to the Orlando Sentinel.

"I want to see my queen on Friday and from that day forward our decisions will be as one," he wrote on Jan. 30.

Two days later, he shared an image of the singer and wrote, "I love you so much I've missed you for so long." Earlier that day, he shared a post that read, "I'm giving up everything to follow my dream…"

He also shared a YouTube link to one of Del Rey's videos and wrote, "I love you too I'm so sorry I did this to us."

In multiple other posts, Hunt detailed his obsession with Del Ray, writing that she "knows my face in her dreams" and "she's my always and forever to be."

A lengthy, incoherent video posted Wednesday outlined Hunt's plans for himself and Del Rey, 32, as a couple.

"I'm going to probably finish out her tour with her, obviously, and dance and talk and figure out what we're going to do," he said, denying that he was on any drugs other than marijuana. "I'm letting my feet rest before I take off with Lana."

He has reportedly served five previous prison terms for charges including burglary of an occupied structure, grand theft of a motor vehicle and grand theft with a firearm.

Del Rey, whose real name is Elizabeth Grant, tweeted her thanks to fans' messages of support Sunday afternoon.

"Hey kiddos. I'm doing fine thanks for the messages," she wrote. "And tomorrow we'll be in Hotlanta can't wait to see everyone. Yachty that means u."

Hunt's arrest echoes a similar situation faced by singer Katy Perry in December. In her case, an obsessive fan who ominously told police he'd stop at nothing to reach the pop star was arrested after attending one of her concerts and ordered in court to keep his distance.