Stix Mitchell is back on familiar ground: His feet inside a gym, his hands around a basketball, his eyes on two hoops prodigies.

His eight-year odyssey to this cramped court was by turns excruciating and exhilarating. On this cold spring morning, as Mitchell walks toward the foul line, the journey continues.

The ex-Seton Hall forward puts the teens through a brisk 75-minute workout, sharing kudos and critiques in his role as coach/mentor for kids in his home borough of Brooklyn.

His insights range far beyond the 94-foot floor as he shares tales from a tumultuous past of sadness, success, regret and redemption.

"They have heard all my stories," said Mitchell, now 31. "I try to keep the guys sharp and ready for life's challenges. That is the greatest gift I can give."

The Bedford-Stuyvesant product still smiles at his college success: Atlantic 10 freshman of the year in 2007, a transfer to the Pirates, a breakout sophomore year averaging nearly 15 points and 8 rebounds.

His eyes well with tears when recalling his precipitous plunge from grace: Tossed off the Hall's hoops team in 2010, arrested in a holdup of college classmates, a 208-day jail stint — and a guilty plea that still eats at Mitchell's soul.

"Things were tumbling out of control," recalled Mitchell at an earlier meeting, dressed in black sweats with a matching hoodie inside a Starbucks at the Barclays Center.

"And I couldn't do anything about it. I couldn't change the narrative. I couldn't walk out of that cell and say, 'Hey, this is not me. This is not who I am. This is not how I was raised.' "

He's ready to do that now.

***

Robert Mitchell arrived on the South Orange, N.J., campus as a hot-shot baller from Duquesne University — an instant starter for Seton Hall coach Bobby Gonzalez's 2008-09 squad.

With just 180 pounds on his 6-foot-6 frame, Mitchell played power forward and thrived in a nightly mismatch against the best of the Big East.

He started 29 of 30 games, played 36 minutes a game and became a fan favorite. The future was bright for the kid with spider-skinny legs and a heart like a lion.

"After making that sacrifice, I pretty much thought going forward that I would have a certain amount of equity and loyalty going into the next year," recalled Mitchell.

His junior year instead became a season in hell.

The team captain became buried on the temperamental Gonzalez's roster — benched for half the Hall's games, his numbers dipping to 8 points and 4 boards per game.

Everything came to a head at season's end, a week of true March madness.

On March 14, 2010, Mitchell's public gripes about playing time led Gonzalez to boot him off the team. The Pirates ended their season with an 87-69 first-round NIT beating from Texas Tech.

"We want Stix!" the student section chanted during the March 16 loss. "We want Stix!"

At that moment, the missing Mitchell was locked up less than a half-mile from Newark's Prudential Center, arrested hours earlier on an armed robbery charge.

One day earlier, Mitchell was invited to a meeting by Seton Hall President Msgr. Robert Sheeran. Stix, though due to graduate in two months, had a year of basketball eligibility left and hoped to return despite his spat with Gonzalez.

Mitchell acknowledges that he wanted to smoke some marijuana and calm his nerves before meeting with Sheeran. Around 2 p.m., he drove former Hall hoopster Kelly Whitney to an off-campus residence to buy some weed.

Mitchell parked the car as Whitney went inside. By the time Stix followed, a robbery was underway — with some of the eight victims being Mitchell's friends and fellow SHU students.

Mitchell tears up, his lower lip quivering, in recounting the tale. He tells the same story that he told police after his arrest, the same story he told under oath in a Newark courtroom.

"When I entered the house, (Whitney) was already in the attic with the gun out and the kids laying down," said Mitchell. "I said I was not guilty from day one. I told the police, 'I'm innocent.' "

Mitchell fled the house, somehow pulling himself together for the 3 p.m. meeting with Sheeran. The monsignor confirmed the get-together but declined to discuss any specifics.

Mitchell said the president assured him a spot on the Pirates' 2010-11 roster. The conversation was moot; Stix's next stop was the Essex County Correctional Facility.

"The 'Green Monster,' " Mitchell said, invoking the notorious jail's nickname. "It's a frightening place."

Mitchell, despite a clean record, was held on a staggering bail of $650,000, making his release a financial impossibility.

But the Mitchell clan still had his back: At Stix's first court hearing, his parents and three of his seven siblings filled the front row wearing Seton Hall's colors.

Inmate Mitchell spent his first two weeks under suicide watch. Defense lawyer Montell Figgins recalled meeting with a "shell-shocked" Mitchell to discuss their options.

"He was 23 years old," said Figgins. "A college student. You take him, now he's in the Essex County jail, in lockdown 23 hours a day. He was a mess."

Mitchell, his heart and spirit broken, pleaded guilty to criminal restraint and burglary seven months after his arrest.

He was freed from jail in a deal where he received five years' probation and agreed to testify against Whitney (later sentenced to three years).

"I regret it every day," said Mitchell about his choice to take a deal. "Just not fighting and seeing it all the way through, allowing my voice and my story to be heard."

Figgins recalled that Mitchell was fortunate to get a plea deal, with the trial judge opposing any agreement.

But he understands Mitchell's anguish: "It was an issue if you take this plea, and you get out, or you can fight it, and sit in jail for the next year."

Mitchell then chased his dream of pro ball around the globe: Italy, Uruguay, the Dominican Republic, Lebanon, a league championship in Morocco.

"I was in Morocco for two years, probably the best years of my life," he recalled. "My son was born, Preston. The team loved me, the fans loved me."

But for Stix Mitchell, all roads led back to the place that he loved most: Brooklyn.

***

"Thank you, thank you, thank you!" Mitchell's voice rings out in the Stone Gym at Riverside Church. "I love it! Nice job."

The compliments go to his teenage basketball prodigies, Brooklyn kids Zaire Williams and Ty Laur. The two run the floor at the workout led by Mitchell, their old AAU coach with the Brooklyn Ballers.

Neither is old enough to remember Mitchell banging bodies against UConn and Syracuse, yet he commands their respect.

"He pushes me to work hard," said Williams. "He pushes me to get better."

The workout starts at 8 a.m. sharp. Mitchell has no time to waste time these days.

Since his 2015 return to Brooklyn, Mitchell has welcomed a second son, 1-year-old Xavier. He's reestablished his roots, and spends time working with other local kids.

They talk about basketball, and they talk about life. Mitchell talks about returning to Seton Hall to earn his communications degree; he's a mere nine credits short.

He's taking acting classes with an eye toward television work, and hopes to take his basketball instruction program to an international level.

Mitchell doesn't run from the past, even as he embraces the future.

"You have to take accountability for your life," he said.

"And if a man does those things, when he's faced with challenges he can come out on top."