Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


WASHINGTON — After days of frenzied lobbying and speculation, President Donald Trump decided on federal appeals Judge Brett Kavanaugh for his second nominee to the Supreme Court, setting up a ferocious confirmation battle with Democrats as he seeks to shift the nation's highest court further…

If Carmelo Anthony chooses Mike D’Antoni over LeBron James that would be a biggest upset since Paul George picked Oklahoma City over Los Angeles. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

MCALLEN - Robert Francis "Beto" O'Rourke answers questions during an interview Sunday, July 30, 2017 at the McAllen Public Library.

Beto O'Rourke, in green shirt, starts his 5k run with supporters running with him at Fireman's Park in McAllen on Sunday Jan. 7,2018.

U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke, candidate for the U.S. Senate, listens to concerns expressed by the community at the Mission Chamber of Commerce Saturday, Jan. 6,2018, in Mission.

From left to right, Texas Congressmen Marc Veasey, D-Fort Worth; Beto O'Rourke, D-El Paso; Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio; Filemon Vela, D-Brownsville, and Pete Gallego, D-Alpine, pose for a photo in front of the U.S. Capitol on Monday, Jan. 21, 2013, as the Texas congressmen wait in line to be seated for the 57th Presidential Inauguration in Washington, D.C. (Provided photo)

MCALLEN - Robert Francis "Beto" O'Rourke answers questions during an interview Sunday, July 30, 2017 at the McAllen Public Library.

U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke, candidate for the U.S. Senate, listens to concerns expressed by the community at the Mission Chamber of Commerce Saturday, Jan. 6,2018, in Mission.

McALLEN — Ten months from the 2018 midterm elections, Democratic Senate hopeful and U.S. Rep. Beto O’Rourke, D-El Paso, has been holding town halls across the state, hoping to hit all 254 Texas counties.


He’s already over the 200 mark, and held three in the Rio Grande Valley the first weekend of January. Republican Sen. Ted Cruz, who O’Rourke hopes to unseat, visited the Valley three times in 2017, more than any other year since he’s been in office.


O’Rourke sat down with The Monitor to discuss his time in the Valley, Cruz, President Donald Trump, his campaign, immigration, border security, education and much more.

The transcript has been edited for clarity.


Had you been to the Valley before you ran for office?


Yes, we had come here when I was on the El Paso City Council a couple times to meet with the economic development director. Was it Ray Allen?


Mike Allen (former President of the McAllen Economic Development Corporation)?


Mike Allen from McAllen, yep. And then I had come here, I even forget the name of it now, there’s this border leadership group, and we’d have meetings in El Paso, Laredo and McAllen. I started coming to the meetings, but very infrequently.


What strikes you about the Valley compared to other border areas?


It’s funny because we were talking about this in the car today, about how some things were so striking in how similar they were. Taco Palenque versus Taco Tote, which is what we have, and something very similar. I’m struck more by the similarities, just the fluidity in which people switch between English and Spanish. That town hall in Mission felt very much like a town hall in El Paso, the kinds of questions that came up. This is obviously more humid and greener than El Paso.


The RGV Sector for Border Patrol is the busiest sector for illegal crossings. Do you see that as a big concern, or how do you curb that? Or do you not see that as a strong need?


Illegal crossings?


Yes, and apprehensions.


It’s the lowest level we’ve seen. I guess you could always get lower. But I feel like we’re past the point of diminishing returns. We’re spending now close to $20 billion a year on border security, which is many multiples greater than what we were spending even 15 years ago. We got 20,000 Border Patrol agents, which, again, is significantly larger than where we were at the beginning of the millenium.


So you think this emphasis for border security is overwrought?


I think you just gotta look at the facts. I want to say the average number of apprehensions per agent is now under 10 for the entire year, and in some sectors like the El Paso Sector, it’s under five. The entire year. There’s no credible threat of terrorism. There’s never been a terrorist incident or terrorist or terrorist group connected to the U.S.-Mexico border. Of the 400,000 apprehensions, so many of them were kids or young families leaving the Northern Triangle. You have less than zero migration from Mexico right now.


This perverse obsession with border security is so harmful to border communities. And I know it in El Paso — we feel it and live it in our community. And it was important for me to spend some time here again. Certainly at the butterfly center where we could literally see where the wall is going up. We could literally see where DHS had clear cut private land that does not belong to them without permission. We could see the anxiety that so many private property owners throughout Texas feel who live near the border that their land is going to be taken for the construction of the wall that we absolutely, by any measure, don’t need, as we have never been safer on the U.S.-Mexico border. And I think it is a real disservice to those of us who understand the border best. Those of us who actually live here.


We were talking today about how if you don’t live here and you’ve never been here you can be forgiven for maybe thinking this is some sort of wasteland or war zone or desolate unpopulated place, and it takes being here to realize this is a community, these are people, families that have lived here for generations, centuries in some cases, and it’s not the thing to be afraid of. It’s something really cool and amazing and something that makes me really proud. But we have been, I think, the victims of our own complacency on the border. We have failed to tell our story persuasively and in a compelling way, and we’ve allowed others to define us. (Iowa Republican Rep.) Steve King, who defines DREAMers as drug mules, he was the precedent to Donald Trump describing Mexican immigrants as rapists and criminals.


So in much of the American consciousness, we’re sitting right now in a place that you should be deathly afraid of, when, in reality, it’s one of the most amazing, wonderful, magical places, anywhere in the world. But it’s changing — and this isn’t the point of difference you’re looking for — I think it’s something very common now, there’s intense pride. And not taking it anymore. Fighting back and fighting for ourselves that I never saw as a kid. I left the border, convinced I’d never come back, and I think part of it was, everyone s---- on us and we just kinda take it. So maybe that’s what we deserve, I don’t know. I don’t know that I could’ve even articulated that.


When I came back in the late 90s and I was living there, I was like, ‘this place is amazing.’ I didn’t realize how lucky I had it growing up here. And I think so many people are having that epiphany: We live in the most amazing place and we should act like it, stand up for ourselves. And also, not just, don’t do this bad thing and put this wall here, we want to lead the way on immigration, we want to lead the way on protecting the DREAMers, we want to lead the way on binational trade and our relationship with Mexico. So, I think this is a really amazing time to be on the border and from the border and for the border.


Beto O'Rourke, in green shirt, starts his 5k run with supporters running with him at Fireman's Park in McAllen on Sunday Jan. 7,2018.

You mentioned immigration, what kind of proposals do you have for immigration reform?


For example, I’ve written a bill called the American Families United Act. That fixes a small part of the immigration system that would allow foreign born family members of U.S. citizens to reunite here by being able to go before a federal judge when there’s essentially a technical violation of immigration law that today results in a lifetime ban on re-entry, and I was able to introduce that with Republican colleagues. For me that’s important because, though it’s not comprehensive, it’s showing that there’s a way to get things done with Republicans and Democrats working together. More broadly, I think you must immediately legalize the 800,000, maybe close to a million, that would include those who haven’t come forward yet, DREAMers in this country. You then very soon after have to find a way to provide status for the original DREAMers, the parents of DREAMers, and find those who are laboring in the shadows, give them a chance to get right with the law, to register.


And I think there are some legitimate security arguments like, who are all these people who are here and are undocumented and by definition without documentation we don’t know who they are and where they live. There’s an argument there and I think the response is, as we did with the DREAMers, we invite you to come forward out of the shadows, and the condition is, you have to tell us who you are, where you live, what your phone number is. And then there is a path for you to be able to stay here, to work here and to ultimately become a citizen, if that’s what you want to do.


I mean, it’s tough, becoming a citizen if you don’t have money or you don’t have family here. Not sure how many people understand that.


Right, or if they say, ‘why don’t you just get in the back of the line.’ But the line extends 15 years, or 20 years in some cases.


How do you expedite that?


I think you consciously acknowledge that you have to create more opportunities for more people to immigrate here far more quickly than we’re able to do now. And I know that runs counter to so much of the rhetoric that dominates the discourse on immigration right now, but it is so to our advantage — forget whether or not it helps that immigrant family — it is so to the advantage of our country to have the value of the ideas, the work, the creation, the innovation, the families that come with those who choose to come here. And they’ve measured it, like immigrants net -- undocumented, documented -- add X hundreds of millions of dollars to the U.S. economy. Pay net X much more in taxes than they ever take out in social services or benefits. And I think all those things are important, but so is the incalculable, ‘they just make this a better place.’ And we always have. All of us, unless we were brought here against our will as slaves or were here 13,000 years ago, we’ve all added something to what was already here.


It’s funny, I don’t know if you were in the meeting, but someone said, ‘Like I know the facts, it’s a no-brainer the border’s safer than it’s ever been, immigration is such a net-positive to the country but that doesn’t seem to be working, what do you do?’ I’ve been struggling with that question because I think there’s an emotional dynamic of this that those who’ve tried to scare you about immigrants and the border have been so successful. And how do we responsibly meet that emotionally? So I try to think about stories of people who distinguish us who happen to be immigrants and provide a very powerful emotional connection to the border or moving forward on immigration. That’s broadly what it would look like?


What about Border Patrol agents who, maybe, I know recently they’ve put out numbers that more agents have been assaulted this year. Recently an agent near Brownsville was shot on the river — not life-threatening but was shot. Are those concerns or how do you view those?


I think those are real concerns. One of the things that we talked about today after visiting the National Butterfly Center and being on that levee road and seeing Border Patrol agents pass by was how, this is a really difficult job, perhaps among the most difficult jobs in our country, you’re literally, as you just pointed out, putting your life on the line. You work in sometimes incredibly hostile conditions with really uncertain outcomes with what might be coming at you or what you might find. And it’s not always like drugs or criminals or undocumented immigrants.


There are incredibly heartbreaking stories of opening a trailer door and seeing people who are dying or dead and being the first person there who’s able to care for them or comfort them or give them aid. So I think these are extraordinary men and women. But I think in part because of the rhetoric that’s so hyped on viewing Mexico as primarily a threat, and immigrants as a danger, a mortal danger to us — when the president talks about them as rapists and criminals, and others talk about them as murderers, you set up this really unfortunate and unnecessary dynamic and I think you put those agents in a really difficult position. And this plan, beyond requesting $18 billion for wall construction to protect the DREAMers, the president’s saying he wants 10,000 new agents.


I remember talking to the head of the Border Patrol union a few years back when they were last proposing comprehensive immigration reform three or four years ago, and they were gonna add 20,000 more agents. At the time, the head of the national Border Patrol union was like, ‘Where in the hell are we gonna find 20,000 new people that we can vet, that can pass all the background checks, then what would we do with them, how would we incorporate them to our culture and to ensure that they’re doing a great job and that can continue to elevate the level of our force and our performance?’ So, yeah, I want to make sure we’ve got their backs, that all of them return safely back from their shift at the end of the day. But I also wanna make sure we’re realistic in what we’re asking them to do. And this militarization of the border and militarizing communities is just real bad.


I guess staffing, under the DHS umbrella, with CBP, the men and women in blue, at the ports of entry, is a major problem. Congress has funded 1,000 new agents, Border Patrol and CBP at the ports. But they haven’t been filled. When people push, like Trump and others, what’s the hold up in getting those filled?


At one point there was a holdup on CBP officers, men and women in blue, over being able to do all that vetting I just described.


The polygraph.


Yes, you may know, there was a holdup with the contractor who was doing the polygraph and background checks, and I think generally, there was just a problem with finding people who were qualified and wanted to the work and could be attracted to the jobs. Actually, this is something I’ve worked on with John Cornyn, where we authored a bill together, bicameral, bipartisan, to try to bring more CBP officers to the ports. This is one of those things that gives me hope — a Republican and a Democrat, we were trying to meet the argument on its face, we’re concerned about border security and who’s coming into our country. Well, let’s have more officers at our ports of entry. Because that’s where 99.99 percent of people and goods and shipments are gonna come through. Let’s get more people at those ports doing a better job understanding who and what is coming into our country.


From left to right, Texas Congressmen Marc Veasey, D-Fort Worth; Beto O'Rourke, D-El Paso; Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio; Filemon Vela, D-Brownsville, and Pete Gallego, D-Alpine, pose for a photo in front of the U.S. Capitol on Monday, Jan. 21, 2013, as the Texas congressmen wait in line to be seated for the 57th Presidential Inauguration in Washington, D.C. (Provided photo)

A little on you and Cruz. You’ve avoided it mostly but I guess the Valley’s “your region” being a border person. He got 31 percent (of the vote) in Hidalgo County in 2012, he’s been down here more often in the last year or so. What do you think of that strategy of him coming down here more often?


We’re holding these town halls all over the state — we had three today. We had 14 over the last three days before this one. And every now and then at one of these town halls someone will ask me a question and I’ll say, ‘I’m happy to answer your question but I’d love to know how Cruz answered that question when he held a town hall here.’ And it’s always the biggest laugh line. Because it’s been such a rare event for anyone to be able to hold him accountable. And I don’t mean him as a person, I mean Ted Cruz in a position of public trust.


And it’s only in holding these town halls that you get to understand the communities that you want to represent and you want to serve, so to the degree that any office holder that comes back to listen to their constituents, I think that’s a good thing. I just know that we’ve both been in congress the same amount of time. In the time I’ve been there, I’ve held, in El Paso, 88 live, no holds barred, all comers, in a public place, town hall, no one’s turned away. People can say anything they want, and they do, and sometimes it’s ugly, sometimes it’s tough, sometimes it’s wonderful, sometimes it’s hilarious, but it’s always great for me to learn and also to be held accountable to know that I’ve got to perform. Like, they’re gonna want to know when I see them in this next month why I voted this way or what I’ve done on the DREAM Act or whatever it is. We’ve just been missing that in Texas.


So I don’t know if that’s a strategy on the other side. Ted Cruz has been in office for five years now — I don’t think he came to El Paso, the sixth largest city in the state of Texas until after I entered the race, which was four years into his term as U.S. Senator. And that is a consequence of leaving the state within months of being elected as he did in 2013 and traveling to Iowa and New Hampshire and all these other places. I just saw a letter that he wrote to the governor of Iowa. In that letter he says to her, ‘having visited every single one of your 99 counties, yadda yadda yadda.’ And it struck me — there’s 254 counties in Texas, and I know, because I’m meeting with the county judges, Republican county judges, Democratic county judges, and just the people of all these counties. Ted Cruz has not been in many of the counties of the state of Texas.


So how can you serve South Texas better than Cruz?


I think one, representing the interests of South Texas. You have somebody in Ted Cruz who wants to build a wall. South Texas doesn’t want a wall. You have someone who vilifies and demonizes immigrants and tries to scare us about people from other countries, someone who’s talked about police patrols in Muslim communities in the United States of America. I don’t think South Texas wants that. I think South Texas, and this was in our first town hall today in San Benito, a veteran said, ‘look, we have a ton of veterans in the Rio Grande Valley who have served this country, and yet it is so hard to get the care that we deserve and that we earned.’ I can show you, I can demonstrate in El Paso how we’ve turned around access to care for veterans by making it a priority. I can show you legislation that we passed by finding Republicans by expanding mental health care access at the VA.


Not only can Ted Cruz not work with Democrats, he has a very hard time working with Republicans and really just getting anything done. Instead of really moving things forward, he’s literally shut things down. That government for 16 in 2013 is not lost on the people of the Rio Grande Valley, the people of El Paso, the customs officers, the Border Patrol agents, whose family members, and sometimes they themselves, were calling my office being like, ‘What the f—-, buddy? You guys got to do your job, I need to be able to get back to work and know that I’ve still got a job.’ I literally, as did many of my other colleagues, went to Ted Cruz and said, ‘I don’t know that you realize what you are doing to Texas right now, but it’s hurting the people that we all serve.’


His pursuit of Obamacare and his desire to see, essentially, people not be able to afford insurance. Let’s not assume that’s what his goal was — his goal was to defeat Obamacare. That overrode the interests of his constituents, including those in the Rio Grande Valley and South Texas and throughout the state.


Something that has changed the Valley a lot is NAFTA. What do you think’s gonna happen?


It’s in this really precarious position, as is so much that has anything to do with the countries of the world. We talked a lot about North Korea today, you talk about the changing dynamic with our friends across the Atlantic. You look at the closest relationship that we could possibly have measured physically, measured culturally, measured familially, measured historically, and that’s the country of Mexico. And Trump has been so disrespectful and so unhelpful in terms of cultivating that relationship. The million Texas jobs that depends on that relationship are at stake.


And you have someone in Ted Cruz who aids and abets the president’s policies who, like Trump, has called for a wall. if we don't like a wall here in the Rio Grande Valley and in Texas, you know the Mexicans take that as the greatest sign of disrespect and disincentive to improve trade relationships in good faith. That would be catastrophic to the Texas economy. One in every four jobs in the community that I represent is connected to U.S.-Mexico trade. I just met with the president of the Dallas Fed and he said there are one million jobs in the state of Texas. No state has more to gain or lose depending on our trading relationship with Mexico. El Paso, like McAllen, like Laredo, like Brownsville, like the Texas cities along the border, we live or die with our trading relationships with Mexico.


 What do you think should happen?


The optimist in me says perhaps there is, in this uncertainty, an opportunity to renegotiate some aspects of NAFTA to our, and Mexico’s, advantage. My proposal would be, at a minimum, Mexico ensure the rights of workers in their country to organize, which they don't have. It's a delicate situation for the United State to call this out. Those syndicates in the Mexico are shams. They do not allow their workers to negotiate better wages and working conditions. And if they did, not only would the Mexican shopper be able to spend more in McAllen or in El Paso, but the U.S. worker would be at a less of a competitive disadvantage, because that Mexican worker would be earning more, and that would change the calculus in where new factories would be built or new investment is made. So I think that's one positive change that i would like to be a part of. And I’ve met with Wilbur Ross and the U.S. trade representative as well as other members of Congress. And that's the case I made, let’s not lose NAFTA, and its to be improved, this is the way to do it.


That’s what Cornyn seems to stress. That he seems pretty forceful, at first, do no harm, because that’s what Ross told him was gonna happen, but that seems like it may be uncertain right now.


Yes, the president’s rhetoric is so reckless. And his threats, at some point, Mexico will call his bluff. You know this, Mexico has more free trade agreements than any other country, including the United States. And they are cultivating those other relationships, and it doesn’t mean they'll disconnect from the United States, nor is it in their interest to do so, but they certainly now have every incentive possible to go find better trading partners, and that will be to our peril.

Again, this is one where you’ve got a lot of Republicans and Democrats on the same side of this issue, at least in Congress, less so in the administration. And I think there comes a price for blindly following and supporting Trump, because Trump is grossly negligent in this all important relationship for Texas with Mexico.


With Trump we have seen some potential fallout as Doug Jones won the Alabama senate race. And the Democratic party seems to have a lot of momentum from that victory. How much of that is real and how much is maybe overhyped?


I think it’s all local. I really do. I don’t want to take too much from anywhere else and apply that to Texas.


You do mention it though.


I do mention it because I don’t want people to think there’s some national wave rolling through Texas. I try to never talk about it in those terms. I do try to take the example that we saw in Alabama of someone running with the courage of their convictions, who was very inclusive of everyone, especially those who had been marginalized, and in some ways effectively denied the ability to participate in our democracy, African Americans. Alabamans, and specifically African American women, who proved to be so decisive in that election. And to point out that, I have to do this, because there’s just this assumption on the part of some that Texas is a red state and that running as a Democrat and winning as a Democrat is impossible. So I have to show them by how much more Trump won Alabama than Texas, and by how much more Roy Moore is liked there than Ted Cruz is liked here, and those facts are not dispositive, it doesn’t mean we win, what it means, though, is that, look, you wanna know this is possible? This is absolutely possible. And we were talking about this in the car, we have people who are calling us up saying, ‘you need to hire (Jones strategist) Joe Trippi. He figured it out.’ And I’m like, ‘f--- that, Joe Trippi didn’t figure that out, Alabama figured that out.’ The people who led that campaign, the voters, they figured it out. It’s the same way here. The people in Texas are gonna figure it out one way or another, and I’m totally at peace with that.


People sometimes say, "you don’t have DNC or DNCC or Chuck Schumer," I don’t want any of that stuff. I’m very happy to put my faith in Texas and do these town halls, continuously. We did six on Wednesday, five on Thursday, five on Friday, we did three today. Somebody said, and this is a compliment, ‘you’re running right now, 10 months out, like you’re two weeks out.’ And it feels right and I feel like that’s the way to win. But it’s totally dependent on Texas. No one can come from the outside and make it any better.


Beto O'Rourke, in green shirt, starts his 5k run with supporters running with him at Fireman's Park in McAllen on Sunday Jan. 7,2018.

So it feels like that, I’m sure you have some numbers to back it up, but is it more palpable than anything else or do you actually get the sense that there’s a shift?


A shift in that?


That you’re pulling people that you wouldn’t have maybe without Trump.


Absolutely. The things that you can measure, like how much we raised and how much people from Texas have donated and the average amount, and how much more we have raised so far than Cruz. There will be another assessment in three weeks. That’s all one indication. Then just what you see in this town hall we had two days ago in Cleburne. Never been to Cleburne. And if you told me to find Cleburne on a map a year ago I wouldn’t be able to tell you. And we had 300, 400 people in this packed room. And the cool thing is, they’re not necessarily excited to see me or impressed that I’m there, more that they’re blown away that everyone else is there. Like, ‘what the f---! What are you guys doing here?’ That is the best part of this experience so far.


There really is something happening. They might appreciate the fact that I’m visiting their town, but they’re really turned on by the fact that everyone else in their town turned out. This woman in Hondo raised her hand at the end and she’s like, ‘hey, I’m a Republican, but I’d still like to work on your campaign, is that cool with you?’ ‘Yeah, of course, I’d love to have you.” Being in Paris, Texas, and a person at the meeting being like, ‘I’ve been a Republican because that’s been the only primary that’s mattered in this state, but I’m really more about the candidate or the issues.’


So that lady who raised her hand, why did she want to work for you?


I don’t know, in that restaurant in Hondo we had maybe 70 people and the person who organized it pulled me aside and said, ‘this is the largest turnout we’ve ever had for an event like this and I’ve been doing this forever.’ And again, smart enough to know, not about me and not necessarily about this campaign, but more to do with this moment. And that woman is so frustrated with the direction of this country, understands, as so many of us do right now, so many of the things we care about right now could be lost forever if we don’t get it right this year. Even social comfort. We were in Mexia, we finish this meeting and it’s been a great meeting, small group, 40 people, we finish and I’m like, ‘Ok, I gotta go because we’re going to Centerville,’ and she’s like, ‘stop, hold on a second.’ And I thought maybe they didn’t like me, they were kinda stone faced, her husband had a U.S. Navy hat on, a veteran, it was very hard to read. But she stood up and said, ‘I moved here I don’t even know how long ago. And every since I had felt like a duck out of water because I didn’t think anyone felt the way that I did and that people didn’t care about the things that I cared about and here I am at the public library in Mexia with all of you who I hadn’t met before and I finally feel like I’m at home.’ It was this beautiful moment and that moment has happened dozens of times across the state, especially when we go to these red places.


Being here is ensuring that we don’t take anyone for granted, a Democratic county, so, ‘folks in this area are supposed to vote Democratic, don’t waste your time here.’ But I want to be here because I want to give people a reason to vote and I want to understand what’s going on. But the same in Mexia you could just as easily write them off because they’re not supposed to vote for us. So, I think the fact that we started 20 months out has afforded us the ability to do this.


So the town halls happen all over the state. Do you feel like it’d be tough to pay it back, you know, that’s a lot of places you’ve been, if you did win? You’d probably feel a pull in different directions across the state.


Absolutely. I’d love nothing more than to respond to that. The pledge I’ve made is, as much as I’ve done as a house member, as a senator, holding monthly all comers, no holds barred, public, unfiltered town halls to listen, to be responsible, to be held accountable, all across the state.


Because I’m sure you tell all these people — you said it all day, ‘I want you to hold me accountable when this is over.’ I’m sure everyone requests you to come back. It’d be tough to fulfill that.


I don’t think so. If you look at, six years, 72 months, That’s 72 town halls across the state. Now, you can’t have a town hall in every single one of the 254 counties. But you could have a town hall in Tyler that could pull from four or five surrounding counties. But I don’t know, the pace we’ve kept on this, maybe there’s a way to have a morning and evening town hall. Take the work ethic that we try to bring to this campaign just to ensure we stay on an intense pace as senator to delivering that way. Because one of the best things I can get from someone is, ‘I really disagree with you, your explanation to end the federal prohibition on marijuana, I just don’t think that’s the right thing to do. But, I love that you’re here to tell me why you decided to co-sponsor or vote a certain way on a bill.’ Because, i think we all get that we’re not gonna agree with each other 100 percent of the time. But if we can trust each other and are held accountable to each other and you’ll hear me out, as my representative, I think that very fundamental aspect of democracy is missing right now in the country. If we can be part of bringing that back, I would feel very lucky.


Last thing, education came up a lot today. You talked about how a big problem border communities have when people leave and don’t come back. How do you fix that?


I think it’s the billion-dollar question for so many of our communities. You see it all across the state. We saw it in West Texas last week. Was in Sterling City, was in Knox City, anyhow, it was a county that was slowly losing its population, its young people. I said, ‘Well, I want to represent you in the senate, what can we do?’ They said, ‘It’s not coming back. We were a farming community and we have a $1.2 million laser-guided combine on that farm right now, I just don’t need the workers there anymore, we’re not subdividing the land.’ So it’s not an easy question to answer, but I don’t know if you heard the anecdote I gave about Pecos and Fort Stockton. I love that story, because you really saw the community invest in this young man, and then he stayed.


Is that the one where he went to school and because of the scholarship had to come back for six years?


Yeah, Harvard Medical School. Six years, then we cut you loose and he’s already on his eighth year. He said he thought he was just gonna come back for six years and fulfill his requirement, but, ‘this is my hometown, I married a girl I went to high school with, got my kids here, got my practice, I love it.’ Him coming back to Fort Stockton is a net add because otherwise he never would’ve come back, and marrying his wife ensured he’d stay and having two kids. It also makes that town more attractive to others who, one of the quality of life assurances they want is a quality doctor who otherwise may not be there. I love that.


I got in touch with the mayor of Wichita Falls, who’s a Republican, that I had met when I went there. I just asked if I could get lunch with him, and we text and that kind of thing, keep the relationship going. His biggest challenge is that they’re educating people and they leave and don’t come back. I said, ‘I just had this exact conversation with a guy in Pecos County and what if we brought young people back to your community by forgiving their student loan debt because maybe it’s too expensive to live in Wichita Falls because maybe it’s too expensive to pay the rent. We’ve also talked about, maybe national service. If every young person were required to serve their country and what if connected to that was a guarantee that you’re going to get an education and you won’t have any debt, you’re able to get an apprenticeship or whatever it is to keep you competitive. You may have heard this — and I didn’t come up with this — a guy in Odessa says, “take the tax rate for corporations to 25 percent, generate $400 billion over 10 years, invest that in higher education right now.”


One last cool story, we met this really cool young guy named Clay in Donley County in the Panhandle and he was working at a roadside produce stand, I just kind of struck up a conversation with him. He was studying to be a welder at I think the Donley Community College, was at West Texas A&amp;M, Pell Grant recipient but was also moonlighting as a cowboy in Palo Duro Canyon, which is obviously one of the coolest, most romantic ways to put yourself through college. But working these jobs as a cowboy, working the produce stand, having the Pell Grant, trying to get his certification as a welder, he was just barely making ends meet. You could tell from the conversation that everything he invested in this, maybe the debt he took on doing this, he wasn’t sure if he was going to complete his course of study. I thought, ‘that’s so f——- up. This guy is killing himself to learn a trade that’ll allow him to lead a much better life, gonna contribute to the success of the state.’ So figuring out how to make sure that’s affordable, because I think if we’re intellectually honest, and Ted Cruz might be the first to say, ‘Well Beto, you want to spend billions of dollars to make sure people have an education.’ And I think my answer is, ‘Yes, I do.’ But I think those billions of dollars are better spent educating the people of this country so they can perform at a higher level and create more jobs and economic growth than it is giving tax breaks to the wealthiest people who already have plenty of money to begin with. So those are the choices we have. But yeah, these town halls have been the best way to find out what’s going on.


mferman@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Mitchell Ferman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.