


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Scottsdale schools Superintendent Denise Birdwell delivered a check to the district Friday from an attorney for $4,312.50, a district spokesman said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The Arizona Attorney General's Office is investigating procurement practices for school renovations in the Scottsdale Unified School District. This video has been updated to include information about Hunt &amp; Caraway's 2013 contract with the district.
    Wochit

Scottsdale Unified School District board president Barbara Perleberg (left) and superintendent Denise Birdwell leave for executive session during a governing board meeting Jan. 30, 2018. The board accepted the resignation former CFO Laura Smith, who resigned after payments to a company she had ties with were uncovered.
(Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

Scottsdale schools Superintendent Denise Birdwell on Friday delivered a check to the district from an attorney for $4,312.50, a district spokesman said.


The Scottsdale Unified School District board previously had questioned Birdwell's hiring of the attorney and having the district pay for an estimated $4,000 in legal bills. 


The attorney had sent warning letters to a resident and to The Arizona Republic. 


Birdwell and another top administrator, Chief Operations Officer Louis Hartwell, are on paid leave pending the results of investigations. Laura Smith, the district's former chief financial officer, has resigned.


The district and the Arizona Attorney General's Office are investigating the district's use of outside contractors.


So far, the AG's Office has filed one civil lawsuit against the district alleging procurement violations and has confirmed a criminal investigation is underway.


The attorney could not immediately be reached for comment. Birdwell was unavailable to respond to questions while on leave, according to the district.


MORE ON SCOTTSDALE UNIFIED:


Scottsdale schools leaders were 'bullying the messengers,' say residents who complainedWhat we know now about the Scottsdale school district investigationsScottsdale residents rally for school board to fire superintendentConstruction at Scottsdale school can continue after state-monitored re-evaluation


In June, Scottsdale resident Susan Hughes alerted school board members Sandy Kravetz and Allyson Beckham to a potential conflict of interest involving Smith and raised concerns that Birdwell might be involved.


Smith resigned in January as the district's investigation found she steered district work to a consulting firm she previously led and now is run by her sister.


Birdwell confirmed to The Republic last month that a board member forwarded Hughes' email to her on June 22. The superintendent said her focus at the time was to have an attorney address an allegation Hughes made about her in the email.


"I simply printed the email and placed it in a file for the attorney," Birdwell said, adding that she now regretted not looking into the resident's allegation about Smith.


Birdwell had Phoenix-based attorney Kraig Marton send a "cease and desist" letter to Hughes. The letter, obtained by The Republic under Arizona public-records law, warned that the superintendent would sue Hughes if she continued to make an assertion about Birdwell's ties to the consulting firm.  


"You have been warned," the letter concludes.


Hughes called the letter an "intimidation tactic."



    The Republic's politics team talks Scottsdale school district construction, car registration could be on the rise and charter school finances on March 6, 2018. Emmanuel Lozano/azcentral.com
    

The Republic also received a warning letter from Marton in July after publishing a story about leadership concerns mounting in the district.


The letter questioned The Republic's citing of one of the residents' complaints about Hartwell and its reporting on the superintendent's ties to him. (His sister is Birdwell's roommate and landlord.)


Hartwell, who is on paid leave, has submitted his resignation to the district.


Reach the reporter at 602-444-8631 or yjeong@arizonarepublic.com. Follow her on Twitter: @yihyun_jeong.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

READ MORE:


Maricopa Community Colleges faculty sues governing board


Loss of another Tempe trailer park highlights lack of affordable housing


After recent $7 million settlement, a look at 5 other payouts from Arpaio-era jail deaths


 
