


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Former bookkeeper Rebecca Sigeti has been accused of stealing more than $841,000 from two Arizona companies.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    What is the difference between misdemeanors and felonies in Arizona?
    Wochit

Crime
(Photo: azcentral.com)

A former bookkeeper has been accused of stealing more than $841,000 from the Pine-Strawberry Water Improvement District and a private business in north-central Arizona.


The Arizona Attorney General's Office announced Monday that 60-year-old Rebecca Sigeti was indicted by a state grand jury and is facing 40 felony charges including theft, misuse of public monies and fraudulent schemes and artifices.


Investigators said Sigeti allegedly embezzled the money from her employers by issuing authorized checks to herself for her own personal use.


Sigeti is alleged to have stolen nearly $525,000 from the Pine-Strawberry Water Improvement District and more than $316,000 from the Sunny Mountain Realty.


Authorities say the monies came from customer security deposits and water-use payments, plus taxpayer property tax payments that should have been used to support district operations.


READ MORE:


Former Phoenix woman who stole $2.9 million sentenced to 44 months


Whistleblower claims threats after exposing embezzlement of millions of government dollars


Former Show Low Fire District manager takes plea deal in nearly $1.8 million theft
