


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Daniel Valenzuela's departure is the latest in a series of City Hall shufflings spurred by former Mayor Greg Stanton's decision to run for Congress.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Phoenix City Councilman Daniel Valenzuela
(Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Phoenix Councilman Daniel Valenzuela announced Friday he will resign from the City Council on July 16 to run for mayor.


Valenzuela's imminent departure is the latest in a series of City Hall shufflings spurred by former Mayor Greg Stanton's resignation in May to run for Congress.


Valenzuela launched his mayoral campaign in October but has continued to serve his west Phoenix district.


RELATED: It's official: Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton resigns to run for Congress


"Serving as a member of the governing body of the city where I was born and raised has been an honor of the highest magnitude. Working together, we have made great progress in building upon the foundation of those who have served before us," Valenzuela said in his resignation letter submitted Friday. 


Today I formally announced my resignation from the Phoenix city council, effective 7/16/18, 2 run for mayor. Serving the city where I was born, raised has been an honor of the highest magnitude. I look forward to the opportunity 2 continue 2 serve the people of Phx. #Daniel4Mayorpic.twitter.com/uprbIIpDYs

Councilwoman Kate Gallego is also expected to resign sometime in the next month to pursue the Mayor's Office as well.


At the start of Thursday's Phoenix City Council meeting, Gallego told her colleagues and the audience that it would likely be her final meeting before she left to run for mayor. She did not reveal the date she will step down, but state law requires her to do so prior to Aug. 8. 


The remaining council members will appoint interim council members to represent both Valenzuela's and Gallego's districts. Those individuals will hold the positions until an election is held in March. 


The mayoral election will be held in November. In addition to Valenzuela and Gallego, Republican Moses Sanchez and Libertarian Nicholas Sarwark are running for mayor.


READ MORE:



    Greg Stanton resigned as mayor of Phoenix on May 29, 2018. Thelda Williams now serves as the interim mayor. Stanton plans to run for Congress.
    Carly Henry, The Republic | azcentral.com

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.