


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Here are more than 80 companies, government entities and nonprofit organizations advertising open positions across Arizona this month.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Here are more than 80 companies, government entities and non-profit organizations collectively advertising more than 25,000 open positions across Arizona this month. Each of these employers is looking to fill at least 100 jobs.
(Photo: Getty Images)

Here are more than 80 companies, government entities and non-profit organizations collectively advertising more than 25,000 open positions across Arizona this month. Each of these employers is looking to fill at least 100 jobs.


Accenture, hiring 270. The company provides management consulting, as well as technology and outsourcing services. More info: accenture.com/us-en/careers/jobsearch. 


Advantage Solutions Group, hiring 200. The marketing company has a variety of sales-related positions available. More info: careers.advantagesolutions.net.


Aetna, hiring 120. The health-care benefits company has openings ranging from customer-service representatives to pharmacists. More info: aetna.jobs.


Allied Universal Corp., hiring 160. The security-services company has openings ranging from security officers to account managers. More info: aus.com/azjobs.


American Express, hiring 260. The financial-services company is adding jobs in the Phoenix area. More info: careers.americanexpress.com.


Amphitheater Public Schools, hiring 340. The Tucson school district is looking to fill positions ranging from teacher to facility support staff. More info: https://www.amphi.com/domain/34.


Anthem, hiring 700. The insurer has openings ranging from account managers to reimbursement specialists. More info: antheminc.jobs/arizona/usa/jobs.


Aramark, hiring 460. The food service and uniform maker has jobs available from cashier to information technology. More info: careers.aramark.com.


Arizona Department of Economic Security, hiring 270. The state agency has openings ranging from secretaries to case managers. More info: jobs.azdes.gov.


Arizona State University, hiring 140. The state university is filling an assortment of jobs, from receptionists to faculty instructors. More info: cfo.asu.edu/applicant.


AutoNation, hiring 110. The auto dealership and service network is filling positions such as sales associate to service technician. More info: jobs.autonation.com.


Bank of America, hiring 380. The bank and financial-services company is adding positions in the Phoenix area. More info: careers.bankofamerica.com.


Bank of the West, hiring 130. The bank is adding positions including technical analysts and loan administrators. More info: bankofthewest.com/about-us/careers.html.


Banner Health, hiring 1,400. The non-profit company operates hospitals and other medical services. More info: bannerhealth.com/careers.


Bashas’, hiring 100. The grocer is adding positions across the state. More info: hrapply.com/bashas/AppIndex.jsp.


Brookdale, hiring 170. The company is hiring for positions from nurses to social-services directors. More info: brookdalecareers.com.


Charles Schwab Corp., hiring 100. The financial services company is hiring for positions ranging from global services representatives to relationship specialists. More info: schwabjobs.com.


Chipotle, hiring 200. The Mexican-themed restaurant is hiring for a variety of positions. More info: careers.chipotle.com.


Community Health Systems, hiring 270. The health-care company is adding jobs in Tucson from nurse practitioner to scheduling clerks. More info: careershealthcare.com.


Compass Group, hiring 150. The food-services company is hiring positions ranging from cashier to dishwasher. More info: altogethergreat.com/careers/.


Conifer Health Solutions, hiring 360. The health system service management company has openings ranging from patient access representative to coding supervisor. More info: http://coniferhealth.com/careers/.


Costco, hiring 310. The wholesaler has openings ranging from cashiers to pharmacy technicians. More info: costco.com/jobs.html.


CVS Health, hiring 1,510. The company operates pharmacies and retail centers across the country. Locations in metro Phoenix, Tucson, Prescott, Lake Havasu City and Yuma have openings. More info: jobs.cvshealth.com.


Deloitte, hiring 410. The consulting and financial-advisory company has openings ranging from cyber-risk consultant to SAP HR manager. More info: jobs2.deloitte.com/us/en.


Dignity Health, hiring 850. The medical center seeks speech pathologists, certified nurse midwives, social workers and physicians in the Phoenix area. More info: careers-dignityhealth.icims.com/jobs/intro.


Dish Network, hiring 230. The satellite-television company is adding jobs from account managers to installers. More info: careers.dish.com.


Domino’s, hiring 350. The pizza delivery company is hiring drivers, customer service representatives and managers. More info: jobs.dominos.com/dominos-careers.


Freeport-McMoRan, hiring 300. The mining company has openings ranging from chemist to mechanic. More info: fmjobs.com.


Fresenius Medical Care, hiring 110. The health-services company is filling positions ranging from dietitian to registered nurse. More info: jobs.fmcna.com.


Fry's Food Stores, hiring 280. The grocer with 119 locations in Arizona is part of the Kroger chain. More info: jobs.kroger.com/frys-food-stores.


General Dynamics, hiring 110. The aerospace and defense company has openings ranging from software engineers to customer-service representatives. More info: gd.com/careers.


Grand Canyon Education, hiring 180. The company operates Grand Canyon University, a private, for-profit Christian school. More info: jobs.gcu.edu/jobs.


Great Clips, hiring 320. The company operates hair salons across Arizona. Locations with openings include Casa Grande, Buckeye, Mesa and Phoenix. More info: jobs.greatclips.com.


Hilton Worldwide, hiring 390. The hotel and resort operator is adding jobs from housekeeper to engineer. More info: jobs.hiltonworldwide.com.


Home Depot, hiring 850. The home-improvement and construction retailer is adding positions in the Phoenix area. More info: careers.homedepot.com.


Honeywell, hiring 160. The aerospace company has openings ranging from engineer to marketing associate. More info: honeywell.com/careers.


HonorHealth, hiring 680. The company operates acute-care hospitals and outpatient centers, among other medical services. More info: jobs.honorhealth.com.


Indian Health Service, hiring 310. The government agency is hiring for positions ranging from administrative support to physician. More info: ihs.gov/jobs/index.cfm.


Intel Corp., hiring 140. The semiconductor manufacturer is adding jobs from data scientists to research engineers. More info: intel.com/content/www/us/en/jobs/jobs-at-intel.html.


JCPenney, hiring 550. The retailer is adding positions in Tucson. More info: jobs.jcp.com.


JPMorgan Chase, hiring 300. The bank and financial-services company is adding positions across Arizona. More info: careers.jpmorgan.com.


Kyrene Elementary School District, hiring 210. The Tempe school system has openings ranging from teachers to bus drivers. More info: kyrene.org/Page/10774.


Learning Care Group, hiring 190. The day-care provider has openings ranging from school managers to cooks. More info: learningcaregroup.com/careers.


Legacy Traditional Schools, hiring 160. The charter school has openings ranging from teachers to food services. More info: careers.legacytraditional.org.


Life Time Fitness, hiring 210. The health and lifestyle company is adding jobs from cooks to personal trainers. More info: jobs.lifetime.life/.


Lockheed Martin, hiring 180. The defense manufacturer has openings ranging from material handler to systems administrator. More info: lockheedmartinjobs.com.


Lowe’s, hiring 180. The home-improvement and construction retailer is adding positions in the Phoenix area. More info: jobs.lowes.com.


Macy’s, hiring 170. The retailer is hiring for positions ranging from cosmetic-sales representatives to retail-support staff. More info: macysjobs.com.


Maricopa Community Colleges, hiring 180. The school system has openings ranging from systems administrator to student-services specialist. More info: careers.maricopa.edu.


Maricopa Integrated Health System, hiring 200. The system is hiring for positions ranging from radiologists and registered nurses to appointment schedulers and food-service workers. More info: jobs.mihs.org.


Massage Envy, hiring 200. The company has openings ranging from massage therapist to sales associate. More info: massageenvy.com/careers.


Mayo Clinic, hiring 180. The hospital has positions ranging from instrument technician to pharmacist. More info: mayoclinic.org/jobs/locations/arizona.


McDonald's, hiring 320. The restaurant chain is adding positions. More info: mcdonalds.com/us/en/careers.html.


Northwest Medical Center, hiring 170. The Tucson hospital has openings ranging from scheduling clerk to registered nurses. More info: jobs.northwestmedicalcenter.com.


Oracle, hiring 1,120. The company provides cloud applications, platform services and engineered computer systems. The company is adding jobs in Phoenix and Tucson. More info: oracle.com/corporate/careers.


Orbital ATK, hiring 190. The aerospace and defense company is looking for candidates for positions ranging from engineers to inspectors. More info: jobs.orbitalatk.com.


Panera Bread, hiring 120. The restaurant chain is adding positions. More info: jobs.panerabread.com.


Panther Premium Logistics, hiring 210. The transportation company has openings for territory managers and other positions. More info: join.pantherpremium.com/HR.


Paradise Valley Unified School District, hiring 240. Paradise Valley schools are seeking to fill positions ranging from coaches to teachers and support staff. More info: jobs.pvschools.net.


Peoria Unified School District, hiring 110. The Northwest Valley school system is filling jobs for a range of positions, from custodians to teachers. More info: applitrack.com/peoriaud/onlineapp.


PetSmart, hiring 610.The company provides pet supplies and services. More info: careers.petsmart.com.


Pizza Hut, hiring 310. The pizza restaurant and delivery chain is adding jobs in the Phoenix area. More info: jobs.pizzahut.com.


Raytheon, hiring 480. The company specializes in defense, civil government and cybersecurity. The jobs are mainly in the Tucson area. More info: jobs.raytheon.com.


Republic Services Inc., hiring 160. The garbage collection company is filling positions ranging from drivers to analysts. More info: republicservices.jobs.


Roehl, hiring 270. The trucking and transportation company is adding drivers and other positions. More info: roehl.jobs.


Scottsdale Unified School District, hiring 190. The school system is looking for teachers to office workers. More info: scottsdale.tedk12.com/hire/index.aspx.


Sears Holdings Corp., hiring 250. The company includes Sears, Kmart and related brands. More info: jobs.sears.com.


Sprouts Farmers Market, hiring 250. The Phoenix-based grocer is adding positions ranging from cashier to store manager. More info: about.sprouts.com/careers.


Starbucks, hiring 700. The coffee company has openings ranging from barista to store manager. More info: starbucks.com/careers.


State Farm, hiring 100. The insurance company seeks customer service, call center, claims, information technology and other workers. More info: www.statefarm.com/careers.


State of Arizona, hiring 370. The government is filling positions ranging from customer-service jobs to grant coordinators. More info: hr.az.gov/AZStateJobs/.


Target Corp., hiring 400. The retailer is adding positions across the state. More info: jobs.target.com.


Tenet Healthcare, hiring 530. The company that includes Abrazo Community Health Network operates hospitals and outpatient centers, among other health-care services. More info: tenethealth.com/careers/join-our-team.


Tucson Medical Center, hiring 140. The hospital is looking to fill positions ranging from registered nurses to security officers. More info: jobs.tmcaz.com.


Tucson Unified School District, hiring 360. The school system is looking for candidates for positions ranging from teachers to custodians. More info: jobs.tusd1.org.


UnitedHealth Group, hiring 310. The medical insurer is hiring for positions ranging from phone-service representatives to nurse practitioners. More info: careers.unitedhealthgroup.com.


University of Arizona, hiring 1,270. The university is adding positions in Tucson ranging from counselors to research assistants. More info: uacareers.com.


U-Haul, hiring 170. The transportation and propane-services company has openings ranging from customer representatives to area field manager. More info: jobs.uhaul.com.


US Bank, hiring 190. The bank is hiring for positions ranging from teller to small-business specialist. More info: usbank.com/careers/index.aspx.


Walgreens, hiring 140. The company that operates pharmacies and retail centers has openings ranging from pharmacy technicians to sales associates. More info: walgreens.jobs.


Walmart, hiring 440. The retailer has a variety of positions available across the state. More info: careers.walmart.com.


Washington Elementary School District, hiring 100. The school district is hiring teachers, psychologists and nutrition workers. More info: jobs.wesdschools.org/jobs.


Wells Fargo, hiring 260. The company provides banking and other financial services. More info: wellsfargojobs.com.


READ MORE:


 
