


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Ryan Prassas is on personal leave after police say he drunkenly assaulted a woman and her 14-year-old as he was making the teen drive them home.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Ryan Prassas
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A high school math teacher is on personal leave after police say he assaulted a woman and her 14-year-old daughter after a drunken night that resulted in him having the teen get behind the wheel.


Ryan Prassas, 36, is charged with aggravated assault on a minor, a felony, and a misdemeanor count of assault, according to Maricopa County Superior Court records.


Police said in a probable-cause statement that Prassas had the teen drive just after midnight on March 23 because he and her mother had been drinking.


It wasn't her driving that caught the attention of authorities. Police said Prassas was hitting the woman in the head and pulling on her hair, prompting her daughter to pull over in a parking lot near Happy Valley Road and Lake Pleasant Parkway in Peoria.


They got out of the car, and Prassas pushed the teen, causing her to fall to the ground and injure her elbow, police said in the probable-cause statement. 


The teen and her mother walked away, but Prassas followed and continued to argue with them, records show. Witnesses saw the fight and managed to separate everyone before police arrived.


A Phoenix Union High School District official confirmed Monday that Prassas is on personal leave. Trevor G. Browne High School's website lists him as a math teacher.


His next court hearing is set for 8:30 a.m. April 5.


READ MORE:
