


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Phoenix Murphy Elementary School District must find a way to make up for a $2 million budget deficit or may face a state takeover.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Teachers and instructional aides in Phoenix's  Murphy Elementary School District protest Feb. 12, 2018, in advance of a possible school board vote to cut salaries and institute furloughs.
    Wochit

More than 100 parents, teachers and students protest pay cuts outside Murphy district office in southwest Phoenix on Feb. 12, 2018.
(Photo: Ricardo Cano/The Republic)

Facing immense community pressure, the Murphy Elementary School District governing board voted down its own hastily-announced proposals to institute furloughs and cut teachers' pay by 5 percent in an effort to stave off a potential state takeover.


The struggling school district in southwest Phoenix has overspent its 2017-18 operating budget by more than $2 million, and is at risk for state intervention if it does not significantly reduce its budget deficit by the end of the school year. 


Teachers in the district were shocked and angered to learn Friday afternoon that their school board was set to decide on a 5 percent pay cut that would have immediately affected their paychecks.


A 5 percent pay cut would equate to about $2,000 for the Murphy district's starting teacher salary of $39,543. 


But the proposed cuts came at a time of overwhelming public support from education advocates and leaders to pay Arizona teachers better wages to address a chronic, statewide shortage of qualified teachers.


MORE: Schools for deaf, blind feel effects of teacher shortage


About 40 Murphy teachers and instructional aides did not show up for work Monday in protest of the proposed cuts. 


More than 150 parents, students and teachers later that day marched outside the district's office before its board meeting.


And hundreds more filled a school cafeteria to express outrage over a pay cut Murphy teachers viewed as a sign of disrespect that would have upended many of their overworked lives.


Packed crowd at Garcia Elementary School in Murphy district, where teachers parents and students are irate over potential 5% pay cuts pic.twitter.com/m1TwOySXyt

"We got what we wanted tonight," said Rob Rubino, a sixth-grade teacher at William R. Sullivan School. 


"Teachers aren’t supposed to go backwards in pay. We work real hard, and I’m glad that the board was able to see that. They heard the teachers, children and parents speak."


The Murphy district's troubling finances partly stem from an unrelenting decline in student enrollment over the past decade.


That was evident in July 2016, when about two dozen parents tried to withdraw their children from the largely Hispanic school district, which for years has struggled academically.


According to a budget presentation at the Monday board meeting, 896 students – representing a 39 percent decrease in Murphy’s enrollment and $3 million less in per-pupil dollars – have left the district over the past decade.


At the same time, its expenditures have continued to increase annually. 


MORE: Arizona Legislature casts first vote to extend $643M education sales tax


The Murphy district would be at risk for receivership — essentially meaning the state would take over the district — unless it significantly reduces its budget deficit.
 
State takeovers of school districts have been highly unusual in Arizona, though It is was not immediately known how many Arizona school districts have gone under receivership.
 
In Arizona, school districts that overspend their budgets by 5 percent of their revenue control limit are eligible for state takeover.
 
Murphy School District, as of January, was at risk of overspending its budget by 28 percent.



    Arizona is in the midst of a teacher shortage. Many schools and students are grappling with the consequences. What's behind the shortage? Republic reporter Ricardo Cano explains in this episode of azcentral Rewind.
    

Murphy parents, teachers and students unleashed a torrent of frustration at district superintendent Jose Diaz and the school board for putting teacher pay cuts on the table without any input from educators or community members.


Ultimately, it was that uproar that pressured board members to unanimously shoot down the proposals.


“I came back to teach students in this district that we can come out of poverty and make something better for ourselves.”


Some of them cried, others shouted when they addressed Diaz and the school board in public comment.


Some called for Diaz and the board to resign. Many said the pay cuts disrespect the district’s teachers, who said they often work 60-hour weeks. 


Nearly all of them expressed outrage at the district’s leadership and accused them of financial mismanagement and disregard for Murphy's students.


Teachers who addressed Diaz and the school board pleaded with them not to implement the pay cuts. They warned district leaders the cuts would threaten their livelihoods and create a mass exodus of teachers.


SEE ALSO: As teachers get about $1 a day in stipends, some plan to ask for more


"I came back to teach students in this district that we can come out of poverty and make something better for ourselves," said Yanitza Villa, a Murphy district teacher who attended Sullivan School as a student.


"It’s not all about the pay. It’s about giving these children an equal opportunity for education, and that’s not what we’re doing here."



    A database built by The Arizona Republic shows that 22 percent of 46,000 public school teachers in Arizona during the 2016-17 term were either not qualified to teach or had less than two years of classroom experience.
    Wochit

It remained unclear after Monday night's board meeting how the district will reduce its budget deficit. 


Richard Polanco, president of the Murphy school board, initially tried to delay the vote on the teacher pay cuts until the next scheduled meeting.


The crowd of displeased parents, teachers and community members shouted boos at Polanco for trying to stall the vote.


Board members unanimously shot down both proposals.


Diaz, the Murphy superintendent, in an email before Monday's meeting blamed the budget shortfall on declining enrollment over the past eight to nine years.


Diaz provided a document showing enrollment had fallen to 1,436 students this school year, from 2,332 students in fiscal year 2008.


RELATED: 5 ways Gov. Doug Ducey's budget could affect your child's school


"We have been careful to not place blame on any one person, but rather the fact that as enrollment decreased over at least the past 8 to 9 years, the district did not downsize its staff and expenditures as it went," he said in the email. "We are optimistic that if we work together, we can increase enrollment, balance the budget and continue to serve the community."


But point fingers is what some district leaders did immediately following the vote.


When asked by a Republic reporter about who proposed the teacher pay cuts, Polanco pointed at Diaz.


"Unfortunately, it was the superintendent who wanted it on there (the agenda)," Polanco said as Diaz stood right next to him.


Diaz after the meeting would not comment on Polanco's remarks.


"Teachers are the best. They deserve the best," Diaz said. "The district is trying to do the best we can. Teachers are right."



    Many teachers in Arizona are getting second or even third jobs to make ends meet. The state ranks near the bottom nationally for teacher pay.
    Wochit

The district is already hurting for enough qualified teachers, teachers said. 


In 2016-17, 19 of the Murphy district's 87 teachers were long-term substitutes, according to a teacher-certification database created by The Republic. Only 48 teachers — or 55 percent — of the district's held the state's full qualifications of a standard certificate.


Michelle Shields, a teacher at Jack L. Kuban School, said the pay cut would have reduced her salary by more than $3,400. 


“I have a masters degree and I will now have to get a third job to make ends meet to be able to support my children.”


"This sudden decrease in pay is unfair at a time of high teacher turnover in this district," Shields, who has taught in the Murphy district for 21 years, said before Monday's meeting. 


"This is a terrible thing to do to teachers who are already working two jobs. I have a masters degree and I will now have to get a third job to make ends meet to be able to support my children," she said.


Sally Ortega, a first-grade teacher at Kuban School, said teachers in the district "can’t afford to get a cut like that."


SEE ALSO: Arizona school funding: How it works


Renee Dominguez, a former Murphy parent who withdrew her child from the school in October, was surprised by the move to cut teacher pay.


“This is one of the poorest districts in the state of Arizona," Dominguez said. "Our teachers are some of the most underpaid as it is anyway, and now you want to cut them 5 percent? They can’t afford this.”


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE:


Catholic school teacher says she was fired for marrying same-sex partner


Arizona revokes charter for shuttered Goodyear school


Arizona Legislature casts first vote to extend $643M education sales tax


Is your teacher qualified? 5 things about Arizona teacher certification


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.