


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Mayor John Giles thinks Mesa is one key ingredient away from having a downtown innovation district: an Arizona State University satellite campus.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mesa wants to create an innovation district in a revitalized downtown. What does that mean?
    Wochit

Downtown Mesa, with the Mesa Arts Center and shops along Main Street and Center, is where officials want to create an innovation district. The light rail runs down Main Street on Jan. 17, 2018.
(Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

Mayor John Giles thinks downtown Mesa could transform into Arizona’s next hotbed of innovation, but it's missing one key ingredient: Arizona State University.


"Historically, Mesa has, every generation or so, swung for the fences," Giles said. He added, "This is the next challenge that we face: Are we going to change our economy, are we going to invest in infrastructure that creates anchors that will attract a technology-based economy to our city and to our downtown?"


The mayor is part of a group of city leaders pushing to revitalize Mesa's once sleepy downtown. Mesa's Main Street, lined with historic buildings, has seen millions invested in its transformation already: a $99 million Mesa Arts Center in 2005; about $200 million to extend light rail to downtown in 2015.


MORE: Construction starts on Mesa light-rail extension to Gilbert Road


Now, city leaders look to become an "innovation district," an area with leading-edge institutions and companies and that connect with startups and business incubators to grow new ideas and products.


Mesa is eager to involve ASU, which ranks as the country's most innovative university. 


The potential payoff for creating an innovation district could be considerable: job growth, economic growth and more municipal revenue. That revenue could be put to use in Mesa, where public safety officials say they are in desperate need of funding.


Downtown Mesa, with the Mesa Arts Center and shops along Main Street and Center, is where officials want to create an innovation district. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

The concept was at the center of discussion during a city-held event, "The Rise of Mesa's Innovation District," at Mesa Arts Center on Jan. 18.


Jennifer Vey, a senior fellow at Brookings Institute, which coined the "innovation district" term, gave the keynote speech. Ji Mi Choi, associate vice president at ASU, was on a discussion panel with local business leaders.


Mesa paid $4,000 to bring two Brookings officials, including Vey, to share research and examine the city, a city spokeswoman said.


Vey said she spent about 36 hours getting to know Mesa and talking to officials. Giles hopes her recommendations will help the city chart a path to invigorate downtown.


Vey urged Mesa to examine its strengths and weaknesses in revitalizing its downtown. If Mesa wants to push forward with the idea of creating an innovation district in the area, building the right infrastructure will take the cooperation of developers, city officials and those leading the institutions they want to attract.


"If people have a common sense for what they’re trying to move along, it will help drive ... some of the physical investments that the city and private sector want to be making in terms of fulfillment of that vision," she said.


The Washington D.C.-based Brookings Institute coined the "innovation district" term in a report several years ago. Since then, it's become an urban planning movement that cities across the U.S have rushed to adapt, including Phoenix.


The districts foster an "innovation ecosystem," according to the think tank's report. It cites neighborhoods in Boston, Philadelphia and St. Louis as models of successful innovation districts.


"This is just a long-term evolution," Vey told The Arizona Republic. "This is not a government program or some faddish kind of idea that cities are trying to jump onto. It’s being driven by much broader kind of macro forces."


But sprawling Mesa may not necessarily meet the definition of "urban," where density is central to the concept. The report lays out three typical models for innovation districts:


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Panelist John Graham, CEO of Sunbelt Holdings, said that the creation of an innovation district in downtown Mesa is already underway.


"It's not like we're all waiting for the memo to go out that it's time to start this. It is happening; it has been for some time," he said.


Among the efforts, the city is negotiating with Habitat Metro, one of the pioneers in downtown Phoenix's revitalization effort. The developer wants to build a towering hotel and apartment complex in downtown Mesa across from Mesa Arts Center.


There's a crucial objective in creating an innovation district: to bring together a mix of important businesses, startups and institutions to facilitate innovative ideas.


"The very nature of the idea is that you’re doing something new and disruptive," Choi said. "So you are, by definition, having to understand what already exists and what will exist and what will exist is the future part of things."


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The innovation district idea is an opening for Giles to reprise the push to bring ASU to downtown Mesa.


"Thankfully, we have the most innovative university in the world — that’s going to max out its growth three or four light-rail stations down the road from us — that’s interested in bringing innovative technology programs to downtown Mesa," he said.


MORE: Proposed degree programs, renderings for ASU's downtown Mesa campus


However, Mesa voters rejected a sales-tax increase to fund a satellite ASU campus downtown in 2016.


The mayor acknowledges the message that voters don't want their taxes increased "has been received and will be respected." He says the city can afford to provide the infrastructure and the university would likely need to be a financial partner, bringing in one building at a time.


"ASU comes in with millions of dollars of technology and professors and the support for that institution," he said. "There’s financial return in that."


MAYOR: Mesa to keep trying for ASU campus downtown, without higher taxes


Choi told The Republic that "concrete discussions" between Mesa and ASU continue.


"ASU does have the opportunity to play that role as a leading research and research-intense institution proximal to the city of Mesa," she said. "Generally the idea is that ASU certainly supports that vision and would like to be of assistance."


Mesa isn't the only city in Arizona pondering the concept. Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton announced a similar push to transform the city's warehouse district in 2016 to attract more entrepreneurs to the city.


Phoenix Economic Development Spokesman Eric Toll said in an email that a marketing effort is about to be unveiled around the proposed district.


Several panelists cited the success of ASU's move into downtown Phoenix more than a decade ago.


"It was not until ASU came to downtown Phoenix that the place came alive," said Karrin Taylor Robson, a board member of the Greater Phoenix Economic Council. "Now you see what happens as a result: You have these organic collisions between education and business, and it's all now feeding on itself."


A mix of tech companies also formed what they called a "Downtown Innovation District" in Tucson in 2013, according to a press release from the Downtown Tucson Partnership.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Giles said he will never forget the day he saw a dog hobbling across Main Street at a snail's pace without the threat of getting run over from his City Council office back in the 1990s. Downtown, things have changed already, he told the crowd at Mesa Arts Center on Thursday.


"This is a model that Mesa, under Mayor (Scott) Smith’s leadership probably six or more years ago, has already initiated," he told The Republic. "Look no further than Benedictine University and the downtown education complex."


There is hope that an innovation district will also draw in diverse sectors of Mesa's population.


MORE: Collaborative space opens in Mesa for corporate America expats


Jenny Poon, one of the panelists and founder of local co-working space Co+Hoots, stressed the importance of tapping more women and minorities to lead businesses. To do that, they need to see that it's possible to rise to those roles starting at a young age.


"You can't be what you don't see," she said.


While the idea involves an ambitious shift in infrastructure for a city that's ballooned to nearly 500,000, the purpose is disruption.


"Innovation districts are not about the buildings that are created or the spaces that are created," Choi said. "Buildings and spaces just support the processes and constructs that enable long-term collaboration."


READ MORE:


Safeway, first major shopping center coming to Eastmark in Mesa


Downtown Mesa's Sweet Cakes is now Mezona Market


Have you heard the one about the comedy club in downtown Mesa?


Mesa will convert shuttered school near downtown into park and recreation center


Construction on downtown Mesa Artspace 'artist colony' to begin this year


Mesa hopes move downtown, new vision boosts LaunchPoint business accelerator


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
