


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Fun things to do before UCLA and Kansas State play on Tuesday and Washington and Penn State play on Sunday

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Fans and Fiesta Bowl officials greet Penn State players, coaches and family as they arrive at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport on December 23, 2017 in Phoenix, Ariz.
(Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

The Christmas presents have been opened, the holiday meal has been devoured and fans of four college football teams are preparing to end 2017 with two big games right here in the Valley.


At 7 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 26, UCLA and Kansas State will compete in the 29th annual Cactus Bowl at Chase Field in Phoenix. And the PlayStation Fiesta Bowl kicks off at 2 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 30, at University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale with the University of Washington vs. Penn State.


In addition bowl-related events for fans, all four teams will have tailgates, meet-ups and other activities. Here’s a guide to many of the official fan events and places to check out near the two stadiums.


Cactus Bowl LIVE! Featuring LOCASH: LOCASH is a country music duo made up of singer-songwriters Chris Lucas and Preston Brust. Their sound is a combo of modern country and classic heartland rock. The event is presented by Desert Schools.


Details: 4 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 26. Phoenix Convention Center, South Ballroom, 100 N. Third St., Phoenix. $25 general admission, concert ticket only; $40 includes admission and upper-level Cactus Bowl ticket (while supplies last), $75 includes general admission and lower-level Cactus Bowl Ticket (while supplies last), $150 includes VIP meet and greet with LOCASH, Club Level Cactus Bowl ticket and parking pass (while supplies last). fiestabowl.org/events.


Local alumni group: UCLA Alumni, Arizona Network:  alumni.ucla.edu/alumni-networks/arizona-network and facebook.com/UCLAalumniAZ.


Colors: Blue and gold.


Mascots: Joe Bruin, Josephine Bruin.


Oasis Cactus Bowl Pregame Party: Tailgating UCLA fans will enjoy partying at The Oasis Cactus Bowl Pregame Party, presented by Ménage A Trois before the teams take the field. There will be live music, marching bands, cheerleaders, pep rallies, games and big screens showing team highlights. Food and beverages are available for purchase.


Details: 3:30 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 26. West of Chase Field, at Fourth and Jackson streets, Phoenix. Free. fiestabowl.org/events.


Fiesta Bowl officials greet Kansas State players at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport on December 21, 2017 in Phoenix, Ariz. (Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Local alumni group: Cactus Cats: k-state.com/getinvolved/clubs/phoenixaz.php and facebook.com/CactusCats.


Colors: Royal purple, white black and gray.


Mascot: Willie the Wildcat.


Pregame Headquarters and Rally: The K-State Alumni Association, K-State Athletics, KSU Foundation and K-State’s Office of the President present this free party for Wildcat fans. Food and drinks will be available off the menu. The K-State cheerleaders and pep band, Willie the Wildcat, K-State President Richard Myers, Athletic Director Gene Taylor, Alumni Association President and CEO Amy Button Renz and Voice of the Wildcats, Wyatt Thompson, will appear.


Details: 3 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 26. Game Seven Grill, 201 S. Fourth St., Phoenix. Free. k-state.com.


Powercat Gameday: Powercat Gameday will broadcast live beginning at 3 p.m. on game day. Tilted Kilt will open early with a full menu of burgers, sandwiches, wings and more plus a great selection of beers.


Details: 3 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 26. Tilted Kilt Pub, 2 E. Jefferson St., Phoenix. powercatgameday.com/cactusbowl.


CityScape and CitySkate: The CityScape shopping and dining development includes Copper Blues, Arrogant Butcher, Blue Hound Kitchen &amp; Cocktails, Tilted Kit and Five Guys restaurants plus stores such as Urban Outfitters and Charming Charlie. The holiday ice rink CitySkate has taken over Central Avenue and features a huge Christmas tree, nightly light shows and thousands of twinkling lights.


Details: CityScape, 1 E. Washington St., Phoenix. cityscapephoenix.com. Ice skating goes through Sunday, Jan. 7. Hours vary, check website for details. $30 express pass. $15 general admission. $10 discounted tickets available to members of the military, senior citizens and children 8 and under. Children 3 and under free. 602-772-3900, phxicerink.com.


Cobra Arcade Bar: This barcade showcases 40 restored arcade cabinets, local artwork and video game-themed cocktails with names like Princess Peach and Crazy Kong. DJs perform regularly, and happy hour runs from 4 to 7 p.m. weekdays, offering $1 off draft beers and $2 off all other drinks. The place is open from 4 p.m. to 2 a.m. daily.


Details: 801 N. Second St., Phoenix. 602-595-5873, cobraarcadebar.com.


Pizzeria Bianco: This cozy brick restaurant in Heritage Square has earned national attention. The menu features wood-fired pizzas with local ingredients, salads and antipasto. Bar Bianco next door serves wine, beer and small plates.


Details: 623 E. Adams St., Phoenix. 602-258-8300, pizzeriabianco.com.


Bitter &amp; Twisted Cocktail Parlour: Located in the historical 10-story Luhrs Building, this bar sits beneath what was the Prohibition Department until 1934. The menu is a pop-culture-themed book of a wide variety cocktails, such as the L.I.T. Up, and Bear Witness. There's also a non-alcoholic drink section. The bar is open from 4 p.m. to 2 a.m., and closed on Sundays and Mondays.


Details: 1 W. Jefferson St., Phoenix. 602-340-1924, bitterandtwistedaz.com.


Crescent Ballroom: This popular music venue has a lounge in the front serving libations like the Honey Badger cocktail and Mexican cuisine. The bar added a second story to its front patio, providing ample space to hang out al fresco. Try the crowd favorite, poquito bean and cheese burrito, for $5.50. The ballroom is the best spot to catch up-and-coming acts, with wooden-bleacher seats in the back and a side area by the merch booth for underage patrons.


Details: Crescent Ballroom, 308 N. Second Ave., Phoenix. 602-716-2222, crescentphx.com.


The "Spirit" balloon, the Fiesta Bowl mascot is spun around on the parade route during the 46th Fiesta Bowl Parade in Phoenix on Saturday, December 31, 2016. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

National Bank of Arizona Fiesta Bowl Parade: If you love a good parade, don't miss the National Bank of Arizona Fiesta Bowl Parade. The parade, which is in its 47th year, features colorful floats, huge balloons, equestrian units, local celebs, marching bands and more.


Details: 9 a.m. Saturday, Dec. 30. Starts at Central and Montebello avenues in Phoenix. check website for the full parade route. Free; reserved bleacher seating is $25, general admission seating is $10. fiestabowl.org/events.


PlayStation Fiesta Bowl Fan Fest Pregame Party: If you feel you cannot have a college football game without a good tailgate party, this event is for you. Join tens of thousands of your closest fan friends on the Great Lawn at University of Phoenix Stadium. Fans of all ages will enjoy pregame traditions including performances by marching bands and cheerleaders, pep rallies and plenty of food and beverage booths.


Details: 9:30 a.m. Saturday, Dec. 30. University of Phoenix Stadium, Great Lawn, Glendale Avenue and Loop 101, Glendale. Included with the purchase of a Fiesta Bowl game ticket. fiestabowl.org/events.


APS Fiesta Bowl Stadium Club Pregame Party: This pregame party is in an exclusive area on the Great Lawn at the University of Phoenix Stadium. From big-screen TVs and live entertainment to an all-you-can-eat buffet and more, this offers the ultimate game-day experience.


Details: 9:30 a.m.-1:30 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 30. University of Phoenix Stadium, Great Lawn, Glendale Avenue and Loop 101, Glendale. $100. fiestabowl.org/events.


Washington head coach Chris Petersen talks about the Fiesta Bowl after arriving at Phoenix Sky Harbor in preparation for their bowl game against Penn State on Dec. 30. Picture taken on December 25, 2017 in Phoenix, Ariz. (Photo: Patrick Breen/azcentral sports)

Local alumni group: UW Alumni – Arizona: facebook.com/AZHuskies.


Mascot: Harry the Husky, Dubs.


Colors: Purple and gold.


Volunteering at St. Mary’s Food Bank: Huskies and Penn State fans will team up at St. Mary’s Food Bank to organize food donations. The event for local and visiting fans will feature a visit from the Husky Band and cheer squad and the chance to meet fellow fans while helping hungry families.


Details: 8:30-11 a.m. Thursday, Dec. 28. St. Mary’s Food Bank, 2831 N. 31st Ave., Phoenix. facebook.com/AZHuskies.


Purple Reign Tailgate: Huskies fans can enjoy a festive buffet featuring hometown favorites, as well as hosted beer and wine. Harry the Husky, the Husky Marching Band and UW Cheer will all be there. Fans of all ages can enjoy activities and games, giveaways and showing off their purple pride.


Details: 11 a.m. Saturday, Dec. 30. University of Phoenix Stadium, Great Lawn, Glendale Avenue and Loop 101, Glendale. $85 general admission, $80 for UWAA or President’s Club members, $50 for under 21, free for age 6 and under. washington.edu/alumni/events/purple-reign-tailgate-at-the-playstation-fiesta-bowl.


Pregame event in Scottsdale: Join the Arizona Huskies the night before the big game at the Skeptical Chymist; enjoy pre-game fun and the chance to meet other fans.


Details: 5:30 p.m. Friday, Dec. 29. Skeptical Chymist, 15689 N. Hayden Road, Scottsdale. facebook.com/AZHuskies.


Penn State's Juwan Johnson's backup shows off a lion as he enters a tent for a Fiesta Bowl interview at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport on December 23, 2017 in Phoenix, Ariz. (Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Local alumni group: Penn State Alumni Association, Phoenix Chapter: psuphx.weebly.com.


Mascot: Nittany lion.


Colors: White, light blue, dark blue.


Penn State Phoenix Chapter Fiesta Bowl Welcome Party: Join the PSAA Phoenix Chapter at a festive welcome party in Old Town Scottsdale. Enjoy an extended happy hour, Philly cheesesteak sliders and plenty of fun with fellow fans. Wear your Penn State garb to receive specials on food and beverages.


Details: 6 p.m.-2 a.m. Friday, Dec. 29. The District, 7333 E. Indian Plaza, Scottsdale. psuphx.weebly.com.


Official Penn State Pep Rally: Penn State alumni, students and fans can cheer on their Nittany Lions at the Official Penn State Pep Rally, sponsored by the Alumni Association. It will feature the Penn State Blue Band, cheerleaders, Lionettes, Nittany Lion and special guests. Concession stands will be open for food and beverage purchases and the event is free to all Penn Staters.


Details: 2-4 p.m. Friday, Dec. 29. Scottsdale Stadium, 7408 E. Osborn Road. Free. When parking, enter through Gate F (Drinkwater Boulevard side). Parking is available at the Civic Center Library Parking Garage at 3803 N. Drinkwater Blvd. facebook.com/events/937266496423350/.


Penn State Phoenix Chapter Fiesta Bowl Tailgate: McFadden’s Glendale and the PSU Phoenix Chapter are hosting The Lion Zone tailgate party. Autographs, ticket giveaways and Penn State merchandise will be raffled off at the event which will also feature food and drink specials.


Details: 9 a.m. Saturday, Dec. 30. McFadden’s, 9425 W. Coyotes Blvd., Glendale. mcfaddensglendale.com.


Fiesta Bowl Watch Party: Members of the Penn State Alumni Association, Phoenix Chapter who are unable to make it to the game can head to Temple Bar Sports Grill in Scottsdale to watch the Fiesta Bowl together.


Details: 2-5 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 30. Temple Bar Sports Grill, 17050 N. Thompson Peak Parkway, Scottsdale. facebook.com/events/310227966141543.


Skate Westgate: Westgate Entertainment District presents an outdoor ice rink all holiday season long. All skill levels are welcome, from kiddos putting on skates for the first time to experienced skating adults.


Details: Through Sunday, Jan.. Skating hours vary by day, check website for details. Westgate Entertainment District, 6751 N. Sunset Blvd., Glendale. $15 for general admission, $11 for toddlers and members of the military with ID. westgateaz.com/skate.


Bar Louie: Kown for its signature martinis, American fare and nightlife-centric atmosphere. Dishes include appetizers, flatbreads, salads, sandwiches and burgers ranging from the Blue Louie to tempura shrimp. The Clover, Tickled Pink and Louie's Cosmo are among the signature martinis. There's also an extensive craft beer and wine list.


Details: Westgate Entertainment District, 6770 N. Sunrise Blvd, Glendale. 623-522-5810, barlouie.com.


Dave &amp; Buster's: This entertainment destination has a large, circular sports bar with massive walls of high-definition televisions and lots of seating for sports and gaming fanatics. It holds more than 160 arcade games with a wide range of prizes for kids and adults.


Details: Westgate Entertainment District, 9460 W. Hanna Lane, Glendale. 623-759-7800, daveandbusters.com.


Tanger Outlets: Across the way from Westgate Entertainment District and the University of Phoenix Stadium, Tanger Outlets shops include Lululemon, H&amp;M, Calvin Klein, Polo Ralph Lauren and many more. Several fast-food restaurants are also on site.


Details: 6800 N. 95th Ave., Glendale. 623-877-9500, tangeroutlet.com/glendale.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
