


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Two Phoenix-area men were sentenced to prison for defrauding people in the U.S. and Canada in a telemarketing scheme.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Your credit score can land you that dream job or prevent you from getting a mortage. Republic reporter Rebekah Sanders outlines how you can protect yourself from mistakes on your credit report.
    

Courts
(Photo: azcentral.com)

Two Phoenix-area men were sentenced to prison for defrauding people in the United States and Canada in a telemarketing scheme that generated close to $20 million, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Missouri said this week.


The men targeted about 100 people in the St. Louis area alone and the victims lost a total of $1 million, according to a news release sent Tuesday.


In total, there were about 4,000 victims, federal prosecutors said Wednesday.


Michael McNeill, 48, of Phoenix was sentenced to 10 years in prison and his accomplice, Joshua Fynn, 36, of Chandler, was sentenced to seven years in prison. 


U.S. District Judge John Ross also ordered the men to forfeit their assets and to pay restitution to the victims, according to the release. 


Prosecutors said McNeill and Flynn also went by the nicknames Mr. White and Mr. Pink, presumably a reference to characters with the same aliases in the movie "Reservoir Dogs", in which eight men go on a diamond heist in Los Angeles.


In November, McNeill and Flynn pleaded guilty to one count each of wire fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering. 


The Arizona Attorney General Office were among the law enforcement agencies that help investigate the case.


READ MORE:$7 million settlement approved in Arpaio-era jail deathPhoenix kitchen worker convicted in fatal stabbing of co-worker


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 


 


 
