Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.


✓ Unlimited access to azdailysun.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

✓ Unlimited access to E-Edition✓ Unlimited access to the azdailysun.com website and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call 877-810-7370 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Widely scattered showers or a thunderstorm this evening. Then partly cloudy. Low around 55F. Winds W at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Widely scattered showers or a thunderstorm this evening. Then partly cloudy. Low around 55F. Winds W at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 6:57 pm

PHOENIX -- Declaring the law unconstitutional, a federal judge on Tuesday permanently blocked the state Department of Education from restricting "ethnic studies'' programs in the Tucson Unified School District -- or even demanding information from the school officials about what is being taught.

But it remains to be seen what changes the school board might enact now that they've been freed from state oversight.

Judge Wallace Tashima said state lawmakers acted illegally in 2010 in making it illegal for any schools to have courses that promote the overthrow of the federal government, promote resentment toward a race or class of people, are designed primarily for pupils of a particular ethnic group, or "advocate ethnic solidarity instead of the treatment of pupils as individuals.''

The judge not only barred state education officials from enforcing the 2010 law but said they cannot threaten to withhold state funds for noncompliance. It was precisely that threatened loss of more than $14 million that caused the district to scrap the original program and replace it with what it calls "culturally relevant curricula.''

More to the point, Tashima told Diane Douglas, the current state Superintendent of Public Instruction that she cannot conduct "any inspections or audits of any program, curriculum or course'' at the district to verify compliance with the 2010 law.

For the moment, that is an academic victory.

In 2015, shortly after taking office, Douglas declared that what replaced Mexican American Studies complies with the 2010 law. And Douglas spokesman Dan Godzich said Tuesday his boss is not requiring any sort of reports.

And while there do not appear sufficient votes to reinstate the original program, Tashima's ruling opens the door to the governing board reinserting some of the old elements into what is now being taught.

There is also some question of whether Tuesday's order is the last word. A spokesman for the Attorney General's Office said no decision has been made whether to appeal.

The ethnic studies program, dating back to the late 1990s, was designed to provide culturally relevant curriculum for students by incorporating historical and contemporary Mexican-American contributions into classroom studies.

It came under fire in 2007 when a group of students walked out on a speech by Margaret Dugan, the then deputy state school chief. She was responding to a controversial speech where labor activist Dolores Huerta told students that "Republicans hate Latinos.''

That got the attention of Tom Horne, her boss at the time, who pushed for the 2010 law. John Huppenthal, who followed Horne as schools chief, subsequently declared the Tucson program in violation of law and threatened to withhold aid.

Parents responded by filing this lawsuit.

In an initial ruling earlier this year, Tashima said the law violated the rights of students "because both enactment and enforcement were motivated by racial animus.'' But he left it until Tuesday to issue the injunction.




                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


We’re writing to thank you for activating your Full Access subscription including all azdailysun.com websites, mobile apps and more. With your “Full-Access” subscription to the Arizona Daily Sun, you get everything produced by the area’s largest news team, plus even more products and service…

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 