


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Attorney General's Office investigation could not find sufficient evidence to prove Nowakowski influenced a land deal for his personal benefit.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Phoenix Councilman Michael Nowakowski
(Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Phoenix Councilman Michael Nowakowski did not commit a crime by discussing a downtown-development deal that involved his private-sector employer, according to the Arizona Attorney General's Office.


Prosecutors did not find sufficient evidence to bring charges under the state's conflict-of-interest laws, according to a memorandum issued by the office.


Nowakowski met with a private development group to discuss its bid for a piece of city-owned land in his district in 2015. Later, Nowakowski's private-sector employer, the Cesar Chavez Foundation, submitted a development proposal for the same land and ultimately won the bid with another co-bidder.


The city canceled the land sale after a report in The Arizona Republic detailing the situation and accusations from the rival bidders that he did not disclose a conflict of interest.


Nowakowski maintains he did not know his employer would put an offer on the land when he met with the rival bidders, and thus had no conflict of interest.


READ MORE: Phoenix OKs sale of land at center of controversy


Phoenix also hired a private law firm to look into the allegations. The reportby Sanders Parks concluded that Nowakowski's actions did not rise to the level of a conflict of interest under Arizona law.


The Attorney General's Office launched its own investigation.


According to the Attorney General's Office inquiry, the city "reported they didn't get the cooperation they were seeking in order to fully investigate the allegations," which prompted the state's investigation.


The state's investigation was limited as well. State investigators said they did not interview Nowakowski or his wife, who previously worked as a paid consultant for the foundation.


Nowakowski's attorney told The Republic in May that the councilman had not been contacted by investigators; the Attorney General's Office memo said this was untrue and that investigators made several attempts to question the couple.


Later contacted, the couple declined to be interviewed. 


In the report, investigators said speaking directly to Nowakowski would have been the "best method to determine what he knew and when he knew it," but they are "comfortable with the decision not to recommend criminal charges."


In a statement released late Wednesday, Nowakowsi said, "As I have stated from the beginning, any suggestions of a conflict of interest or misuse of confidential information on my part have proven to be false. This is the second independent investigation that has reached the same conclusion and I am glad to see this matter closed."


When asked why his client declined interviews with state investigators, Nowakowski's attorney Kory Langhofer said the councilman had addressed the issue in previous statements and at a press conference. Langhofer said the councilman also answered questions from the Attorney General's Office in writing through him.


"I don't know what more he could have done," Langhofer said. 


Former Arizona Chief Deputy Attorney General Rob Carey said it's not unusual for people to decline interviews during a criminal investigation. Most lawyers will tell their clients not to participate, he said.


Land south of Fillmore Street between Fourth and Sixth avenues in Phoenix. (Photo: The Republic)

The Attorney General's Office's determination hinged on the story of one of the key stakeholders.


Real-estate developer Robert Lyles and his team was one of the bidders to buy and redevelop the 7.6 acres on Fillmore Street between Fourth and Sixth avenues. Lyles is a partner with Deco Communities, which made the bid.


In an interview with The Republic in 2015, Lyles said he met with Nowakowski in his role as a councilman and shared details with him about his company's proposal.


Lyles said he was "shocked" when he learned the city agreed to sell the property to the bidding team that included the councilman's private employer. Nowakowski maintains he was unaware that the Cesar Chavez Foundation, in partnership with commercial developer Trammel Crow Co., planned to bid on the property when he met with Lyles.


“Anytime someone sees your plan before they create theirs, or they’re in the process of it, has to be helpful," Lyles told The Republic in 2015. "We showed him a bunch of preliminary stuff."


But when state investigators spoke with Lyles, he told them he didn't believe any of the information he provided to Nowakowski about his project wound up in the Cesar Chavez Foundation's proposal.


In the report, investigators said Lyles' statement was "significant" because it shows Nowakowski did not disclose confidential information for his personal profit.


Investigators also noted the meeting between Nowakowski and the Deco team occurred at the Cesar Chavez Foundation's offices, which they said supports the notion that the councilman didn't attempt to conceal his association with the foundation.


However, Lyles and Billy Shields, who was working with Deco, did tell investigators they believed Nowakowski influenced the formation and operations of the panel that ultimately recommended the Cesar Chavez Foundation's proposal, according to the report.


Investigators did not find evidence to support the allegations. 


The Attorney General's Office report also touched on Nowakowski's role in alerting the Cesar Chavez Foundation to the land sale.


Trammell Crow disclosed that Nowakowski had personally told his boss at the foundation, Paul Chavez, about the forthcoming sale. Public records show Nowakowski's office also requested a phone call between a foundation executive and Deputy City Manager Paul Blue, which Blue said was a discussion about the basics of the bidding process.


Both Chavez and Nowakowski said the discussion was only a 10-second exchange during a longer phone conversation about development projects, according to the earlier report prepared for the city.


Based on the two men's statements, investigators determined this conversation did "not constitute participation in the city's official decision-making process" because it appeared the foundation didn't intend to bid on the project at the time of the phone call. 


State investigators further looked at other elements of Nowakowski's involvement in the land-sale process, but did not find evidence that the councilman tried to conceal his association with the foundation, influence decision makers or cover up wrongdoing. 


Tom Irvine, a prominent real-estate and government attorney, said after reading the report the case seemed "completely buttoned up."


"Nobody has any evidence against him," he said. 


"Investigators are comfortable," the memo concluded, "with the decision not to recommend criminal charges based upon the limited information from Langhofer, the comments Nowakowski has made in the media, and the comments to the
Sanders Parks investigators."


Republic reporter Dustin Gardiner contributed to this article.


READ MORE:


AG investigating Phoenix Councilman Michael Nowakowski


After Nowakowski controversy, developer gets nod on downtown Phoenix project bid
