


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Scottsdale district-initiated probe finds the district did not break the law in hiring Hunt &amp; Caraway Architects, but it turns up other problems.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The Arizona Attorney General's Office is investigating procurement practices for school renovations in the Scottsdale Unified School District. This video has been updated to include information about Hunt &amp; Caraway's 2013 contract with the district.
    Wochit

Parents of children at Hopi Elementary School, and residents near the Arcadia structure, say the school's new design removes historical architecture, weakens the learning environment and creates a traffic burden on the rest of the neighborhood.
(Photo: Tristan Ettleman/The Republic)

Scottsdale Unified School District's internal investigation into concerns related to school renovations found the district did not break the law in hiring Hunt &amp; Caraway Architects, although the district may have overpaid the firm and run afoul in other areas.


The district will submit its findings to the Arizona Attorney General's Office, which is conducting its own investigation into the district's procurement of outside contractors.


Susan Segal, an attorney the district contracted in late November to handle the review, delivered her findings to the school board on Tuesday.


“I did not find any violations of the law in the procurement of the services of Hunt &amp; Caraway," Segal told the board. "However, there are subsequent events that developed that are concerning."


Her concerns include: 


Segal is expected to return to the board in January to recommend any legal action the district might take.


She also will provide her findings in another procurement-related probe, this one into the district's use of Professional Group Public Consulting (PGPC). The consulting firm's Arizona Corporation Commission filing lists Laura Smith, the district's chief financial officer, as PGPC's president and director. Smith has filed a conflict-of-interest disclosure form with the district listing her other position.


READ MORE:


Scottsdale Unified School District's spending under investigation by attorney general


The district launched its investigation into procurement concerns after residents complained for months about a lack of transparency in the district's bidding and billing practices, with many of the complaints stemming from the rebuild of Hopi Elementary School.


"The management of tax dollars on behalf of children is a profound responsibility that the leadership of Scottsdale Unified School District does not take lightly," the district said in a statement released Tuesday. "That review is now complete, and the findings confirm that SUSD followed all legal procurement procedures in the selection of architects for school construction and planning."


Dan Drake, whose children attended Hopi Elementary, said Segal's report shed light on the procurement of Hunt &amp; Caraway and confirmed concerns about Robichaux. "It doesn’t remove the cloud that hangs over the district," he said.


Drake said he still has concerns about Superintendent Denise Birdwell's hires, including Smith and Louis Hartwell, who is overseeing some of the $229 million in bond spending that voters approved in 2016. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Many residents raised concerns about how the district hired Hunt &amp; Caraway, noting they were doing work for the district before being selected in a 2016 bidding process.


Segal clarified that work was done under a 2013 bid process, as well as a 2016 bid. She said the procurement was properly handled by 1 Government Procurement Alliance, a Phoenix-based non-profit cooperative. Scottsdale and some 200 other Arizona school districts use 1GPA and similar agencies to procure outside vendors. 


Segal noted the Tempe Elementary School District currently is using Hunt &amp; Caraway for projects through the same 1GPA procurement process.


Although Segal uncovered no problem with using Hunt &amp; Caraway for services, she questioned how the firm billed the district.


"There is evidence that the district has been overbilled by Hunt &amp; Caraway in a significant amount, although the exact amount is still to be determined," she said.


Hunt &amp; Caraway billed the district at 7 percent of construction costs on at least three projects, rather than the 6 percent negotiated in the 1GPA contract, she said. 


Segal placed the blame largely on Hunt &amp; Caraway, but the report noted that district employees should have caught the overbilling. She suggested that 1GPA provide member school districts with up-to-date fee schedules for the vendors it procures. "Perhaps this did occur," but the Scottsdale district had no record of it, the report said.


The district, in its prepared statement, said it would contract with an auditor "to ensure there has been no overpayment or, if there has been overpayment, what the next legal steps may be."


Court records obtained by The Arizona Republic show that Robichaux was convicted of felony theft in 1998 after charging $125,653 to the Arizona Department of Transportation for a project that never was built, according to records.


Segal said the state procurement code that school districts follow does not require a company to reveal if a principal has been convicted of a felony, but she said it's a good idea for those procuring services to ask. 


And 1GPA did ask in its 2013 solicitation, she said. 


“Hunt &amp; Caraway said 'no,' which at the time of course was untrue because Brian Robichaux, its president who had a 50 percent ownership in the company at the time, had been convicted of a Class 2 felony in Arizona in 1998," Segal said. 


Tamara Caraway, who is now president of Hunt &amp; Caraway, signed off on the company's response to 1GPA's solicitation for architecture services in 2013. Caraway said she did not learn of his felony conviction until this October, Segal's report said.


Caraway did not respond to The Republic's request for comment. 


Segal questioned Robichaux about his conviction and described his response as "remarkably cavalier." Her report said Robichaux described it as more of a contractual dispute than a criminal matter. 


"He seemed to reflect no remorse for committing a crime other than that the State decided to prosecute him for it," Segal wrote in the report. 


Robichaux declined comment when reached by The Republic. 


"Scottsdale Unified School District did not know about this 20-year-old conviction. As soon as it came to light, Mr. Robichaux stepped down from his position with HCA," the district said in its statement.


Segal said that state law was "clearly violated" when the district chose a construction manager for projects without a registered architect on its selection committee. The district had contracted with PGPC, the consulting firm that also is under review by Segal, to oversee the selection committee.


Another contractor told Segal that while she assumed Robichaux was a registered architect, it was PGPC's job to confirm it, according to the report.


The question is whether Robichaux represented himself as a registered architect.


The law does not require the principal in an architecture firm be a registered architect but he cannot represent that he is one, Segal said. “On at least two occasions — and I suspect more occasions — Mr. Robichaux represented that he was an architect to persons related to the district, which could cause any layperson to believe he was a registered architect," she said. 


Segal said she would report the situation to the Arizona Board of Technical Registration, which handles licenses and certificates for architects and other professions.


Republic reporter Yihyun Jeong contributed to this article.


READ MORE:


'Compromise is not pretty' as Scottsdale board moves forward on Hopi rebuild


Phoenix's Arcadia residents revolt over Hopi Elementary redesign


Drugs suspected in death of former Scottsdale football standout


Scottsdale man accused of cancer fraud also faked own death, police say
