


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

District officials and Mesa police determined that the note, which was found in a restroom and suggested, possible violence, is not considered viable.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

A screenshot shows the email sent from Skyline High School Principal Tom Brennan to parents and families of students regarding a threatening note found in a girls bathroom.
(Photo: The Republic)

Skyline High School families were sent an e-mail advising of a possible threat against the Mesa school for the second straight day Thursday.


In an e-mail to Skyline families Thursday, principal Tom Brennan said a student found a note in a girls' restroom that contained a gun-violence threat against the school for Friday.


District officials and Mesa police completed a threat assessment and determined there was no viable threat, Brennan said. He said additional security will be in place Friday.


"Skyline High School will be fully operational tomorrow  with heightened vigilance by all authorities and the assignment of additional district security and Mesa Police officers to the campus,'' he wrote.


MORE: Mesa schools among those checking into viral social-media threat


On Wednesday, Skyline families, along with those from Superstition High School in Mesa, were sent e-mails from the school district office advising that the district and Mesa police had looked into a possible social media threat made against a school with initials "SHS.'' Both schools are part of Mesa Public Schools.


It was determined the threat was a hoax that had gone viral. Numerous police agencies and schools around the country with high school initials "SHS'' in their communities posted social media advisories about the threat, with many determining it was a hoax originating in Ohio.


READ MORE:


Classes canceled after social media threat involving St. Mary's High School in Phoenix


'We need to listen to our kids': Scottsdale, Florence students hold 17 minutes of silence


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 
