


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The West Valley historically has left to its Phoenix and Scottsdale counterparts.  But some say it's time.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Booking a hotel for summer? Check out these tips to get the best deal possible!
    TreNesha Striggles, Wochit

Surprise is looking into whether there would be demand for a resort in the city, possibly near the White Tank Mountains.
(Photo: Christine Keith/The Republic)

Surprise is looking for room in the resort market, something the West Valley historically has left to its Phoenix and Scottsdale counterparts. 


Surprise leaders voted this month to spend $20,000 for a study to gauge demand for a resort at three potential sites in the northwest Valley suburb.


West Valley leaders say the region's exponential growth and uptick in occupancy at area hotels means the time is right for a potential resort. Not to mention a just announced Super Bowl in Glendale in 2023, which Arizona Cardinals President Michael Bidwill promises to be bigger and spread out around the Valley.


Already, the Tohono O'odham Nation plans to open a resort near Glendale's sports and entertainment district, based on the market, after opening its larger casino in late 2019.


Brian Friedman, Glendale's economic development director, said West Valley residents deserve these types of amenities.


"Everything that’s available in the East Valley, our goal is to have that immediately available in the West Valley."


Surprise Councilman Todd Tande said that because a new resort would be years in the making, it behooves city leaders to gather all the information they can. (Photo: David Kadlubowski/The Republic, David Kadlubowski/The Republic)

The West Valley, which clung to its agricultural roots longer than other parts of the Valley, has its share of attractions for out-of-town visitors but continues to play catch-up on hotels and lodging. The West Valley boasts five spring training ballparks, a NASCAR track, a National Football League stadium and a hockey and concert arena. 


"I don’t think the public is really aware about the amount of development occurring commercially here," Friedman said. "Success begets more success, and it’s Glendale and the West Valley’s time to shine, especially in the hospitality industry."


Surprise leaders also say it's the right time. 


"A resort would be many, many years in the making, so we need to get our facts and information now and get the ball rolling," Surprise City Councilman Todd Tande said.


Armed with information, he said Surprise would likely look to attract a private developer to build the resort.


The three potential Surprise sites include:


Some council members gravitated to the site near White Tank Mountain Regional Park, the largest park in Maricopa County with approximately 30,000 acres dotted with saguaros and rugged mountain landscape.


"A resort near the White Tank Mountains would be absolutely fantastic," Councilman Roland Winters said. "It would lure people to Surprise, it’s a great area."


Surprise Councilman Skip Hall says Maricopa County is considering creating a northern entrance into the White Tank Mountain Regional Park, making it the perfect place to build a resort to attract and retain visitors. (Photo: Bettina Hansen/The Republic)

Maricopa County is considering creating a northern entrance into the park, making it the perfect place to build a resort to attract and retain visitors, Councilman Skip Hall said.


"That’s another asset for Surprise, the possibility of this resort being close to that entrance for access into the White Tanks," Hall said.


Some residents aren't convinced.


"You need to keep the White Tanks the White Tanks," Surprise resident Paula Forster said. "A lot of people go there to hike and it should stay that way, it should be undisturbed. But there's lots of land that can be built on."


Forster, who has lived in Surprise for 18 years, has seen plans for a resort, shopping malls and stores that have not come to fruition.


"It can be done correctly, but they need to get busy doing it," Forster said. "We have a lot of visitors and grandchildren that come, this would do so much more to bring in more people."


Another resident questioned whether the city could draw a developer to build a resort. 


"I like to say our city is like a teenager, it's progressive and great about a lot of things, but there's a lot of things we need to shore up before a resort comes to Surprise," said Eric Cultum, who is running for City Council. He said he's not sure developers yet see the city's potential.  


The Wigwam Resort in Litchfield Park opened in 1929. (Photo: The Republic)

The Valley has more than 65,000 guest rooms at more than 470 hotels and more than 40 resort properties, according to Visit Phoenix.


Phoenix has nine resorts; Scottsdale has 19.


The West Valley has two resort-style properties: the historic Wigwam Resort in Litchfield Park and Cibola Vista Resort &amp; Spa in north Peoria.


Revenue for Arizona's luxury hotels and resorts was up 4.1 percent in 2017, which was significantly faster growth than the U.S. average at 1.9 percent, according to the Arizona Office of Tourism. 


Over the past five years, coming out of recession-era lows, revenue at Arizona's luxury resorts and hotels grew by 52 percent between 2012-17, much faster than the U.S. average rate of 43 percent.


The improved market means growing options, including a Great Wolf Resorts with an indoor water park planned on the Salt River Reservation near Scottsdale in early 2019 and a Ritz-Carlton Paradise Valley Resort expected to open in March 2019.


Reach the reporter at lorraine.longhi@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @lolonghi.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE ON HOTELS:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 


 
