


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton will step down as the leader of the nation's fifth largest city on May 29 to run for Congress.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton gave his final State of the City address on March 6, 2018. During his speech, he discussed the city's triumphs, including transit, social justice and sustainability.
    

Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton waves during the Phoenix Pride Parade in Phoenix April 8, 2018.
(Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton will step down as the leader of the nation's fifth largest city at noon on May 29 to run for Congress.


Stanton announced his bid for Congressional District 9 in October to run for the seat Democratic Congresswoman Kyrsten Sinema will vacate to run for U.S. Senate, but he's stayed quiet about his resignation plans until now.


State law requires elected officials to step down from their positions before turning in election petitions for a different office. Stanton's petitions are due May 30.


Stanton, a Democrat, served two terms as a councilman in Phoenix District 6 before he was elected mayor for the first time in 2011. 


"Serving the people of Phoenix, both as a member of City Council and as mayor, has been a great honor for my family and me. I have confidence that with the ongoing leadership of the Phoenix City Council and City Manager Ed Zuercher, Phoenix will continue on its positive path," Stanton said in his resignation letter to City Clerk Cris Meyer.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Stanton's departure will trigger a Nov. 6 special election to fill the mayoral post, with a runoff election likely in March.


Candidates who want to replace Stanton have to declare in the 10 days following his resignation.


So far, DemocraticCity Council members Daniel Valenzuela and Kate Gallego, along with Republican Moses Sanchez, Libertarian Nicholas Sarwark and independentMichael Lafferty have announced they will run for the city's top spot.


Vice Mayor Thelda Williams will serve as mayor at least until the council can vote on an interim mayor, though City Hall insiders speculate the council will select Williams to serve until a new mayor is elected.


Valenzuela and Gallego will have to step down from their council seats before Aug. 8, the deadline for filing official election paperwork with the city. 


When they leave, the remaining council members will appoint interim council members until new council members are elected. 


If Gallego and Valenzuela step down before June 19, the council election would also be Nov. 6. If they step down after that, the council election would be in March.


READ MORE:
