


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Phoenix elementary school crossing guard and another suspect were arrested on suspicion of molesting a 7-year-old girl for more than a year.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Arizona’s child-welfare agency says to call the child-abuse hotline if you reasonably believe that a child has been “abused, neglected, exploited or abandoned.”
    Wochit

Marisa Claire
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office)

Corrections &amp; clarifications: An earlier version of this story misidentified the school district that employed one of the suspects. It is the Deer Valley Unified School District.  


A Phoenix elementary school crossing guard was one of two people arrested on suspicion of molesting a young girl for more than a year, Maricopa County court documents revealed.


Marisa Marie Claire, 36, was employed as a crossing guard at Esparanza Elementary School, in the Deer Valley Unified School District, when arrested last Friday, records say.


Claire, along with Matthew Kevin Dunlap, 40, were identified in videos obtained by police that showed the molestation of a 7-year-old girl, court records show.


Claire and Dunlap reside together, court records show. She had been employed as a crossing guard at Esparanza Elementary, 251 W. Mohawk Lane, since April, according to a district official.


Matthew Dunlap (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office)

Dunlap admitted to police that he and Claire engaged in sex acts with a 7-year old girl twice a week for a year, records state.


Videos of the acts were recorded and stored on Dunlap's iCloud account, where police retrieved them after obtaining a warrant, court records show.


Claire faces two counts of sexual conduct with a minor, one count of molestation of a child and two counts of sexual exploitation of a minor.


Dunlap was charged with eight counts of sexual conduct with minor, 12 counts of sexual exploitation of a minor and one count of molestation of a child, court records show.


The school's principal, Melissa Sepuka, sent a letter to parents saying none of the alleged crimes took place on campus.


“Dear Esperanza Parent/Guardian, There is some information that we feel is important to share with you as we work together to ensure a safe and secure school community," the letter reads. "Esperanza School administrators became aware that police are investigating a cross-walk guard and monitor who has worked at the school since April. This staff member is not currently working on campus. She was arrested for an alleged crime involving a minor. It is important to point out that the alleged crime did not occur on our campus.  DVUSD Human Resources is following all legal procedures during this investigation. This staff member passed all of the required background checks during the hiring process. We do not have any additional information at this time.  The safety of our students remains a top priority for Esperanza Elementary and the Deer Valley Unified School District.”


READ MORE:
