


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Here's what you need to know about the women's marches in Phoenix, Flagstaff, Sedona, Prescott, Payson, Ajo and Nogales.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Denise Cossey, of Phoenix, left, and Peggy Christoff, of Anthem, cheer during an equal rights march at the Arizona State Capitol on January 21, 2017. The rally was timed to show solidarity with a Women's march taking place Washington, D.C., a day after Donald Trump was sworn in as president.
(Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

A year ago Sunday, at least 36,000 people marched in downtown Phoenix, Tucson and Flagstaff, joining hundreds of thousands across the country in protest after President Donald Trump's first day in office.


Hundreds of anniversary marches and rallies are planned across the U.S. this weekend, including at least seven in Arizona cities and towns. 


Phoenix Police Department told The Arizona Republic the expected crowd size for the Phoenix event is 20,000, the same number that showed up last year. 


"It was just a protest last time," Phoenix march organizer Eva Burch said. "Now it’s a movement. It’s something they can be a part of not just in a day but something they can take in the months coming up and be an active and engaged member of this community."


Burch and Murphy Bannerman helped organize the Phoenix march last year and are among the organizers for the Sunday march. 


“"This year, we have an opportunity to make a meaningful impact in 2018 elections. Last year, we discovered how much energy was waiting and willing to be harnessed in the community, and I felt like this year we had an obligation to tap into that and give people something to do."”


"A shortfall we had last year is the groups that are the most hurt by the policies of the Trump administration were not represented in our organizers. That changed this year," Burch said. 


This year, at least seven women are involved in organizing the Phoenix march, including women who are black, Native American, Latina and LGBT. 


They are organizing breakout meetings before the march for specific communities. For example, Bannerman, who is black, is also one of the organizers of the "March for Black Women to The Women's March Phoenix," which will meet in the Wesley Bolin Plaza at 9 a.m. before the larger march begins at 10 a.m.


Navajo activist Nalene Gene and Eve Reyes-Aguirre, who is runing for U.S. Senate as a member of the Green Party, will host the "Honoring Indigenous Women Leading The Women's March," which will meet the Capitol's south lawn at 9:40 a.m. 


Social worker Imelda Ojeda will be one of the hosts of "Mujeres En La Lucha at The Women's March Phoenix." It is gathering at 10 a.m. near the Arizona Capitol Museum, on the Capitol grounds.


"Over the last year, these are groups that have directly been attacked, so there is an emphasis to really show support and make sure there is space for them at this march," Bannerman said.


Bannerman and Burch said organizers were surprised by the turnout last year, and this year they have bigger plans. 


"This year, we have an opportunity to make a meaningful impact in 2018 elections," Burch said. "Last year, we discovered how much energy was waiting and willing to be harnessed in the community, and I felt like this year we had an obligation to tap into that and give people something to do."


At least 75 organizations and political candidates or campaigns will have tables set up at the event, looking for people to sign petitions, become volunteers, or register to vote, Burch said. 


"I think a lot of people don’t even know what district they belong to; they don’t know where they would go to register to vote;  they don’t know how to volunteer time or find a candidate, and this a one-stop shop for all of this," Burch said. 


As for logistics, this time the march route is longer to prevent people at the front of the line finishing the march before others have started. There also will be more food vendors, more portable bathrooms and a bigger sound system so that all attendees can hear the speakers. 


Scheduled speakers at the Phoenix event include: State Reps. Athena Salman, D-Tempe, and Wenona Benally, D-Window Rock, Planned Parenthood Arizona Vice President Jodi Liggett, Balsz School District Governing Board member Channel Powe, Mi Familia Vota coordinator Jessica Rubio, transgender activist Juli Myers, disability-rights activist Jennifer Longdon, and Laila Ikram of the Council on American and Islamic Relations.


Phoenix


Phoenix police spokeswoman Det. Marianne Ramirez said the two-mile march will begin at the Arizona State Capitol, head southbound on 17th Avenue to Jefferson Street, turn eastbound to 8th Avenue, turn northbound to Washington Street, turn westbound to 17th Avenue and end back at the Capitol.


Organizers said they were not releasing the exact route in advance "due to safety."


Police will close the march route to vehicles by 10:30 a.m. on Sunday, Jan. 21. The march is scheduled to begin at 11 a.m. and roads should be reopened by 1 p.m. 


There is limited parking near the Capitol. Those taking the light rail should exit at the stops at Van Buren and Central or 1st avenues. Organizers also suggest using the #3 Van Buren Bus, exiting at 17th Avenue and walking south to the Capitol. 


Flagstaff


The "March for Love 2.0/Women’s March" will meet at 1 p.m. at Flagstaff City Hall.


Sedona


The "Women's March Sedona" will start at 10 a.m. Saturday at Creative Gateways, 45 Birch Blvd., and march to Vino di Sedona, 2575 State Route 89A. 


Prescott


The "Women’s March on Prescott" will begin noon Saturday at Courthouse Plaza in downtown Prescott.


Payson


"Marching in Sisterly Solidarity" will begin at 10 a.m. Saturday at 513 S. Beeline Highway, Payson.


Nogales


The "Women’s March Nogales" will begin at 2 p.m. Saturday at organizer Christine Cortland’s house, 344 W. Noon St., and proceed to International Street near the U.S.-Mexico border. 


Ajo


The "Power to the Polls March in Ajo" will begin 1 p.m. Sunday in Ajo Plaza.  


READ MORE: My Turn: Arizonans will fight for Planned Parenthood


Other women marched first and that's why so many marched again


Arizona's 'Fab Five': Where are the women now?


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.