


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In Arizona, school choice can have different meanings from one neighborhood to another and, sometimes, from one family to the next.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Charter school enrollment is growing in Arizona, but what's the difference between a charter and your neighborhood district school? azcentral.com
    Wochit

Emanuel Cano attended Western School of Science and Technology. He plans to go on to college in fall 2018.
(Photo: Courtesy of Jake Goodrick)

Four years ago, as an eighth-grader at Pueblo del Sol Middle School in Maryvale, Emanuel Caro had an important decision to make.


He would be entering high school and, under Arizona's school-choice laws, was in a unique position to choose which public district or charter school to attend.


This was not a simple decision: His mother did not speak English, so he had to translate every conversation and form for her. She also did not understand the public-school system well — and he did not, either.


"Since I was little, I always wanted to go to college," Caro said.


But he wasn't sure how to get there. 


The educational philosophy in Arizona revolves around the concept of school choice. But choice can have different meanings, possibilities and applications from one neighborhood to another and, sometimes, from one family to the next.


“It (college) was a thing that I definitely wanted to do, but I wasn’t very sure if I was able.”


After moving several times back and forth from Mexico with his family, Caro had lived for the past few years in a West Phoenix neighborhood that is home to many immigrant families like his.


It's within the Phoenix Union High School District. According to its boundaries, Caro should have attended Maryvale High School — which has a C letter grade based on state rankings.


Open enrollment laws allow students to enroll in district schools outside their boundaries. Caro's other nearby options also have C grades.


And then one of Caro's teachers suggested something Caro and his family hadn't considered: Charter school.


Caro was born in Mexico and attended preschool there, the first leg of an educational journey that has taken him across two countries, three cities and eight different school systems. 


As Caro prepared to begin kindergarten, his father decided to close the butcher shop he owned and move to the United States with his wife and three children. They first settled in Los Angeles, which they found too expensive.


They then came to Phoenix, which was more affordable and closer to the rest of their family in Mexico. 


When Caro was in third grade and his fourth different school, his family packed up again and returned to Mexico. 


Besides the constant change of schools, there was also the change of language — from learning in Spanish to learning in English and then back to learning in Spanish. 


“To understand something new… I had to translate it to Spanish,” Caro said. “It was difficult. For me, I had to learn first English or first Spanish then translate it to the English or Spanish.”


Halfway through fifth grade, he and his family made their final move across the border, back to Phoenix. 


READ MORE: Charter enrollment policies changed after report finds 'illegal' practices


“I was entering a school at which I didn’t know anyone at all, and like, I was basically separated. I wouldn’t talk to anyone. I was just very isolated,” he said. 


His family and teachers supported him as he readjusted. For family nights, his parents would choose a movie in English rather than Spanish to watch together, so the whole family could become familiar with the idiom and cadence of the language in their new country. 


With the assurance that his family had found its home in Maryvale, Caro grew more comfortable with his schooling and his English. He knew he was there to stay. 


“As soon as we crossed, my dad said, we’re gonna stay for a long time,” he said.


Arizona law allows for open school enrollment, which enables any student in the state to apply for admission to any public school with available space.


The state was also among the early adopters of free public charter schools.


In theory, the system is set up to help students who live within attendance boundaries of under-performing schools to transfer into higher-rated schools. 


That is not how it always plays out. 


The higher-performing district schools are often already full, as are many of the highly-rated charter schools. Attending an out-of-boundary school also poses transportation challenges, particularly for lower-income families that may not have flexible work schedules or a vehicle to drop off and pick up students themselves.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

A recent report by the American Civil Liberties Union of Arizona found that more than half of 471 charter schools inspected had policies or materials that excluded or deterred students with disabilities, low test scores, behavior problems, from lower-income families or with parents without legal status. 


Some schools require application essays, mandate that parents volunteer or make a monetary donation in lieu of volunteering, or do not provide enrollment documents in Spanish.


The findings suggest that underserved populations, including children of immigrants and low-income students, are especially disadvantaged when it comes to educational options.


“I think in many ways, access to charter schools in Arizona is purposefully opaque,” said Steve Kilar, the communications director of the ACLU of Arizona. “They don’t make it easy to understand that these are public schools that are available to everyone.”


Critics say the report unfairly targeted charter schools. They argued that district schools also make mistakes when it comes to enrollment policies and manuals. 


The report has resulted in documentation and policy changes at nearly 100 charter schools in six months. The Arizona Board for Charter Schools — which oversees the publicly funded schools — has also revised its review process.


Both the Arizona Charter Schools Association and state board have issued guidelines to help schools develop enrollment documents and policies. 


As he was finishing eighth grade, Jason Catanese, Caro's eighth-grade math teacher, told Caro about Western School of Science and Technology. It was billing itself as a solution to the dearth of high-performing schools in Maryvale. 


“Maryvale has 75,000 kids. It’s the largest neighborhood in the city of Phoenix. One of the largest concentrations of Latino youth in the country, and yet, not one single A-rated high school,” said Peter Boyle, Western's founding director.


Not even his school. 


Western’s B-rating is higher than the other high schools in Maryvale, but not as high as its administrators hope it will eventually end up. 


Catanese thought Caro — the quiet and respectful young student with eyes that always attend, the boy whom he had coached on the middle school soccer team — would be an ideal fit.


“He was a student that was very dedicated,” Catanese said. “I realized that for him, education was very important.”


READ MORE: Basis attributes success to flexibility of Arizona charter school laws


Transferring to a new school would be hard enough. With this option, Caro would have to put his faith in a school that was unproven academically. But he had already been in a lot of schools, in both Mexico and the United States, so he approached the idea with an open mind.
 
Caro and his mother met with Catanese to discuss the new school. Catanese told them about the opportunities he felt it could provide. Smaller class sizes would give Caro a better chance to stand out, compared to the larger classes in the district high schools.


“My mom was present… and I was translating. And he was just telling me, like, how it was a new school, with new teachers, with new ideas, with STEM building activities that will push you towards college,” Caro said.  


Although Caro always hoped to attend college, no one in his family had ever gone on to college before. It was something he didn’t know much about. 


“It (college) was a thing that I definitely wanted to do, but I wasn’t very sure if I was able,” he said.  


Caro translated his teacher’s English words to Spanish for his mother, and then translated her words to his teacher. He was the link between two adults who were debating a choice that could define the next four years of schooling and impact the rest of his life. 


His teacher’s words eventually won over Caro and his mother.


In the fall of 2014, Caro, his new classmates and their new teachers began their first year together at Western.


Caro benefited from the smaller class sizes and opportunities to participate in extracurricular activities at Western. 


“Charter schools are smaller, so you get to know your teachers more. They sort of push you towards success,” he said. 


He played baseball and soccer, and served on the student council — opportunities that Caro thinks would have been less accessible at a larger school. In addition to his part-time job as a cashier, he added work experience by interning in his school’s office. 


“I don’t think I would have been involved (at a district school),” Caro said. “Maybe just soccer, and that’s about it.” 


READ MORE: Our View: How Arizona's standard on charter school finances cheats you


But the new charter also had some down sides for Caro.


He said that his school lacked the camaraderie and school spirit of some larger high schools. 


Also, the school offered online classes in place of traditional in-person classes for some courses. He found that especially challenging for subjects such as math. 


“I struggle with math, and having to take it online without a teacher, like, in the presence of the classroom, it was just harder for me to learn," he said. "Online classes were the thing that I didn’t like there."


Caro graduated this spring as part of his school’s first graduating class. He said he finished his high school career prepared to continue his education at a university this fall. 


Caro's educational voyage across borders and between cities isn’t quite the norm. Finding a stable home, as his family did years ago, didn’t necessarily equate to settling into a stable school situation for him.


With open school enrollment in Arizona and underperforming district schools all around, switching schools didn’t end when switching addresses did. 


Pushed by his teachers and counselors, Caro made getting in to college after high school a priority.



    Higher education reporter Anne Ryman of The Arizona Republic gives five tips to find free money for college. Hannah Gaber/azcentral.com
    

Western organizes college trips at the end of each year, where the school takes students on college visits. Through those visits, Caro toured universities in Arizona, California, Texas and New Mexico, making the vision of college he'd held since a child feel more real.  


“There were several teachers that were very innovative and supportive to push you,” Caro said of his teachers at Western. "They were trying to get you ready for college.”


This fall, he plans to attend Grand Canyon University where he would like to study communications and advance towards his dream of working in sports media. 


 “I see myself in college now," he said. 


READ MORE: 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.