


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Four students also face charges in connection with threat against school in Gila County.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Gila County
(Photo: azcentral.com)

A Globe middle-school principal has resigned from her job and is facing a criminal charge after she learned of a potential school threat to students' safety and didn't immediately notify authorities, Globe police and the school district superintendent said.


Superintendent Jerry Jennex said in a letter to parents posted Monday on the Globe Unified School District Facebook page and website that four students also are facing charges in connection with the threat.


The principal, who was identified as a school administrator in the superintendent's letter, worked in the High Desert Middle School in Globe, a mining town about 90 miles east of Phoenix.


The plan, according to the letter, involved a map, a homemade bomb and guns. Police and the school district didn't specify how the plan was to be carried out.


The incident started this past Thursday when a student learned of threat and told his parents, who reported it to police. In the course of the police investigation, officers learned the principal knew about the threat the day before and didn't notify the police.


The four students face charges of interference with or disruption of an educational institution and terrorist threats, police said. The principal could face an endangerment charge, police said.


The Gila County Attorney's Office, which will ultimately decide on the charges, didn't return a phone call from The Arizona Republic seeking comment. Neither police nor the district confirmed the principal's identity.


The principal's resignation comes as schools nationwide have been on heightened alert because of mass shootings on campuses, including one Feb. 14 in Parkland, Florida, in which a gunman killed 17 people at a high school.


"This incident has brought to light the fact that we need to make sure that staff does not become complacent and that all of our safety protocols are updated," Jennex said in the letter, posted Monday.


“We ask that you continue to be our partners in minimizing violence in schools by reporting anything that you see or hear to administration and police.”


Jennex, who didn't return a phone call from The Republic seeking more details on the plan, said in the letter that the Globe Police Department has so far arrested four students in connection with the threat.


The superintendent said the school district had requested from city officials an officer to work on campus. But, he added, because of budget issues, the district's request hasn't been fulfilled.  


Following this incident, administrators plan to review safety protocol at the school district's three campuses, he said. He added that the district has posted a document on its website and Facebook page with tips for parents and teachers on how to talk to students about violence.


Students will also see posters with this message: "See it, Hear it, Stop it ... Say Something." The message seeks to encourage students to report to a school administrator or police if they see anything that could harm students.


Schools' focus on reviewing or revamping safety protocols after mass shootings come with reasons. They worry students who are trying to take advantage of the publicity by creating a hoax or with genuine intentions may want to copycat a mass shooting.


In Globe, Jennex said the district is trying to clamp down on students creating hoaxes or threats. 


"We will be vigilant in addressing any concerns that we see or hear," he said in the letter. "We ask that you continue to be our partners in minimizing violence in schools by reporting anything that you see or hear to administration and police."


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.