


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

After receiving an act of kindness, parent Rigo Gonzalez launched a GoFundMe to pay off all student lunch debt in Deer Valley Unified School District.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Students get lunch on Jan. 12, 2018, at Sonoran Foothills School in Phoenix.
(Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

A Phoenix dad, prompted by an act of kindness towards him, is trying to raise $48,000 to pay off student meal debt in the Deer Valley Unified School District.


Rigo Gonzalez, 33, launched a GoFundMe campaign to help parents who struggle to come up with money for school meals, which range from $1.25 to $3 for the basic meal.


School districts around the country vary in how they handle students in the lunch line without money, according to a 2014 U.S. Department of Agriculture report. Some offer one free meal per week, while others offer alternatives such as a cold sandwich. Critics say some practices can humiliate students. State Sen. Martin Quezada, D-Phoenix, has introduced a bill that he says would ban "lunch shaming."


In Deer Valley, which educates nearly 34,000 students across Phoenix, Glendale, Peoria, Surprise, El Mirage, Anthem and New River, the district allows students to run a tab, spokeswoman Monica Allread said. When debt accrues, school officials contact parents through written memos, emails and phone calls, she said.


"When contacting families regarding money owed, we always remind them that they can apply for free and reduced price meals and share the information on how to do so," Allread said.


District policy allows for the use of a debt collection agency, but Allread said Deer Valley has never done that. Instead, cafeteria managers work out a payment plan with families.


Nearly 30 percent of Deer Valley students are enrolled in the free and reduced meal program. The majority of the district's meal debt is from students who are not enrolled in the federal program, according to district figures.


Of the 5,253 students who had negative balances on their meal accounts as of Thursday, about 18 percent — or 940 students — owed $1 or less.


The largest debt is of $259.


Gonzalez committed to fundraising for the meal debt, thinking it would be around $7,000. He reached out to a school administrator, and was shocked to learn the amount was more than six times that.


"Maybe I bit off more than I could chew," Gonzalez said. "But if there’s enough interest, I want to get the district debt free by the end of the school year."


As of Friday, he had raised nearly $1,800.


Students get lunch on Jan. 12, 2018, at Sonoran Foothills School in Phoenix. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

Gonzalez, who works as an office clerk and has two children in the district, said he doesn't consider himself the philanthropic type or a savvy fundraiser. But an act of kindness from the community at his children's school inspired him to pay it forward.


The day before winter break, Gonzalez received a call from the principal at Sonoran Foothills School asking him to meet. He went to the school in north Phoenix, and the principal handed him an envelope.


Inside was about $300 in Fry's gift cards and some cash.


Principal Sharon Matt had asked the school's staff and parents to donate to a couple of anonymous families in need. Strangers chipped in. Gonzalez didn't know he was one of the families in mind.


“I don’t think families should have to worry on how they are going to pay for school lunches.”


"It was a great gesture; it resonated with me," Gonzalez said. "I wanted to pay it forward."


Gonzalez stayed up that night thinking about which way would be best, he said.


Last school year, his family qualified for free meals. This year, his two children are on the reduced-price program. Gonzalez said he understands how lunch costs can pile up, and "extenuating circumstances" like a looming electricity disconnection notice or emergency medical bills can lead parents to defer payments for school meals.


He settled on his plan.


"I don’t think families should have to worry on how they are going to pay for school lunches," Gonzalez said. "I felt if that kind of generosity is alive in this area, the way I could pay it forward is to use that to other people’s advantage."


Matt, the principal, said it feels good to know a kind community act inspired Gonzalez to "carry on the goodwill."


She said the holiday donation to the school families is "what you do when you work with children. Everybody is watching out for the kids."


Students get lunch on Jan. 12, 2018, at Sonoran Foothills School in Phoenix. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

Meal debt at two other West Valley school districts were not nearly as high. The Arizona Republic checked with the Dysart Unified School District, which covers Surprise and El Mirage, and the Peoria Unified School District, which covers Glendale and Peoria.


Deer Valley:


Dysart:


Peoria:


*District figures from the week of Jan. 7.


READ MORE:


'School lunch shaming' should be banned, Arizona lawmaker says


Richest schools get richer in Arizona's results-based funding program


Arizona schools hired 1,035 underqualified teachers this school year


Seattle dad, GoFundMe campaign pay off school lunch debt


School lunch hacks parents will love


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
