


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A murder suspect was killed by fugitive-task-force officers in Mesa, in the second U.S. Marshals Service shooting of the day.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mesa police Sgt. Diana Williams talks about the March 2, 2018, police shooting of a man suspected of murdering a woman at a Mesa nail salon on Feb. 2, 2018. azcentral.com
    

Lindsey Eastridge was identified as the victim in a fatal salon stabbing on Feb. 2, 2018.
(Photo: Support of Family Lindsey Eastridge GoFundMe page)

A man suspected of murdering a woman in a Mesa nail salon last month was fatally shot by an officer Friday morning, Mesa police said.


The 36-year-old man, who was not immediately identified, had been under surveillance by police and a U.S. Marshals Service task force, officials said.


At about 11 a.m. Friday, two Mesa police officers approached the man when he was seen in the Monte Vista Village RV Resort, where he lived, near Baseline and Ellsworth roads, said Mesa police Sgt. Diana Williams.


When officers approached the man, they saw he was holding a knife, she said. Officers fired bean-bag rounds at him in an effort to get him to surrender, but the man charged at officers, Williams said.


One of the officers fired a service weapon at the man, Williams said. They attempted medical aid, but the man was pronounced dead at the scene, she said.


MORE: Police release image of suspect in fatal stabbing of nail-salon customer


Williams said police were following up on a tip from a resident who provided information about the man living at the mobile-home park. Williams declined to say how long he had been under surveillance.


David Gonzales, U.S. marshal for the District of Arizona, said Friday the Mesa officers had been working with a U.S. Marshals Service fugitive-apprehension task force in surveillance efforts on the man.


Earlier this week, the Mesa Police Department released images and surveillance video of a man they say walked into Premier Nails and Spa about 7:15 pm. on Feb. 2 and fatally stabbed 30-year-old Lindsey Eastridge as she was getting her nails done. The business is located near the RV resort.


MORE: Police: Person fatally stabbed at Mesa salon


Carla Webber and Gary Jones talk about their sister, Lindsey Eastridge. (Photo: Uriel Garcia/The Republic)

The victim's brother and sister, Gary Jones and Carla Webber, were at the shooting scene Friday.


“This allows, kind of, to hold somebody accountable for this,'' Jones said. "But if this is somebody with a mental illness, it’s hard to hold them accountable for their actions if they weren’t getting the right support system at home or whoever their caretaker might have been."


MORE: Police ID 30-year-old as woman fatally stabbed at Mesa nail salon


Even though the murder suspect no longer is at large, the family is continuing to deal with the pain, and changes, that have come with Lindsey's death, her siblings said. The woman is survived by her husband, two young sons, and two stepsons, in addition to other family members.


MPD is working an officer involved shooting in the area of 8865 E Baseline. All officers involved are ok. Media staging area will be just east of the location. pic.twitter.com/Ap7k6nhrZv

“I don’t want anybody to forget her,” Webber said. “I want everybody to know how an amazing person she was.”


Jones said his sister hosted family holidays.


“She planned Christmas, Thanksgiving, and recently it had been at her house. She had just recently bought a house in San Tan, so we’ve been doing a lot of the family functions at her house. And that was going to become the new tradition — going to her house instead of going to my parents’ house.”


He said the youngest of her children, along with several nieces and nephews, still are trying to understand what happened.


"All they know is that there was an accident and that she’s in heaven now and she’s looking down protecting over them,” Jones said. “She has a stepson who is old enough to get on the internet, and he knows what’s going on, and it’s been tough for him.”


The incident was one of three officer-involved shootings reported Friday morning in the Phoenix area. Another, also connected to the U.S. Marshals Service fugitive-apprehension task force, occurred in Glendale near 43rd and Olive avenues. An officer was said to be injured and the suspect was dead.


In the third incident, a special agent with Homeland Security Investigations shot and killed an armed suspect in a Whataburger parking lot near 90th Street and Shea Boulevard in Scottsdale.


The U.S. Marshals Service fugitive task force has two different teams, one in the East Valley and one in the West Valley. The East Valley task force consisted of officers from Chandler, Mesa, the Maricopa County Attorney's Office and the Arizona Department of Corrections.


MORE: Glendale officer seriously wounded in shooting; suspect dead


Homeland Security agent fatally shoots suspect in Scottsdale parking lot


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
