


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The manufacturer for Greenlight Distribution was sentenced following a lengthy investigation into a synthetic drug operation in Arizona.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Readers can send news tips to azcentral.com via the newspaper's social media channels, email or by calling the office.
    Wochit

Small jars of synthetic drug commonly nicknamed "Spice.''
(Photo: Michael Schennum, The Republic)

The former owner of a Phoenix company that manufactured and sold synthetic drugs was sentenced to 4 years in prison after pleading guilty to illegally selling the substances and money laundering, federal officials said.


Juan Mark Sayegh, 44, of Phoenix, was accused of manufacturing and selling "spice" and "bath salts," both synthetic drugs, through his business, Greenlight Distribution, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Arizona said Friday.


Sayegh pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute a controlled substance and conspiracy to commit money laundering, officials said.


In addition to the prison term, U.S. District Court Judge David G. Campbell ordered Sayegh to forfeit about $1.7 million in cash, real property, and other assets, officials said. 


MORE ON 'SPICE' AND 'BATH SALTS':


Sayegh was arrested in April 2016 and was among five named in a case that centered on the now-defunct Greenlight Distribution in Phoenix.


Authorities said in the two years it operated, from 2010-12,  the company made nearly $5 million by making and selling spice and bath salts, synthetic drugs often packaged in ways that indicate they are for other uses.


Bags of synthetic marijuana, commonly nicknamed "spice," packaged for sale at an Arizona smoke shop in 2010. (Photo: Michael Schennum/The Republic)

Greenlight distributed the drugs under the name "Mary Jane's Potpourri" and "Mary Jane's Private Reserve,'' the U.S. Attorney's Office said. They were actually spice or cannabiniod products. 


Other products, including “Go Fast Carpet Deodorizer” and “Quick Clean Carpet Deodorizer,” were synthetic cathinones, commonly known as bath salts.


The synthetic drugs were first manufactured with chemicals imported from China, which then were designed to be smoked or ingested to produce a high for consumers, officials said. 


The drugs were intentionally and falsely mislabeled as household products that were “not for human consumption” in order to circumvent federal consumer and drug laws. 


Greenlight ceased operation in July 2012, when the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration executed a search warrant at several locations associated with Greenlight and its employees. 


READ MORE:


 
