


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Arizona Challenger Space Center, which aims to inspire kids about space and technology, will set up temporarily at Metrocenter Mall in Phoenix.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The Arizona Challenger Space Center is moving from Peoria into temporary digs in the Metrocenter Mall in Phoenix.
(Photo: Republic file photo)

The Arizona Challenger Space Center is setting up temporary headquarters at Metrocenter Mall in Phoenix.


Visitors won't find the full museum the center had in Peoria, but the non-profit is renting 5,400 square feet of office and classroom space to continue education programs with area schools. The mall's owner, Carlyle Development Group, will provide space for the center's gift shop heading into the holiday season, said Beverly Swayman, the center's executive director.


The mall also provided storage for exhibits and artifacts, she said.


The new digs are temporary. Challenger is negotiating with Metrocenter, as well as the cities of Glendale and Surprise, for a larger, permanent home, Swayman said. 


The 28,000-square-foot Challenger Space Center opened in Peoria in 2000, one of numerous Challenger Centers that were developed around the world after the 1986 Challenger Space Shuttle disaster that killed five astronauts and two others, including teacher Christa McAuliffe. The centers aim to inspire children about space, science and technology. 


Sheila Pickett takes a photo of Robert McCall's 360-degree mural at the Arizona Challenger Space Center in Peoria. The center closed Aug. 5. (Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

The Peoria center closed Aug. 5 after years of struggling to pay its mortgage. The Peoria Unified School District acquired the building in a land-swap deal in mid-August. 


Swayman said the temporary space at Metrocenter allows the center to continue its education programs as it looks for a permanent solution. 


"This has to be a thoughtful process as we look to the future and what it will mean to the communities we have served all these years," she said in a written statement.


They hope to find a 30,000 square feet of space for classrooms, a lunch room, art exhibits and a space mission simulator.


“It is imperative for us to be in an accessible location in an area that is showing expansion possibilities," Swayman said in the statement.  


The center has set up a GoFundMe campaign to generate funds for their impending move to a new structure. Profits from the gift shop also will go toward the move, as well as student scholarships.


READ MORE: 


New Walmart opens at Metrocenter Mall in Phoenix


Phoenix's aging Metrocenter may get much-needed makeover


 
