


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The case of Douglas Haig, the Mesa ammo dealer connected to the October mass shooting in Vegas, is awaiting forensic reports from the government.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Douglas Haig talks on Jan. 30, 2018, about selling tracer ammunition to Las Vegas gunman Stephen Paddock. Michael Chow/azcentral.com
    

Douglas Haig, right, stands beside his attorney, Marc Victor, at a news conference Friday, Feb. 2, 2018, in Chandler, Ariz. Haig spoke about his experience selling ammunition to the gunman who killed 58 people and injured hundreds more in the Oct. 1, 2017, in Las Vegas shooting, the deadliest in modern U.S. history. Haig, a 55-year-old aerospace engineer who sold ammunition as a hobby for about 25 years, said he met Stephen Paddock at a Phoenix gun show in the weeks before the Oct. 1 shooting in Las Vegas that killed 58 people and injured hundreds more. (AP Photo/Brian Skoloff)
(Photo: Brian Skoloff, AP)

Douglas Haig, the part-time Mesa ammunition dealer accused of selling armor-piercing rounds used in last October's mass shooting in Las Vegas, remains in limbo as his attorney awaits forensic reports from government analysts.


Haig, 55, was due in U.S. District Court in Phoenix on May 21. But on Tuesday, a U.S. Magistrate Judge granted a continuance until June 21.


"The government's report is holding it up, said Haig's attorney, Marc Victor, referring to pending analysis of some of the ammunition rounds Haig allegedly sold to the shooter. And that analysis could affect what charges, if any, are eventually brought against Haig.


A criminal complaint was sworn against him in Las Vegas in February, charging him with conspiracy to manufacture and sell armor-piercing ammunition. 


That charge stemmed from the Oct. 1 mass murder in Las Vegas, when Stephen Paddock, 64, opened fire from a high-rise hotel on a crowd attending a country music festival, killing 59 people and wounding more than 800. Paddock killed himself before he could be arrested.


RELATED: Allhands: Let's clarify why ammo dealer Douglas Haig is in trouble


Investigators found Haig's name and address on a cardboard box in the hotel room and on follow-up, learned that Paddock had met Haig at gun shows in Las Vegas and Phoenix. The investigators determined that Paddock bought more than 600 incendiary and armor-plated rounds from Haig and that some bore tool marks suggesting that Haig had reloaded them himself.


Haig has not yet been indicted by a grand jury on any counts, and his case is still in preliminary stages. The case file is very thin, essentially consisting of the criminal complaint and several motions and orders to continue.


The conspiracy, in effect, is a placeholder, and Haig could conceivably be charged with other counts, again depending on what evidence is produced by the prosecution.


In his uncontested motion to continue, Victor stated, "The parties are still awaiting the results of further forensic examinations and reports, which bear great significance to the future hearings scheduled in this case, and the potential for a pre-indictment resolution. The Government informs counsel that supplemental testing has been conducted and those results are not yet available. Furthermore, after these reports are received, the parties will require additional time to prepare for the scheduled hearing or conclude a pre-indictment resolution. The parties expect this to be the last request for a continuance in this matter."


Victor hedged on whether he would seek a plea agreement for Haig.


"I have not yet been shown anything yet that would lead me to believe that Mr. Haig did anything wrong," he said. "I don't know what the forensic report says."


The case remains under the jurisdiction of the U.S. District Court in Las Vegas and will be tried by the Office of the U.S. Attorney for the District of Nevada. The status hearings have been scheduled for the Phoenix court because Haig lives in Arizona.


If the case goes to trial, Victor said, he would likely file a motion to have the case transferred to Phoenix.


RELATED: 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
