


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Great Hearts' Teleos Preparatory Academy says it will review the decision, which the ACLU said targets children of color.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Charter school enrollment is growing in Arizona, but what's the difference between a charter and your neighborhood district school? azcentral.com
    Wochit

Nasir Anderson was sent home from Teleos Preparatory Academy on picture day, Jan. 31, 2018, for wearing braids.
(Photo: Brittany Anderson/Special for The Republic)

A few days before picture day, Brittany Anderson took her son to get his hair rebraided so it would be as perfect as possible.


Nasir, 12, had been growing out his hair since August and wearing it in braids since October, in a style with two braids running from his forehead to the nape of his neck. 


When picture day came Jan. 31, within minutes of arriving at the Phoenix school, Nasir was sent to the office and then told to go home for breaking Teleos Preparatory Academy's dress code for wearing braids. 


"Mom, what did I do wrong?" Nasir asked Anderson on the phone as she headed to his school. She didn't know — she thought the Great Hearts Academies charter school's policy just required neatly-maintained hair. 


When Anderson arrived in the office, she challenged why her son was being sent home and said she was told the braids broke policy. But she said no one showed her the actual handbook.


Furious, she withdrew Nasir from the school and enrolled him elsewhere that day. 


She posted about the incident on Facebook, eventually drawing the attention of national media.


Anderson said she later found out that the family handbook for sixth through eighth grades prohibits boys from wearing "shaved heads, Mohawks, rat’s tails, pony tails, or braids."


Great Heart Academies, of which Teleos is part, released a statement that week defending the policy, adding that if parents don't agree with it, they can send their children to a different school. 


A week later, the school changed its tone.


Great Hearts' superintendent of its Arizona schools, Robert Wagner, issued a statement Wednesday saying officials will review the policy to be "sensitive to the cultural diversity we are proud to have in our academies" and that Nasir is welcome back at school without changing his hair. 


Student athletes' ability to wear a Navajo hair bun or other religious or cultural hair piece is protected under Arizona law. (Photo: Rick Johnson/AP)

Across the country, parents and advocates have drawn attention to school policies that disproportionately affect students of color and result in them missing class more often than their white peers. Others have criticized the fact that policies prohibiting braids or puffs indirectlytell black kids that their natural hair is unacceptable. 


The ACLU of Arizona released a statement Tuesday calling on Great Hearts "to eliminate grooming policies that target children of color."


"No child should be forced out of school because their hair violates an arbitrary policy that almost exclusively applies to children of color," ACLU of Arizona Executive Director Alessandra Soler said in the statement. "Great Hearts needs a wakeup call."


The Arizona Legislature in 2016 passed a law protecting student athletes who choose to wear a religious or cultural hair piece during games. That year, an Arizona Interscholastic Association referee had ordered several Flagstaff High School girls basketball players to remove the traditional Navajo hair buns before a game.


The law forbids a school district governing board, charter school or interscholastic athletic association from preventing a student from wearing religious or cultural accessories or hair pieces while participating in extracurricular or athletic activities, as long as it doesn't pose a safety issue.


Anderson said she and Nasir are mixed race, black and Hispanic, but she doesn't think this case is a racial issue. 


Brittany Anderson, Nasir's mother, says the school should have let her know earlier about its no-braids policy. (Photo: Brittany Anderson/Special for The Republic)

Instead, she's upset the school failed to communicate with her. She said there were plenty of opportunities to talk to her about his hair during parent-teacher conferences, but instead, the school's first move was to kick him out of class. 


"If they would have told me in the beginning of the year kids can’t have braids in their hair, then I would have cut it back. I don’t have a problem with uniform policy," Anderson said.


"It hurts to have your child ask you what did they do wrong that they have to leave school," she said. "That’s the part that troubles me the most, that (the school) made him feel like it was his problem."


Anderson said Nasir was pulled out of class on Teleos Prep's 100th day of school, which is the last day that determines how much state money the school will receive. She also said she won't be sending him back.


"The parent who signed their kid out prior to mine signed their kid out for the same exact reason," she said. "It’s not just my kid I’m doing this for."


READ MORE: 


Attorney's report adds more allegations against Scottsdale schools' ex-CFO


Tax documents of shuttered Goodyear charter school raise spending questions


Report: Some Arizona charter schools unlawfully exclude, deter students


School tells 9-year-old boy his hair is too long
