


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Marina Heights, a $928 million commercial development in Tempe, gets a pass on paying property taxes, courtesy of Arizona State University.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Marina Heights could generate millions of dollars for Tempe and its schools, but they don't see a dime because Arizona State University owns the land under those glitzy office buildings.
    Wochit

Marina Heights, along Tempe Town Lake, is the regional headquarters for State Farm Insurance.
(Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

You’re driving on Loop 202 toward Tempe and there they are, five sparkling glass and steel buildings nestled along Tempe Town Lake.


The complex, which houses the regional headquarters for State Farm Insurance, sold earlier this month for $928 million. It was the largest ever commercial real estate sale in the metro market, according to Business Real Estate Weekly.


So here’s quick quiz. Who do you think pays more in property taxes? Is it:


A.  You, with your 1,800 to 3,000 square foot house with a two- or three-car garage on a piece of land the size of a postage stamp.


Or B. The owners of this 2 million-plus-square-foot office complex with 8,300 parking spaces, housed in five buildings that range in height from six to 17 stories on 20 acres of prime lakeside land.


Clearly, the answer is obvious. Yep, it’s you.


I know this because Marina Heights, the state’s largest office development, pays no property taxes.


Zero, zilch. Not so much as a single solitary cent.


Arizona State University has hit upon a scheme that allows it to lease its land for major commercial development while maintaining the land’s tax-exempt status – a deal that produces a bonanza of profits for private investors at the expense of taxpayers. 


MORE: Office complex changing Tempe's economy, skyline


It’s a great deal for the developers who built the complex then deeded it over to ASU in order to lease it back. They’ll pay ASU a fraction of what they would have to pay if they had to put their development on the property tax rolls.


It’s a great deal for ASU. The university has created a revenue stream by essentially going into the commercial property business, channeling to ASU money that normally would go to K-12 schools and community colleges through property taxes.


But for the state, the community colleges and the property owners who live in Tempe – the ones who have to pay more because this massive development creates nothing in the way of taxes to support K-12 schools? Not so great.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The Arizona Tax Research Association is vowing to go to the Legislature to stop ASU from creating more of these sale-leaseback deals on the hundreds of other acres it owns on ASU's main, east and west campuses and near the Mayo Clinic in Phoenix.


“Until recently, universities have not aggressively used their tax-exempt status to become real-estate developers …,” ATRA President Kevin McCarthy told me.  “They are totally playing with other people’s money. It’s a complete win.”


ASU President Michael Crow says the K-12 schools and community colleges aren’t losing anything because the land is owned by the university and thus never has been on the tax rolls. He says it’s critical that universities find new revenue streams given slashed state funding.


“We have found a revenue source other than general taxation of the population,” he said. “We have found a new revenue source: The temporary use of some of our property to generate revenue for those things that we need to do to balance the operating budget and to advance the interests of the university.”


I suppose it’s all in your definition of the word “temporary.”


The Board of Regents rubber-stamped the sale-leaseback deal with Sunbelt Holdings Inc. and Ryan Cos., in 2013. 


For 99 years.


According to a preliminary analysis of the lease by the Joint Legislative Budget Committee, done at the request of a legislator, Sunbelt Holdings Inc. and Ryan Cos. paid $30.9 million up front to ASU for use of the land.


They pay nothing for the first eight years then pay ASU $4.8 million a year starting in year nine. They also must pay $400,000 to the city of Tempe every year – with $100,000 of that going to schools. JLBC estimates the city’s take jumps to $1.5 million in years 11 through 15 and after that, it’s unclear. They also must make payments to the Rio Salado Community Facilities District though it’s unclear how much those payments would be.  


JLBC estimates the Marina Heights owners would pay $9 million a year in property taxes if the land was on the tax rolls. The Tax Research Association disagrees. Given that land would be classified as class 1 commercial office space, ATRA estimates the taxes would be $12 million a year.


I can see why the office complex – which was completed earlier this year, reportedly for around $600 million – sold earlier this month for a record $928 million. (Houston-based Transwestern Investment Group and Phoenix-based Jerry Colangelo’s JDM Partners LLC bought it.)


Consider that the owners of the office complex will pay $13.6 million during the first 10 years, along with that $30.9 million up-front payment – almost all of it to ASU.


That's a killer deal for the investors when you consider that 10 years of property taxes would have cost them $90 million to $120 million.


The state, meanwhile, could have saved anywhere from $2.5 million to $3.45 million a year depending on whose estimate you use – money it now has to send to the Tempe Elementary and Tempe Union school districts because Marina Heights is not paying taxes to the schools.


The schools aren’t out anything as the state picks up that basic state aid and taxpayers in the school districts make up the rest – in this case, roughly $3 million – in the form of higher property taxes to cover bonds and overrides.


As for the other entities that rely on property taxes – the community colleges, the counties and the Central Arizona Water Conservation District – they’re just flat out of luck.


Crow says keeping this major commercial development off the tax rolls is entirely proper. The lease payments will go toward paying for renovations at Sun Devil Stadium, freeing up other money to be used for academic purposes. He says the Legislature, having slashed state funding to universities, gave ASU the authority to do the deal via the Athletic Facilities District.


“We’re taking all of our athletic facilities out of the operating budget of the university and freeing up those resources for the operations of the university," he said. "Then the facilities we need for the athletic programs are being financed by these temporary transactions."


Temporary transactions that last 99 years on property that is outside of the Athletic Facilities District.


And according to ATRA, properties inside the district still have to pay their share of taxes – the money is just diverted to the university to build and remodel sports facilities.


"State policy makers never decided that the universities would play in this space and be able to use their tax-exempt status in the manner that they woke up and decided they were doing," McCarthy said. "My guess is they were coached into this by some really good developers and lawyers around town.”


McCarthy says he'll be lobbying the Legislature to close what he calls a loophole in the law.


I imagine legislators will jump to do it. Many of them don’t much like the universities, which they consider hotbeds of liberal indoctrination. Where the state once funded $10,000 of a student's university education, it now pays only $5,500.


I’m sympathetic to the universities given the dramatic loss of funding and even more so to the students whose tuition has rocketed as a result.


I just can't figure out why that should translate into a bonanza for private developers.


MORE FROM ROBERTS:


Raise taxes for Arizona schools? Is there an alternative?


Kelli Ward is the next casualty in Steve Bannon's revolution


3 to watch in the race to replace Trent Franks


 
