


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Arizona and 47 other states have reached a $45 million settlement with PHH Mortgage Corp. for its handling of mortgage payments and foreclosure aid.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Forty-eight states, including Arizona, have reached a $45 million settlement with PHH Mortgage Corp.
(Photo: Associated Press)

More than 2,000 Arizona families are eligible for part of a $45 million settlement with PHH Mortgage Corp. for its handling of mortgage payments and foreclosure aid during the housing crash.


Forty-eight states, including Arizona, reached a settlement with the New Jersey-based mortgage lender and servicer. The settlement was announced Wednesday.


The deal resolves allegations that PHH charged borrowers unauthorized fees, failed to process requests for loan modifications and threatened homeowners with foreclosure while they were in a program to keep their houses, according to the settlement filed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia.


Homeowners foreclosed on by PHH between 2009 and 2012 qualify for at least $840 from the settlement. Borrowers who faced foreclosure by the lender but didn’t lose homes will receive a minimum of $285.


Homeowners eligible for money from the deal will be contacted by a settlement administrator, according to the Arizona Attorney General’s Office.


“Predatory mortgage servicing abuses put thousands of Arizona families into foreclosure,” Attorney General Mark Brnovich said in a statement. “Our settlement holds PHH accountable and requires new servicing standards to help ensure that PHH won't harm consumers again.”


Several big lenders and mortgage servicers, including Bank of America and HSBC, have been sued and reached settlements for bad mortgage practices during the housing crash.


In a statement, PPH said the $45 million settlement “is not an admission of liability or that we (the company) violated any applicable laws."


The settlement includes approximately $30 million in payments to 52,000 PHH borrowers nationwide.


READ MORE:


HOAs leading surge in Phoenix-area foreclosures


Phoenix ranks 2nd in U.S. for apartment evictions


Last Frank Lloyd Wright-designed home for sale


Skip the high-rise rental and go horizontal


5 ways Trump's tax plan may impact AZ housing


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.