


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In a flurry of tweets, Ducey outlined what his office said will be the basic components of his plan. Ducey said he is working on a bipartisan bill.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey
(Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

Gov. Doug Ducey said Thursday that his plan to improve school safety in Arizona could include tighter gun laws in several areas, a surprising move for a Republican governor in a red state. 


In a flurry of afternoon tweets, Ducey outlined what his office said will be the basic components of his plan. Ducey said he is working on a bipartisan bill to tackle the issue.


"We are building an aggressive plan that address all these issues around school safety," he tweeted. "Arizona can lead the nation in tackling this — and in a way that is non-partisan. We’ve done this on other issues, and we can do it again."


Ducey's posts came less than 24 hours after students from the group March for Our Lives Phoenix staged a dramatic sit-in outside his office.


They demanded stronger gun-control laws in the wake of the Parkland, Florida, school massacre that killed 17. Ducey didn't meet with the students, but has talked with other groups in recent weeks.


We are building an aggressive plan that address all these issues around school safety. Arizona can lead the nation in tackling this – and in a way that is non-partisan. We’ve done this on other issues, and we can do it again.

The governor's tweets didn't include specific details of his proposals.


Spokesman Patrick Ptak said the posts are a broad outline of Ducey's forthcoming plan, which could be released as early as Monday. He said the tweets were not a response to the sit-in that students staged Wednesday.


RELATED: Students hold sit-in at Gov. Doug Ducey's office to protest gun violence


“Beyond that, the next level of detail you’ll see is the proposal itself," Ptak said. “This is something that we’ve been working on for weeks now."



    Students protest against gun violence at the Arizona Capitol in Phoenix on March 14, 2018. Thomas Hawthorne/azcentral.com
    

Ducey tweeted about what could be the key element of his proposal: protections to keep guns out of the hands of mentally ill people.


"In the overwhelming majority of the deadliest mass shootings in the last 20 years, the shooter exhibited obvious signs of being a threat," he tweeted. "Why not have laws and a process to restrict these individuals from possessing or obtaining guns?"


Alongside the post, Ducey added a link to a CNN article with a picture of Nikolas Cruz, who is accused in the Parkland shooting and who was able to buy an AR-15 rifle despite a long history of disturbing behavior.


In the overwhelming majority of the deadliest mass shootings in the last 20 years, the shooter exhibited obvious signs of being a threat. Why not have laws and a process to restrict these individuals from possessing or obtaining guns? https://t.co/0DMu7BAVhJ

The governor has worked on the issue for weeks following the Parkland shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, which launched a national movement for stronger gun-control laws.


RELATED: With backing of Ducey, Arizona could be on verge of stricter gun laws


When asked on Feb. 27 by The Arizona Republic if he intended to act on gun-safety measures in the wake of the shooting, Ducey said he was already meeting with school superintendents, parents and law-enforcement officials to prepare legislation.


He had just returned from a conference of the National Governors Association, where gun regulations and school safety were discussed. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Ducey told The Republic his administration had examined larger gun-related tragedies that have happened over the past several years across the U.S. He said aides were assessing what, if anything, state government could have done to prevent the shootings.


He suggested that courts should be able to issue a type of temporary order to prevent unhinged individuals from having guns.


Florida lawmakers passed a similar law in the wake of the Parkland shooting.


RELATED: Arizona student walkout on gun violence turns to sit-in at governor's office


"We have situations in domestic violence where there can be a temporary restraining order on an individual," Ducey said. "Why shouldn’t one of these individuals not have that type of order on them so that they don’t have access to a gun?"


The governor, who is running for re-election this year, said he wants schools to be as safe as possible.


"So part of that is the background checks, the loopholes, addressing mental health," he said. "It's also the idea of the (school) resource officer. 


"Then there's things around the architecture of the school — single point of entry — (and) what's on the background check?"


Let’s learn from tragedies in other states. We need a centralized tip line to report – and actually investigate – concerns of school safety so they don’t fall through the cracks. AZ also needs more funding &amp; enhanced training for school resource officers. https://t.co/4xe2rhzgNh

Ducey's office said his plan is based on feedback from meetings with parents, teachers, students on his youth council, prosecutors, law enforcement, mental-health experts and others.


The governor also had multiple meetings with Democratic and Republican leaders in the state Legislature.


Ducey tweeted that seven priorities emerged from his meetings:



    Students chant, "Shame on Ducey!" in protest at Gov. Doug Ducey's office in Phoenix on March 14, 2018. Rob Schumacher/azcentral.com
    

One element of the governor's proposal drew immediate opposition from student organizers with March for Our Lives: school-resource officers.


"We don't want guns on campus," March for Our Lives Phoenix tweeted in response. "We want counselors and psychologists. Most school shootings in Arizona are suicides  — (a school-resource officer) will not stop me from blowing my brains out in the bathroom."


WE DONT WANT GUNS ON CAMPUS. no SROsno armed teachersWe want counselors and psychologists Most school shootings in Arizona are suicides - an SRO will not stop me from blowing my brains out in the bathroom. https://t.co/hqxgnzWyZ5

Some Democrats in the Legislature also are likely to oppose gun legislation that includes more school-resource officers.


Last week, a coalition of progressive Arizona groups sent the Legislature a letter stating they would fight any plan that includes more officers. They argue that more guns in schools increases the likelihood of accidents or violence.


"In short: Arizona’s schools need fewer guns and more resources," the letter states.


Ducey's foray into the gun-control issue is a significant development for a Republican governor in Arizona, where the conservative Legislature typically pushes to loosen gun laws.


The National Rifle Association, the country's most visible and powerful gun-right lobbying organization, did not respond to a request for comment Thursday evening.


Efforts to enact new gun restrictions have fallen flat in the Legislature for years.


RELATED: Viacom paused TV programming in support of student walkouts


This year, not one of the 10 gun-related bills Democrats sponsored — including one similar to Ducey's proposal to stop mentally ill people from possessing guns — has received a public hearing.


Assistant Senate Minority Leader Steve Farley, D-Tucson, responded to Ducey's tweets with a barb. Farley is also running for governor this year.


"You have to do more than check off a box," he tweeted in response. "You have to actually implement real policy. No proposal will work unless we enforce background checks on all gun sales."


.@dougducey You have to do more than check off a box. You have to actually implement real policy. No proposal will work unless we enforce background checks on ALL gun sales. That's what your constituents are telling you. #AZGOVhttps://t.co/lAWxmoiMu1

RELATED:Here's a look at 17 school threats we've reported on at AZ schools since Parkland


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
