


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police said the threat "contained wording" about a shooting at the high school.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Arizona schools have had more than 20 threats since the Parkland, Florida, school shooting on Feb. 14, 2018.
(Photo: The Republic)

A 16-year-old Casa Grande High School student was arrested Thursday after police said he posted a threatening message to SnapChat.


Thomas Anderson, a public information officer for the Casa Grande Police Department, said the FBI told the department about the social media post made by a male student on SnapChat on Feb. 28.


The threat "contained wording" about a shooting at the school, according to Anderson.


The teen was arrested at his home and booked into the Pinal County Juvenile Detention Center Thursday.


Anderson said he is facing a charge of threats and intimidation. The case is currently being reviewed by the Pinal County Attorney's Office. 


The Casa Grande Union High School District did not immediately respond to a request for comment Friday morning.


This is the 19th threat incident azcentral has reported on since a mass shooting at a high school in Parkland, Florida last month. 


Most of the threats occurred at schools in the Phoenix area. Many of them were posted on social media.Officials said no one has been injured in any of the incidents. 


Last week, a Chandler High school student was arrested on suspicion of plotting to use explosives and firearms, officials said.


READ MORE:


'We need to listen to our kids': Scottsdale, Florence students hold 17 minutes of silence


Florida school shooting: What has happened since 17 people were killed?


Teens organize Phoenix 'March for Our Lives' in wake of Florida shooting


Our View: 4 ways to know if you're part of the school shootings problem
