


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Phoenix City Council has selected Thelda Williams to serve as mayor following former Mayor Greg Stanton's May departure to run for Congress.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Greg Stanton resigned as mayor of Phoenix on May 29, 2018. Thelda Williams now serves as the interim mayor. Stanton plans to run for Congress.
    Carly Henry, The Republic | azcentral.com

Phoenix Mayor Thelda Williams
(Photo: James Ritter)

The Phoenix City Council has selected Councilwoman Thelda Williams to serve as mayor following former Mayor Greg Stanton's May departure to run for Congress.


Williams will hold the position until voters elect a new mayor. The mayoral election is scheduled for Nov. 6, but could require a March runoff election if no candidate receives a majority of votes.


Williams will continue to represent her north Phoenix council district as well.


RELATED: It's official: Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton resigns to run for Congress


Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton and Vice Mayor Thelda Williams talk before Stanton's resignation. Williams will serve as interim mayor. (Photo: Jessica Boehm/The Republic)

Williams is no stranger to the center seat on the dais. This will be her third time serving as mayor. She served as interim mayor for about seven months following former Mayor Paul Johnson's resignation in 1994. She then served for three days in 2012 when former mayor Phil Gordon stepped down early. 


Williams was vice mayor prior to Stanton's resignation, so she automatically assumed a temporary mayoral post upon his departure. But the council was required to vote on a long-term replacement.



    Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton gave his final State of the City address on March 6, 2018. During his speech, he discussed the city's triumphs, including transit, social justice and sustainability.
    

During a special meeting Monday, the council unanimously voted to keep Williams in the position. Surrounded by her children and grandson, she took the oath of office in the council chambers, which was filled with prominent attorneys, former city politicos and other local dignitaries. 


Following her swearing in, Williams thanked her colleagues for the honor and spelled out her priorities in four succinct sentences.


"I'm a very simple person. I just want the city to move forward. I want us to be as nonpartisan as possible. I want to focus on public safety, making sure we have paved roads and we have a safe and available water supply," she said. 


Councilman Jim Waring was selected to serve as Williams' vice mayor. 


READ MORE: 
