


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A warrant has been issued for 34-year-old Raymond McLeod, last seen in March 2017 in Guatemala.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Readers can send news tips to azcentral.com via the newspaper's social media channels, email or by calling the office.
    Wochit

This undated photo provided by the U.S. Marshall Service shows Raymond McLeod. Authorities are seeking the public's help in locating McLeod who is wanted for the murder of his girlfriend Krystal Mitchell, who was found dead in a San Diego condo on June 10, 2016.  Police believe McLeod went to Mexico and could now be in Belize. An $11,000 reward is being offered for information leading to McLeod, a former Marine described as armed and dangerous.
(Photo: Associated Press)

SAN DIEGO — Authorities and family members are pleading for the public's help to find a Phoenix man charged with murder in his girlfriend's killing in San Diego nearly two years ago.


A warrant has been issued for 34-year-old Raymond McLeod, last seen in March 2017 in Guatemala.


The U.S. Marshal's Service said Tuesday that McLeod also has been spotted in Mexico and Belize.


McLeod, a former Marine, is charged with killing his girlfriend of just three weeks, 30-year-old Krystal Mitchell, a mother of two young children.


Police are looking for Raymond McLeod, 32, who was the last person seen with Kyrstal Mitchell before her June 10, 2016 death. (Photo: San Diego Police Department)

Mitchell's mother, Josephine Wentzel, is a former police detective and has been helping track down McLeod.


San Diego County District Attorney Summer Stephan says Wentzel has been "extremely helpful" and that "this is not a mother you want to mess with."


The mother of a Phoenix woman killed in San Diego is fighting to track down her daughter's boyfriend, a former Marine, who police believe fled to Mexico and may be now be in Central America.


MORE: Phoenix woman ID'd in San Diego homicide


Josephine Wentzel is asking the public for information leading to Raymond McLeod, described by San Diego police as a suspect in his girlfriend's killing.


Thirty-year-old Krystal Mitchell was found dead in a San Diego condo on June 10, 2016.


Police say the Phoenix couple were on vacation in San Diego and that McLeod fled the scene before officers arrived and has eluded them ever since.


An $11,000 reward is being offered for information leading to McLeod, who police describe as armed and dangerous.


READ MORE:


Person shot by Salt River police has died


Man in blankets run over, killed in parking lot


Suspect sought in fatal hit-and-run in Phoenix


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
