


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton resigned and left City Hall for the last time on Tuesday. Vice Mayor Thelda Williams will now serve as interim mayor.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Greg Stanton resigned as mayor of Phoenix on May 29, 2018. Thelda Williams now serves as the interim mayor. Stanton plans to run for Congress.
    Carly Henry, The Republic | azcentral.com

Greg Stanton and Thelda Williams shake hands at Stanton's resignation on May 29, 2018. Williams will serve as the interim mayor.
(Photo: Carly Henry/The Republic)

At about 11:45 a.m. Tuesday, Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton and Vice Mayor Thelda Williams stood in the hallway of the mayor's office, surrounded by about a dozen staff members and waited for the clock to strike noon. 


In 15 minutes time, Stanton's resignation from the city's top spot would become official — clearing the way for him to run for the open congressional seat in District 9 and for Williams to become Phoenix's interim mayor for a third time. 


"I've never done this before," Stanton said laughing, as the group debated where and how the two should conduct their official transition. 


"I just came here to harass him," Williams said with a smirk. 


With about 10 minutes to go, Councilwoman Debra Stark scuttled into the hallway.


MORE:  Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton says an emotional goodbye in final meeting


"I'm here for moral support for both of you," she said.


Stanton had spent his last morning as mayor outside of the office, celebrating his daughter's eighth birthday, but made it to City Hall in time for a short send off.


Stanton and Williams made their way into a conference room with less than five minutes to go, and Stanton launched into a quick goodbye speech, in which he said the mayoral position is "literally the best job in public service."


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

He said Williams will continue Phoenix's "positive trajectory."


"I feel as I step down to run for a spot in Congress, I'm really excited that the vice mayor is going to be taking over," Stanton said. 


In the remaining seconds of Stanton's mayoral reign, Williams thanked him for his 6 ½ years of service.


"You have really proved that you are a leader, you can think outside of the box and you're not afraid to tackle those hard, hard decisions," Williams said. 


MORE:  Díaz: With Greg Stanton out, the Phoenix mayor fight begins


"Thank you so much. It's official," Stanton said, and with a handshake and a hug the transfer of power was complete.


"Alright, you guys get to work," Williams said, joking, as she headed back to her council office for a meeting with staff.


Williams has served as an interim mayor twice before — once for seven months in 1994 and then for three days in 2012.



    Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton gave his final State of the City address on March 6, 2018. During his speech, he discussed the city's triumphs, including transit, social justice and sustainability.
    

Williams will hold the mayoral post until the council can vote on a mayor pro tempore on June 11. However, the council is expected to select Williams for that position, which she would hold until a new mayor is elected. 


That election is scheduled for November with a possible runoff election in March.


After the handshake, Stanton quickly made his way toward the exit with a canvas bag in one hand and a couple of notebooks in his other. He was on his way to officially file his paperwork to run for Congress, he said. 


"That's got to be exciting," Williams said to Stanton.


"I'm super excited about it," he replied.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
