


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Two new restaurants open Feb. 16: El Chino Restaurante Y Cantina in Phoenix for authentic Mexican food; Tres Tempe for Mediterranean-Southwestern food.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Phoenix welcomed 23 new restaurants in January. Among them are a burger joint in Chandler, a vegan restaurant in Phoenix and a brewery in Gilbert.
    Jennifer McClellan/azcentral.com

Wood-fired Qcom olives and grilled flatbread from Tres Tempe, a Southwestern-Mediterranean fusion restaurant in Tempe.
(Photo: Chanelle Sinclair)

This Friday is a twofer for Phoenix diners.


Two restaurants open on Feb. 16. One is an authentic Mexican spot in Phoenix’s Warehouse District. The other is a swanky Mediterranean-Southwestern fusion kitchen on Price Road between Elliot and Guadalupe roads in Tempe.


Here’s what you need to know about both exciting new spots.


Type of food: A fusion of Southwestern and Mediterranean flavors.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Menu highlights:


Who’s in the kitchen: Executive chef Steve Zimmerman.


Chef Steve Zimmerman preparing dishes for the staff training and tasting at Tres Tempe, a tapas-Mediterranean fusion restaurant in Tempe. (Photo: Kirti Dwivedi)

From the bar: Wine, sangria, margarita and craft cocktails along with tasting flights of beer, wine or mescal.


The concept: Tres gets its name from the three sizes of dishes on its menu: small tapas-style plates; medium plates and large "wood-oven feasts" designed to share. Look for several deals during the first month of operation, including a free small plate with purchase of a medium plate during dinner hours.


Hours:  3-11 p.m. opening weekend (Friday-Sunday, Feb. 16-18); then11 a.m.-11 p.m. daily starting Monday, Feb. 19.


Happy hour: 3-6 p.m. daily.  


Details: Discovery Office Park, 7192 S. Price Road, Tempe. 480-897-5300, trestempe.com.


AZCENTRAL


Things To Do app: Get the best in events, dining and travel right on your device


Type of food: Mexican and Sonoran-style dishes.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Menu highlights:


Who’s in the kitchen: Chef/owner Rafael (Ralph) “El Chino” Ung.


El Chino Restaurante Y Cantina, now open in the Warehouse District in downtown Phoenix. (Photo: El Chino Restaurante Y Cantina)

From the bar: Beer, wine and cocktails.


Family-run: The new restaurant is the second from Ung and his wife, Lynn. Their first is Taquerias El Chino, on 18th Avenue and Van Buren Street near the Arizona State Capitol.


Hours: 11 a.m.-10 p.m. Mondays through Thursdays; 10 a.m.-2 a.m. Fridays and Saturdays (limited menu after 10 p.m.); 10 a.m.-10 p.m. Sundays. All-day brunch on weekends. 


Happy hour: 3-7 p.m. daily.  


Details: 711 S. Central Ave., Phoenix. 602-626-5681, search “El Chino Restaurante Y Cantina” on Facebook.


Reach the reporter at jennifer.mcclellan@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8546.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
