


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Don Shooter faced a lawsuit that claimed he didn't live in his legislative district and shouldn't be on the ballot. A judge disagreed.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Don Shooter testifies during a hearing on June 14, 2018, in Judge Rosa Mroz’s Maricopa County Superior Courtroom in Phoenix.
(Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

A  Maricopa County judge ruled Friday that former state lawmaker Don Shooter can stay on the ballot despite accusations that he doesn't live in the district he hopes to represent.


Shooter was ousted from the Arizona House in February after an investigation found he sexually harassed numerous women.


Despite his expulsion, Shooter filed paperwork last month to run for state Senate in the Republican primary election for Legislative District 13, which stretches from the Valley's western edges to Yuma.


Nothing in the Arizona Constitution prohibits people who are expelled from public office from running again.


But a political opponent filed a lawsuit to remove Shooter from the ballot, alleging he doesn't live in the district because he lives in the Biltmore area of Phoenix, not at the Yuma address he claims.


Under state law, Arizona lawmakers are required to be residents of the district they represent.


RELATED: Lawsuit alleges Don Shooter doesn't live in district where he filed to run


On Friday, Maricopa County Superior Court Judge Rosa Mroz ruled that Shooter can stay on the ballot because his primary residence remains his condo in Yuma. Mroz dismissed the lawsuit.


Shooter and his attorney, Timothy Nelson, said during a court hearing Thursday that he has lived in Yuma for 30 years. The former lawmaker, a Republican, previously represented the district for more than seven years.


"Yuma has been good to me," Shooter testified in court. "It's my home."


Shooter's nominating papers list his address as a condo in Yuma, but he has been dogged by question about his residency for years.



    Rep. Todd Clodfelter (R-Tucson) read a letter on the floor of the House of Representatives calling for the public release of all files related to the sexual harassment investigation of former Rep. Don Shooter.
    

The lawsuit to knock him off the ballot was filed by Brent Backus, a businessman who also is running for District 13 Senate in the Aug. 28 Republican primary.


Backus' attorney, Timothy La Sota, argued Shooter has lived with his wife at their jointly owned home in Phoenix since he was removed from office.


Shooter was expelled from the House of Representatives by his fellow lawmakers Feb. 1. Investigators had previously concluded he sexually harassed at least seven women over many years. 


La Sota cited several pieces of evidence, which he called "overwhelming," to make the case that Shooter doesn't live in the district:


Shooter filed nominating signatures to run on May 30, saying his neighbors asked him to run and he was a "pretty effective legislator."


His attorney, Nelson, called the lawsuit a "desperate attempt" to keep Shooter off the ballot. He said Shooter has never left Yuma without an intent to return to his residence there.


But much of Thursday's hearing focused on questions about Shooter's voter registration. Nelson speculated that a "political foe" could have changed Shooter's registration to his Phoenix address to sabotage him.


MORE: Top 10 things we learned from the Don Shooter sexual-harassment files


Shooter said he has no idea "how the heck" his registration was changed. Shooter's wife changed her registration on the same date. She has not switched it back to Yuma.


Mroz questioned Shooter's story about his registration in her ruling, writing, "the court believes that the evidence supports that Shooter was the person who did it."


"However, statement as to the place of residence made in a voter's registration is not conclusive, but does constitute strong proof of the correctness of residence."


Mroz's ruling also cites evidence that Shooter plans to keep his residence in Yuma: The address is on his driver's license, his vehicles are registered there, his tax returns list the address and he continues to pay rent for the condo.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

La Sota and Nelson disagree about how long a candidate must live in the district continuously before running. La Sota contends that theArizona Constitution has a one-year residency requirement ahead of running for office.


"Even if he still rents an apartment in Yuma, his residence is in Phoenix," the lawsuit states. 


But Nelson said the Constitution technically only requires that someone live in a county that covers part of the legislative district they want to represent.


The Constitution says a lawmaker must live in "the county from which he is elected at least one year before his election." Legislators in Arizona used to be elected by county, not district.


La Sota said it's clear that the language is antiquated. He said the court should interpret the law based on what the authors of Arizona's Constitution intended: Lawmakers must live in the area, meaning the district, they wish to represent for at least one year.


However, Mroz found that that the Constitution and related state laws are "unambiguous and should be given its plain meaning" — meaning Shooter only needs to have lived in a county that includes the district for one year.


Backus is one of four Republicans running for the district's Senate seat. State Sen. Sine Kerr has served as the district's senator since she was appointed to finish former state Sen. Steve Montenegro's term. Royce Jenkins also is running. 


Michelle Harris is seeking the office for Democrats.


READ MORE:



    Rep. Don Shooter speaks to the Arizona House during a House vote on whether to remove him from office following the release of a report detailing allegations of sexual harassment and inappropriate behavior at the Capitol. Carly Henry/azcentral.com
    

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.