


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Unofficial election results show a historic night for schools -- voters approved all 27 school bond and override measures in Maricopa County.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Early returns show all 27 school bond and override measures in Maricopa County tilted toward approval.
    Wochit

Voters in 22 Maricopa County school districts will decide whether to approve school bonds and overrides.
(Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

For the first time in what could be decades, every school district bond and override measure in Maricopa County — all 27 of them — were approved by voters this election.


The unofficial results for the ballot measures put forth by 22 school districts show a rare outcome of overwhelming support for bonds and overrides, property-tax-funded measures that in some districts have proven to be historically difficult to pass.


This is first time in recent history that voters approved all of the school measures on the ballot in a single cycle.


"I’ve been working on school-finance issues since the 1980s, and I don’t ever remember a night like this where the ballot measures in every district are all passing," said Chuck Essigs, director of governmental relations with the Arizona Association of School Business Officials.


Most of the school bond and override measures passed by wide margins.


MORE: Early results show Surprise voters approving 3 city bond requests


All but four of the county's 27 individual bond and override measures (four districts had more than one measure on the ballot) were leading by double-digit margins.


The Osborn and Phoenix Elementary school districts had all three of their bond and override measures approved by more than 70 percent of the vote or more, according to unofficial results.


Shortly after initial results were posted Tuesday night, Essigs said what stood out from this year's election was that districts — in areas rural and urban, wealthy and poor — all appeared to have their measures approved.


That includes districts, such as the Queen Creek Unified School District, that have had varying success in past years.


"This makes me optimistic that maybe we have finally had the opportunity to really do something in Arizona about how our schools are funded and move out of the basement in the country and start to move up to a more acceptable level," Essigs said.


The closest ballot measures this election were those in the Agua Fria Union High School District and Litchfield Elementary School District. Both of the override requests in those districts passed with 52 percent of the vote.


Voters in the Chandler Unified School District appeared to handily approve a $35 million override request partly intended for teacher salaries.


Shortly after the County Recorder's Office posted initial results, Chandler Unified School District Superintendent Camille Casteel tweeted her appreciation for voters.


Thank you community overwhelming support of M&amp;O Override. Passing tonight with 64 percent yes (25,982) to 14649 no. We won’t disappoint you.

"Thank you community overwhelming support of M&amp;O Override ... We won't disappoint you," Casteel tweeted. 


This was the first year all school ballot measures were decided through mail-in ballots.


School districts asking voters to approve bonds and overrides have said the ballot measures are necessary to help counter steep cuts in state education funding for capital expenses.


Capital funding, which pays for things such as school construction, classroom technology, textbooks and school buses, has been cut by about 85 percent since the recession.


While overrides can give school districts an additional boost in funding for classroom or capital expenses, they are not stable funding sources for schools.


Overrides allow districts to increase their classroom budgets by up to 15 percent through property-tax levies. 


Overrides last seven years and begin phasing out by thirds in the fifth year, unless voters approve to extend the override. As a result, districts typically ask voters to extend overrides around the fifth year to avoid losing money.


Bonds allow school districts to pay for longer-term projects, such as the construction of new schools or renovating existing ones. Voters approve the sale of bonds to raise money for these projects.


Maricopa County voters approved 24 of 28 school ballot measures in 2015, and 17 out of 20 last November.


The ballot measures — overrides, in particular — have had mixed results in the years prior.


The passing rate for override proposals before 2015 was less than 50 percent.


Here are the Maricopa County bond and override election results as of 8 p.m. Tuesday:


Agua Fria Union High School District: 


Alhambra Elementary School District: 


Arlington Elementary School District: 


Buckeye Elementary School District: 


Chandler Unified School District: 


Fountain Hills Unified School District: 


Fowler Elementary School District: 


Gila Bend Unified School District: 


Isaac Elementary School District: 


Kyrene Elementary School District: 


Litchfield Elementary School District: 


Littleton Elementary School District: 


Murphy Elementary School District: 


Osborn Elementary School District: 


Paradise Valley Unified School District: 


Phoenix Elementary School District: 


Phoenix Union High School District: 


Queen Creek Unified School District: 


Roosevelt Elementary School District: 


Tempe Union High School District: 


Tolleson Elementary School District: 


Tolleson Union High School District: 


READ MORE:


Arizona voters will have a say in school-voucher expansion


Arizona schools to sue state over funding – again


FAILED: Arizona school bus safety
