


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

As a resident of midtown Phoenix, Joel Starkman revels in the diversity of the area’s residents and artistic influence.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The mirrored “Hollywood” sign plays prominently in the Starkman/Chavez kitchen and dining area, complementing the contemporary vibe.
(Photo: Joel Starkman/Special to The Republic)

Joel Starkman sees his neighborhood as an actual pigment. As a resident of midtown Phoenix, he revels in the diversity of the area’s residents, champions its artistic influence and speaks with pride of its burgeoning potential for growth.


Beyond the walls of the modern three-bedroom townhouse he shares with his husband, Javier Chavez, Starkman sees himself and their home as an influence on the community, and the community as an influence on him.


“Downtown is vibrant. It’s diverse. It’s artistic. It feels way more purple down here,” Starkman said, referencing the color he has assigned to the urban core of Phoenix. “Young people are coming down here by the droves.” 


Starkman, a retired custom jeweler-turned-real estate agent, has a keen understanding of the landscape. With absolute affection, he calls midtown “sleepy,” noting that it is on the cusp of having more to offer its current and incoming residents, most of whom have the ability to live anywhere but chose an urban Phoenix address.


MORE MIDTOWN NEWS:


“I put people in this community,” Starkman said, referring to his career as a real estate agent. “Everyone I’ve put in here is double income, no kids. They aren’t downsizing. They are right sizing. They want lock and leave. They wanted to be near the arts and theater and near restaurants.”


“These streets in midtown are quiet. You’d be surprised. It’s just like, wow, take a drive and discover it.”


Starkman and Chavez call Coronado Commons home, a spot that puts them a stone’s throw from the Phoenix Art Museum. The collection of townhouses is an infill project that rose over the past couple years near Coronado Road and Third Street, not to be mistaken as part of the Coronado Historic District.


“It’s a very unusual little pocket that is probably, technically, Encanto from the old days,” he said. “It’s a very unusual kind of neighborhood. You’ve got midcentury modern, the Regency tower, multimillion-dollar homes.”


His modern tri-level spans 2,150 square feet and includes three bedrooms, all of which are on the third floor. The master suite is complemented by two additional rooms that share a jack-and-jill style bathroom. The home’s first floor includes a garage, an office that Starkman refers to as a “salon,” and a powder room.


Photography covers the main wall of the Starkman/Chavez family room, which is finished with a vintage lamp in the corner. (Photo: Joel Starkman/Special to The Republic)

The second floor anchors the home with its family room and kitchen. 


And everything is tied together by art, which is fitting, considering the neighborhood and Starkman’s flair for creativity that harkens to his days as a jeweler known for his extravagant pieces.


MORE COOL HOMES:


Art graces the home at every turn, from an understated collection of vintage good luck charms harvested from cigarette packages, to the attention-grabbing mirrored letters that spell “Hollywood” featured prominently in the dining area.


“I wanted it. I knew I wanted it for this house,” Starkman said of the sign.


Even the garage has its own piece of art. 


An avid collector of vintage pieces, Starkman also scored a Lucite and glass Lion in Frost iceberg table from 1972, which fits in seamlessly with the home’s décor.


“I bought it at auction,” he said. “It’s basically a piece of art.”


Few things bring him more pride, though, than supporting local artists.


Starkman adores the gallery of black and white photography he has curated over the years, which includes work from local and nationally-known artists. One of the pieces, a portrait of a mermaid, was captured by Marilyn Szabo, who Starkman described as a “lovely, locally-known photographer.” 


An original painting by Christina Szabo hangs over Starkman’s bar. (Photo: Joel Starkman/Special to The Republic)

Another piece, a painting that hangs over his bar area, never goes unnoticed.


“It looks like a Jackson Pollock,” Starkman said. “It’s a beautiful black and white from Christina Speros and she has a wonderful boutique called The Men’s Corner at Scottsdale Marketplace. I’m partial to those because it’s part of the community and it supports local artists.”


And when he needs a taste of something new, or when he wants to find new ways to support artists and the arts community, it’s all within grasp. Starkman and Chavez live steps from art and opera. They aren’t far from the Herberger, and they’re a light rail ride from the Orpheum. 


“We’re not New York. We’re not San Francisco. But, I’m glad. I don’t have to wait in line and pay those prices,” Starkman said. “These streets in midtown are quiet. You’d be surprised. It’s just like, wow, take a drive and discover it.”


READ MORE:
