


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The state's 10 largest school districts have announced they will remain closed Monday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Jon Kreibich holds his daughter, Fallon, during a #RedForEd "Parents Stand for Teachers" rally at the Capitol in Phoenix on April 29, 2018.
(Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

The #RedForEd movement drew more than 50,000 people to the Capitol, closed more than 1,000 schools and displaced more than 850,000 students last week.


As of Sunday afternoon, teachers and other school employees involved in the walkout showed no signs of slowing down.


Here's what to expect when the walkout resumes Monday. 


Many of the more than 1,000 schools shuttered last week will remain closed Monday. 


The list includes the state's 10 largest school districts: Mesa, Tucson, Chandler, Peoria, Gilbert, Deer Valley, Paradise Valley, Dysart, Phoenix Union and Washington Elementary.


MORE: Here are the Arizona schools closing when teachers walk out Monday


Joe Thomas, Arizona Education Association president, announced to a crowd of thousands at the Arizona Capitol on Friday that teachers would return Monday. 



    The heat couldn’t stop these music teachers &amp; band directors. They are just heating up. #RedForEd @azcentral
    The Republic | azcentral.com

Protests will also reach beyond metro Phoenix. 


Hundreds of people rallied in downtown Flagstaff and Tucson last week and plan to return Monday. Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, plans to travel to Arizona to host a news conference Monday morning.


Angela Murphy (center) joins fellow Arizona teachers during a rally at the Arizona state Capitol for higher pay and more education funding on April 27, 2018, in Phoenix. (Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

Classes at some smaller school districts, including Wickenburg Unified School District and Tolleson Union High School District, will resume Monday.


Chandler Unified School District initially announced it would reopen Monday but later changed course, saying that "based on the number of teachers who have reported their absence for Monday, our schools will need to remain closed April 30th."


Scottsdale Unified School District also announced it would reopen Tuesday, but said Sunday afternoon that it would not "due to the high number of teachers reporting absences and the shortage of substitutes to cover those absences."


Schools that attempt to reopen before education leaders call for an end to the statewide walkout may face widespread "sick-ins," with staff taking sick days in protest.



    Gov. Doug Ducey talked with reporters about the #RedForEd walkout April 26, 2018. Carly Henry/azcentral.com
    The Republic | azcentral.com

Gov. Doug Ducey on Friday announced he had secured a deal with state lawmakers to approve his proposed pay increase for teachers, but he did not provide any details.


Officials said they would be "working through the weekend" and would introduce the plan in the Legislature "early next week and pass it shortly thereafter."


Thomas, the Arizona Education Association president, and Noah Karvelis, a teacher and Arizona Educators United organizer, issued a joint statement saying they didn't trust the governor's announcement.


"We have a press release and a tweet from the governor," they said. "We have no bill. We have no deal. The devil is in the details."



    Joshua Buckley, a teacher from Red Mountain High School, discusses an initiative filed with the Secretary of State's office on April 27, 2018, that proposes to fund education through an increase in income tax rates.
    Wochit

On Friday, education leaders launched a ballot initiative called the Invest in Education Act.


The measure would give voters the opportunity to decide in November whether they want to fund public education with higher income taxes on people who earn more than $250,000.


It was not immediately clear which of the groups protesting low teacher pay may support the initiative. Organizations will likely comment on the measure this week. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

MORE REDFORED COVERAGE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.