


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Ducey has said that “by the beginning of the 2020 school year, every Arizona teacher will have received a cumulative raise of 20 percent.”

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Signs stack up outside the Senate building during day four of the #RedForEd walkout at the Arizona Capitol in Phoenix May 1, 2018.
(Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

The teacher pay raise plan proposed by Gov. Doug Ducey that was working its way through the Legislature on Tuesday would not deliver on its underlying promise: providing every teacher in the state a 20 percent raise.


Some districts that pay their teachers higher than the state average will receive less funding than needed to give 20 percent raises to all teachers, according to the Joint Legislative Budget Committee.


Conversely, some districts that pay their teachers lower than the state average would receive enough money to give more than 20 percent raises.


An initial analysis by The Arizona Republic, based on figures provided to the Arizona Auditor General by school districts, shows that 59 districts would not receive enough funding to give all teachers a 20 percent pay raise.



    Leaders of the Arizona Educators United group and Arizona Education say they will end the walkout on Thursday if the budget is passed.
    Thomas Hawthorne, The Arizona Republic

Those include some of the largest districts in the Phoenix area: Mesa Unified, Chandler Unified and Phoenix Union.


Phoenix Union would have the largest shortfall, according to The Republic's analysis. It would receive enough money to give its teachers a roughly 15.61 percent raise. That's more than 4 percentage points short of the promised 20 percent.


#REDFORED UPDATE:  Teachers plan to stay while lawmakers debate budget


Ducey rolled out his plan at a news conference on April 12, flanked by lawmakers, school superintendents and education advocates. Ducey promised a 9 percent raise next year, followed by 5 percent raises each of the next two years.


Additionally, the 1 percent increase that was given this year would be rolled into the funding formula.


Ducey said that meant that “by the beginning of the 2020 school year, every Arizona teacher will have received a cumulative raise of 20 percent.”


However, the way dollars would flow to the districts means some districts would not get enough to fulfill that promise, said Anabel Aportela, director of research at the Arizona School Board Association and the Arizona Association of School Business Officials.


“I think what we’ll be able to show after all this is said and done is that there will be a significant increase in teacher compensation,” she said, calling the flood of money the largest she’s seen in 20 years in Arizona.


“But, I think it’s going to be difficult to show that every single teacher received a 9 percent raise,” this year, she said, or a 20 percent raise by 2020.


DUCEY'S PLAN:  Says plan won't hike taxes – but there's a new car-registration fee


Aportela said school funding formulas are complicated and based on a host of factors. She cautioned that any analysis based on average teachers’ salaries would be off. It wouldn’t include such variables as teacher-to-student ratios or the additional funding that goes to help schools educate students with special needs.


But, she said, the estimate based on average salaries would provide a rough guide.


“It’s safe to say there are some districts that will not generate enough to give a 9 percent raise from last year,” she said.


In contrast, each teacher in Arizona did receive a 1 percent bonus in December.


But that was doled out to districts in a different form, Aportela said.


For that bonus, each district was asked to calculate how much it would cost to give each of its teachers a 1 percent boost and report that figure to the Department of Education.


“There’s no language that says you have to give X percent pay raise.”


For the Mesa Unified District, that number was nearly $2.3 million, according to the report it filed with the department. For Winslow Unified District, it was $38,912.


But this raise is being put into a state funding formula that distributes the money on a per-pupil basis.


Aportela said that means the money won’t be doled out based on a district’s specific need, but through a formula that applies to each school statewide.



    City of Phoenix time lapse of 50,000 #RedForEd marchers along Washington Street in downtown Phoenix on April 26, 2018.
    City of Phoenix

The Joint Legislative Budget Committee told Senate Democrats in a presentation on Monday that the formula would not generate enough funds for every district to give its teachers 20 percent raises. 


The analyst from the JLBC, Stefan Shepherd, also said that nothing in the legislation would require districts to put the extra money into pay raises.


“There’s no language that says you have to give X percent pay raise,” Shepherd told lawmakers.


The bills do require districts and charter schools to report how much they spent on teacher pay raises, and show average salary increases, in both raw dollars and percentages, in a prominent place on their websites.


The Republic analysis assumed all dollars would go to teacher pay raises, a notion that Aportela said was a likely outcome.


Daniel Scarpinato, a spokesman for the Governor’s Office, disputed the notion that not every teacher would receive a 20 percent pay raise. He said any districts that would get less money than needed would be few and those “outliers” could be taken care of in future budget years.


Scarpinato said the funding formula was developed in consultation with educators. Placing the pay raises in the statewide per-pupil formula — rather than handing them out the same way as the 1 percent boost — means the funds would rise with inflation.


“This is the best way to make sure it is protected,” Scarpinato said.


Aportela said schools with higher-than-average salaries may have kept class sizes higher and boosted teacher pay. Conversely, she said, other districts might have thought it more advantageous to hire more teachers, reducing class sizes, but pay them less.


“Every district has made different decisions up until this point,” she said.


This funding formula could have the effect, she said, of cementing those decisions since districts with higher-paid teachers would put that money into raises, rather than into hiring new staff.


“They may have larger classes,” she said. “This is going to bake that in for them.”


Conversely, some districts will receive more than needed to give teachers an average pay raise of 20 percent, The Republic's analysis shows.


Yuma Elementary School District, for example, would theoretically be able to give its teachers an average  28 percent raise, the rough analysis shows.


Bouse Elementary District, in La Paz County, would theoretically have enough extra funds to give its teachers a average 31 percent raise.


Republic reporters Alexis Egeland and Agnel Philip contributed to this article.


READ MORE:
