


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Western Wholesale Co. Warehouse was built in 1925. Equality Health, a healthcare company has moved into the building at 101 E. Jackson St.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The Western Wholesale Co. Warehouse at 101 E. Jackson St. in Phoenix was built in 1925. It housed Alice Cooper'stown, which closed in October 2017.
(Photo: Michelle Dodds/Special for The Republic)

After many years of enjoying a rock 'n' roll lifestyle, the Downtown Phoenix warehouse that was home to Alice Cooper’stown Restaurant has found a healthier future.


The restaurant that featured the “Big Unit,” a 22-inch hot dog named after former Diamondbacks pitcher Randy Johnson, closed in October 2017. Equality Health, a healthcare company that focuses on helping underserved communities, has moved into the historic building at 101 E. Jackson St.


This transition is just the latest of many tenant changes in the building that was originally built in 1925 as the Western Wholesale Drug Company warehouse.


The warehouse was the regional distribution center for drugs, medicines and liquors for the California-based company, which started in Los Angeles in 1901.


Western Wholesale Drug entered the Phoenix market in 1920 when they acquired the H.H. McNeil Printing Company warehouse. The drug company purchased the adjacent parcel the same year, and in 1925, built an adjoining warehouse. Contractor T.B. Stewart constructed the reinforced concrete and red brick building for $30,000. 


The one-story warehouse with a full basement tripled the company’s storage capacity and allowed boxcar freight deliveries directly into the building. The warehouse’s foundation was constructed to allow for the addition of two additional floors to the structure, according to research done by Ryden Architects.


SEE ALSO: The story of one of Phoenix Country Club's grandest homes


The drug company joined the national McKesson &amp; Robbins firm and emerged as McKesson-Western Wholesale Company in 1929. Business was lucrative since drug companies had been allowed to manufacture distilled liquor for medicinal purposes during Prohibition.


Crown Lace &amp;amp; Notion warehouse, 1970s. (Photo: Klanco Inc.)

After Prohibition was repealed in 1933, the firm reverted to McKesson &amp; Robbins and became a major distributor of liquor, including the sole source for Galliano, the Italian liquor.


McKesson &amp; Robbins moved from the warehouse to a new location in 1961. The Crown Lace and Notion Company, which distributed sewing supplies, purchased the warehouse.


Saul Abromovitz had founded the company in 1946, when lace was in high demand after World War II. Abromovitz purchased lace from large retail stores and repackaged it in smaller lengths to supply small businesses outside the Valley. Abromovitz and his wife, Esther, initially operated the business out their house, using their piano as a packing table.


Crown Lace and Notion expanded into other products, including crafts, after their son, Gary, joined the business in 1971. The company eventually out grew the old Jackson Street warehouse and moved into a larger warehouse in 1975.


The Abromovitz family kept the old historic warehouse and tried to lease it out. But it was a tough time to find tenants for Downtown buildings, according to Mark Abromovitz, the grandson of Saul Abromovitz and current manager of Klanco, Inc., which owns the property. “The tenants we did get into the building didn’t always pay,” he says with a laugh.


One proposal for the building was Horny’s Court, a restaurant and bar in which former Phoenix Sun Jeff Hornacek was involved, but it never came to be around 1993.


The building’s most recent tenant was Alice Cooper’stown, which opened in 1998 as one of the first nightspots in Downtown Phoenix’s warehouse district. Alice Cooper, Hall of Fame rock star and Phoenix resident, was a partner in the restaurant.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Equality Health, which already had a Downtown office at Third and Lincoln streets, leased the former restaurant to relocate employees from a Scottsdale location. The health company hired the architecture firm Gould Evans for the warehouse’s office conversion. Martin Building Company is the contractor for the project.


The Equality Health offices will continue to highlight the warehouse’s historic character, including the red brick and pitched wooden trusses.  “I just love that they’re like giant boxes that you can retrofit for so many uses,” Mark Abromovitz says. “These cool old buildings are timeless, and it's great to see the tech world embracing this sort of architecture. I’m thrilled to have Equality Health as our tenant and look forward to a great partnership for many years to come."


Douglas C. Towne is the editor of Arizona Contractor &amp; Community magazine, www.arizcc.com.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 