


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Three suspects were killed by Valley officers Friday, marking one of the county's deadliest days for officer-involved shootings in recent memory.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Police and U.S. marshals work the scene of an officer-involved shooting that left the suspect dead and a Glendale police sergeant seriously injured, at the intersection of 43rd Avenue and Olive Avenue in Glendale on March 2, 2018.
(Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

Phoenix-area officers fatally shot three men within two hours Friday morning in one of the Valley's deadliest days for law-enforcement shootings in recent history.


A Glendale sergeant also was seriously injured in the second confrontation of the day — a fugitive-apprehension operation in Glendale that culminated in a deadly shootout. 


All of Friday's cases were unrelated, though two of the suspects were shot by members of a fugitive-apprehension task force overseen by the U.S. Marshals Service. The third was killed by an agent with the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's Homeland Security Investigations. 


None of the men had been identified as of Friday evening. One of the police shootings was tied to a recent Mesa slaying that had been widely reported. 


UPDATE: Police: Man killed by Homeland Security agent was convicted sex traffickerGlendale police sergeant 'recovering,' neighbors on edge after Friday shootingMesa PD: DNA evidence confirms man killed by police stabbed woman at nail salon


Friday's total accounts for nearly half of the fatal police shootings in Maricopa County in 2018.


To date, eight people have been shot dead in the 13 total incidents. In Maricopa County, no other single day in 2018 or 2017 tallied three shootings involving law enforcement, according to records maintained by The Arizona Republic and the Maricopa County Attorney's Office. 


The last time there were three police shootings in one day was on July 27, 2016. Two of those shootings were fatal.


RELATED: Gila River officers shoot at drug suspect outside casinoRobbery suspect shot and killed by Tempe police identifiedPolice ID knife-wielding man killed by Scottsdale officer



    Officer Tiffany Smith with Glendale police speaks about an officer-involved shooting on March 2, 2018, that left a suspect dead. David Wallace/The Republic
    

David Gonzales, U.S. marshal for the District of Arizona, said the task forces are composed of officers from federal, state and local agencies who work together full time. There are two teams in the Phoenix area, one centered in the West Valley and one in the East Valley. 


Gonzales said there was no coordinated fugitive sweep occurring Friday morning.


"It was just completely random," Gonzales said of the two teams' shootings. "Both units are out day and night, hunting down fugitives. It was just by happenstance that these two incidents occurred within the hour."


RELATED: When is a police shooting most likely to happen?


Here is a summary of the three Friday shootings:


Police officials said an Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent shot and killed a "known suspect" in the parking lot of a Whataburger near Shea Boulevard and 90th Street in Scottsdale about 9:30 a.m.


Details remained scarce by Friday evening, however, as both Scottsdale police and ICE officials declined to discuss the underlying case or release any identifying information about the suspect. 


MORE: Homeland Security agent fatally shoots suspect in Scottsdale parking lot


Sgt. Ben Hoster, a Scottsdale police spokesman, said the suspect had been waiting in the Whataburger parking lot for someone who was inside the restaurant when the agent approached him.


"As a special agent approached the male suspect, the male suspect produced a handgun, and the agent drew his service weapon and shot and killed the male suspect," Hoster said.


Hoster said the Scottsdale Police Department had not been made aware of the operation before the shooting occurred. Scottsdale police have assumed the lead in the shooting investigation.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

A U.S. Marshals Service's fugitive-apprehension team had been trying to arrest a 44-year-old man wanted on a burglary charge who also had a reported history of assaults on officers.


Sgt. Scott Waite, a spokesman with Glendale police, said he didn’t know the details leading up to the violent confrontation between the man and officers. 


The shootout began in a parking lot near 43rd and Olive avenues at about 10:30 a.m., wounding the Glendale sergeant. There was a second exchange of gunfire between the suspect and another Glendale officer, but neither was shot, officials said. 


The man fled on foot while police tracked him with a helicopter, K9 units and grid searches in Glendale streets. Officers chased him to a nearby residential area around North 45th Avenue and West Purdue Avenue, where the suspect again fired off rounds at officers. Officers then returned fire, killing the suspect, officials said.


MORE: Glendale officer seriously wounded in shooting; suspect dead


Glendale officers secured the area and kept neighbors from returning home well into the afternoon, and an armored police vehicle remained parked in front of a house there.  


Sunset Elementary School was placed on lockdown Friday morning as a precaution because of the nearby police activity, said Pam Horton, Washington Elementary School District spokeswoman. 


The wounded sergeant was not identified as of late Friday, but Glendale police posted a tweet saying he was in serious but stable condition.


Update: OIS 43Av/Olive Thank you everyone for the outpouring of support. We appreciate all your prayers for our Sergeant, his family, and friends. He is still in serious condition but stable at this time.

Less than a half-hour after their West Valley counterparts, the East Valley fugitive-apprehension team shot their intended target — a man suspected of fatally stabbing a woman in a nail salon last month. The killing had received widespread media attention as the attacker remained at large. 


At about 7:15 p.m. on Feb. 2, a man walked into Premier Nails and Spa and fatally stabbed 30-year-old Lindsey Eastridge, who was getting her nails done.


Earlier this week, the Mesa Police Department released images and surveillance video of the man in an effort to generate tips. Officials said a tip came from a resident about the man living at an RV park where he was shot Friday. Officers had him under surveillance before the shooting, officials added.


MORE: Nail-salon murder suspect killed by police in Mesa


At about 11 a.m., two Mesa police officers approached the man where he lived, at Monte Vista Village RV Resort near Baseline and Ellsworth roads, according to Sgt. Diana Williams, Mesa police spokeswoman.


As officers approached the man, they noticed he was holding a knife, Williams said. The officers fired bean-bag rounds at him in an effort to get him to surrender, but Williams said the man charged at officers.


One of the officers fired a service weapon at the man, who was pronounced dead at the scene, Williams said.


Republic reporters Jason Pohl and Uriel J. Garcia contributed to this story. 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
