


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

An international developer wants to bring a cultural and entertainment district to downtown Phoenix. The Phoenix City Council said, "slow down."

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is the average rent paid by Phoenix-Metro residents?
    Wochit

Hines' rendering of the 25-story condo tower it's planning in downtown Phoenix on the south end of Collier Center near Third and Jefferson streets.
(Photo: Hines)

Earlier this week, an international developer publicly announced that it wants to bring a cultural and entertainment district to downtown Phoenix. Two days later, the Phoenix City Council said, "slow down."


Houston-based Hines in December reached out to Phoenix to pitch a project that they said could bring office, retail, cultural amenities (including a Latino cultural center and Valley Youth Theatre) and a better walking experience to the stretch along Third Street from Van Buren Street to the Talking Stick Resort Arena.


Hines is already planning a 25-story condominium high rise at the Colliers Center, near Third and Jefferson streets. Plans call for 375 condos in the tower.


MORE REAL ESTATE:


To accomplish the arts district project, the development company would need to purchase five city-owned parcels, including a couple of undeveloped sites surrounding the Herberger theater, part of Third Street and the Phoenix Convention Center South building.


Hines used a new city policy that allows private companies to submit unsolicited proposals for city-owned land. Usually, developers can only bid on properties if the city puts out a request for proposals. 


Wednesday, the City Council's Downtown, Aviation, Economy and Innovation Subcommittee voted to withdraw Hines' request — at least temporarily. 


Vice Mayor Thelda Williams said she felt uneasy about moving forward with such ambitious plans before the council determined its long-term strategy for the convention center and traffic issues downtown. 


"I think for a great city, it has to be well planned," she said. "Right now, we're not there."


Councilman Michael Nowakowski also said he was concerned about selling the southern convention center building. Hines' proposal called for mixed-use high rises with office, residential and commercial space on the site.


“It's not a permanent request to see this go away. It certainly isn't for me.”


The 143,400-square-foot space is currently utilized for 86 events per year and generates $2 million in revenue for the city. 


The convention center site has also been discussed as a potential location for a new Phoenix Suns arena, though discussions between the city and team have stalled. 


Williams, Nowakowski and Councilman Daniel Valenzuela all said that the vote to withdraw the item didn't mean, "no." Rather, they said, it meant, "not yet."


"We need to get our act together," Williams said. 


Valenzuela, the chairman of the subcommittee, said he will make sure the proposal comes back for consideration at a later time.


"It's not a permanent request to see this go away. It certainly isn't for me," Valenzuela said.


MORE: Glendale joins Phoenix in supporting bid for Super Bowl LVII in 2023


Arizona developer and community leader Steve Betts, who is advising Hines on the project, said he expected there would be some "growing pains" to work through because this was the first unsolicited proposal since the council adopted the new policy.


He said the community may have misunderstood the subcommittee's vote as final approval.  It was just the "start line," he said.


"It was simply idea. A very conceptual idea," he said, noting that if it moved forward there would be a robust public process to evaluate the proposal. 


Betts said the questions posed by Williams and Nowakowski were legitimate and need to be addressed, and said Hines will continue to work with the city on the proposal.



    It’s been awhile since we have grown out with big communities instead of in with smaller infill sites. But recent deals for big swaths of land are spreading the Valley farther north toward Lake Pleasant, past the White Tank Mountains in the west and
    Wochit

READ MORE:
