


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Lots of people remain confused about the rules for election canvassing - including Phoenix Police.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Canvassing is used in politics to engage voters at their doors about an election, issue or candidate.
(Photo: Patrick Semansky/AP)

Let’s be clear. Canvassing is not soliciting. Still, many remain confused over the difference between the two, including the Phoenix Police Department.


My canvasser, a person of color with a significant developmental disability, was recently stopped when Phoenix police rolled up in two squad cars and detained him for looking “suspicious” and “soliciting.”


My canvasser was respectful and complied with every command the officers gave. Regardless, after running his state identification, Phoenix police told him he did not have “an ID for what he was doing.”


The canvasser called my campaign manager, Eric Limbs, with the police still present. The canvasser recounted what happened to him and then the officer got on the phone. The officer told Limbs that the canvasser should have an identification indicating who his employer was in order to be soliciting. The officer told Limbs that the canvasser should leave the area.


After the incident, the canvasser was distraught for hours. He has remained anxious about canvassing since the episode, despite the fact he did nothing wrong.


I reported the incident to the Phoenix Police Department and was repeatedly told the canvasser was soliciting. The Phoenix Municipal Code clearly defines a solicitor as a person who goes door to door to speak to residents uninvited for a “commercial purpose” (§ 23-140); solicitors also require a government-issued identification (§ 23-142).


Canvassing is not even remotely commercial. It is used in politics to engage voters at their doors about an election, issue or candidate. Regardless, even if it was, my canvasser provided his identification and was still told to stop.


If Phoenix’s solicitation laws did include political canvassing, those laws would be unconstitutional under the First Amendment. In Watchtower Bible &amp; Tract Society of New York, Inc. v. Village of Stratton, the high court struck down an ordinance that lumped in all door-to-door activity with soliciting, finding that “[t]he mere fact that the ordinance covers so much speech raises constitutional concerns. It is offensive — not only to the values protected by the First Amendment, but to the very notion of a free society[.]”


This incident did not have to happen.


The police involved could easily have determined that my canvasser was not soliciting simply by looking at his clipboard with my petition (the petition includes my name and address), my campaign literature (which includes the office telephone number and other contact information), or the application on his phone, which includes the list of registered voter households that he was sent to.


MORE: Garrick McFadden thinks he can oust Schweikert


The officer, however, did none of this. Instead, without any basis, he ordered the canvasser to cease activity and immediately depart the neighborhood.


There is now more going on in Arizona politics than ever before. Races that were never actively contested are now not just contested, but contested by multiple candidates. Canvassing is an integral part of the democratic process, without which candidates would likely not be able to even get the petition signatures they need to be on the ballot.


And that means that voters, some for the first time, will have not just contact, but repeated contact, with candidates. There will be events, door knocks, phone calls and texts, all done and made to inform Arizonans about the election and to encourage them to participate in it.


Needless to say, Phoenix police should not insert itself into this process. No police department should be terminating legal canvassing activity.


I filed a complaint about the incident. In doing so, I asked that Phoenix police educate officers about the difference between political canvassing and solicitation. The persons I spoke to showed no interest in such education.


I still await a response to the complaint.


Editor's note: Some details of the incident are in dispute. Phoenix Police said an officer responded on a call of a man who was walking in the neighborhood, stopping in front of houses and jotting down notes. The man was not going door-to-door to make contact with anyone. A police spokesman acknowledged the officer mistakenly told the man he needed additional identification in order to solicit. But he said the officer did not instruct the man to leave. He also said police investigators attempted to call McFadden multiple times after a complaint was filed but did not receive a call back.


Garrick McFadden is a Democratic candidate in Arizona’s 6th Congressional District. Reach him at info@electgarrick.com.


READ MORE:


Want more opinions? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
