


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Hundreds of students at Scottsdale and Florence high schools left their classes for a silent demonstration to honor victims of the Florida shooting.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Students walked out of Mesa High School Wednesday. The walkout came as students in the Phoenix area and the nation are calling for action from lawmakers after the shooting in Parkland, Florida. azcentral.com.
    Wochit

Valley schools
(Photo: azcentral.com)

Hundreds of students at  two Arizona high schools briefly left their classrooms for a silent demonstration Thursday morning to honor the victims of last week's massacre at a Florida high school.


The demonstrations at Poston Butte High School in Florence and Desert Mountain High School in Scottsdale follow staged student walkouts at three high schools in the Southeast Valley Wednesday and ahead of what is likely to be more Arizona student protests planned for the coming weeks.


Thousands of other students across the U.S. also walked out of school, either in protest of gun violence or in solidarity with the victims of the massacre at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida.


MORE: Gilbert, San Tan Valley, Mesa students walk out for 17 killed at Florida high school


Students at both Poston Butte and Desert Mountain high schools organized demonstrations during the school day in which they stood silent for 17 minutes in honor of the 17 victims from last week's shooting rampage.


Videos posted on Snapchat showed hundreds of Poston Butte students lined around the school's football field. The videos showed students huddled in silence — some of them holding hands or bowing their heads — as a television helicopter whirred above them in the distance.


The students stood in silence around the football field for 17 minutes, then walked back toward the school's campus to resume regular instruction.


Chris Knutsen, superintendent of the Florence Unified School District, said he supported his students' demonstration, which he described as "a very peaceful, appropriate meeting for our kids" that minimized disruption to the school day.


About half the school's 1,460 students participated in the 10 a.m. moment of silence demonstration, Knutsen said.


Knutsen and a school board member walked out with students.


"Sometimes we need to listen to our kids," Knutsen said. "We continue to see these things happen in our nation and I think sometimes we need to listen to our kids to help stop these mass shootings from happening in our country."


MORE: National School Walkout to protest gun violence


Richard Franco, spokesman for the Florence Unified School District, said the district contacted the Pinal County Sheriff's Office to help provide security for the demonstration.


Franco said students who participated will not be disciplined "as long as they are working with school leadership to not disrupt the educational environment."


"We are working with student leaders at all three high schools to give students the opportunity to come together and share their concerns as well as show their support for one another on March 14," Franco said.


At Desert Mountain High School in Scottsdale, students walked out of their classes at about noon and held their own silent demonstration.


Madison Kelly, a Desert Mountain student and one of the demonstration's organizers, said the school was "supportive of us speaking out for a change."


Kelly said Desert Mountain administrators assured students that they would not be disciplined for walking out of class as long as they did it peacefully.


“The tragedy in Parkland, Florida last week has left us all heartbroken," Scottsdale schools superintendent Denise Birdwell wrote in a letter to parents. "Here in the Scottsdale Unified School District, we have taken some time to process the news and find we are still at a loss for words."


READ MORE:


Classes canceled after social media threat involving St. Mary's High School in Phoenix


Mesa schools among those checking into viral social-media threat


LIMITED TIME: Get a digital subscription to azcentral.com for $4.99 per month

 
