


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The WESTMARC 25th Anniversary Best of the West Awards honored the contributions to the image, lifestyle and economic development of the West Valley.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The WESTMARC 25th anniversary Best of the West Awards honor outstanding economic contributions to the West Valley.
(Photo: WESTMARC)




The WESTMARC 25th anniversary Best of the West Awards Dinner on Thursday at the University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale honored the outstanding contributions to the image, lifestyle and economic development of the West Valley.


Awards were presented in the categories of Economic Engine; Quality of Life Within the Community; and Education, and Excellence in Innovation. In addition to these three awards, WESTMARC also presented the West Valley Regional Advancement Award, Inspiration in Leadership and President’s Choice awards.


Joe La Rue is executive vice president of Sun Health, a non-profit organization that champions healthy living and more, won the West Valley Inspiration in Leadership Award. (Photo: WESTMARC)

Award recipient: Joe La Rue, Sun Health


La Rue is executive vice president of Sun Health, a non-profit organization that champions healthy living, research and superior health care through community partnerships that create, develop and foster superior living, learning and working environments.


He is responsible for managing the real estate portfolio for Sun Health, including, overall campus master planning and development. This includes managing the development of Sun Health’s three Continuing Care Retirement Communities in Northwest Phoenix.


La Rue was appointed to the State Transportation Board to represent Maricopa County in March 2012. He is a former member of the Maricopa County Transportation Advisory Board, representing Supervisory District 4. La Rue is a past member of the WESTMARC Board Directors. In addition, Joe served a four-year term on the Peoria City Council from 1997-2001.


John Graham, who works at Sunbelt Holdings, won the West Valley Regional Advancement Award Recipient. (Photo: WESTMARC)

Award recipient: John Graham, Sunbelt Holdings


John Graham joined Sunbelt Holdings in 1982 and became president in 1990. His background in asset management, development and real estate investment provides a solid foundation of knowledge and experience in the real estate field. Under Graham's direction, Sunbelt Holdings has become a dominant force in both community affairs and real estate activities. His prior experience included the Koll Co. in asset management and development from 1980 to 1982 and Coldwell Banker in asset management and sales from 1978 to 1980.


Award recipient: Mike Hoover, City of Surprise


Hoover has been with the Surprise Economic Development Department since February 2008.


His primary focus includes industrial and office recruitment for the Surprise employment districts. He works closely with the Greater Phoenix Economic Council and other regional organizations to bring quality employers to the City of Surprise.


Hoover holds a bachelor’s in global business from Arizona State University-West. His main emphasis was in marketing. Before Hoover enrolled at ASU, he spent two years attending college in Nebraska on a golf scholarship.


Hoover's exposure to large high-tech employers and more than 10 years’ experience in marketing position him to be a key contributor to future economic development in Surprise.


The Economic Engine Award recognizes individuals, organizations, businesses, facilities or programs that have created a significant economic impact for the West Valley. Nominees are not judged only by the sheer size of the nomination’s impact; critical factors of a nomination may include the economic effect in proportion to the size of nominee to the population nominee serves, the adversity that faced the nomination and the ingenuity of the nomination.


Award recipient: PV | 303 Business Park


The PV|303 Business Park is a 1,600-acre master-planned business park located near the confluence of Interstate 10 and Loop 303 in Goodyear.


PV|303 is the home of world-class businesses like Sub-Zero, Dicks Sporting Goods and REI. In 2017, PV|303 announced the location of three additional businesses, which will create nearly 2,000 jobs in office, manufacturing and logistics sectors, as well as invest nearly half a billion dollars in the West Valley.


Those businesses include a corporate office and logistics operation for international grocer Aldi Inc.; a technologically advanced manufacturing plant for Ball Corp.; and a regional hub for United Parcel Service (UPS).














The Quality of Life Enhancement Award was developed to recognize individuals, organizations, businesses, facilities or programs that have enhanced the quality of life for West Valley residents.


Tri-City West Thornwood Branch of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Metro Phoenix won the West Valley Quality of Life Enhancement Award. (Photo: WESTMARC)

Quality of Life Enhancement Award in the Community award recipient: Tri-City West Thornwood Branch of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Metro Phoenix


Welcoming kids from Avondale, Litchfield Park, Goodyear and Buckeye, the TCW Club enhances community life with after-school and summer programs focused upon academic excellence, healthy lifestyle choices, good character development and job readiness. Club members interact with each other and staff in an environment that encourages personal development, inspires dreams and builds friendships. Physical health is enhanced while playing in the gym and enjoying daily nutritious hot meals and healthy snacks. Prevention and leadership programs help youth make positive choices that lead to successful futures.





Quality of Life Enhancement Award in Education award recipient: Peoria Unified School District Career and Technical Education Program


Peoria CTE prepares students to excel by providing 25 CTE programs meeting the needs of the community. The program boasts a 99.7 percent graduation rate and offers opportunities to prepare for employment success while saving parents time and money.




















The Excellence in Innovation Award was developed to recognize individuals, organizations, businesses, facilities or programs which have demonstrated an innovative concept to accomplish one of the following: fulfills a need for West Valley residents, preserves the West Valley’s assets or resources and creates an economic benefit for the West Valley.


The City of Goodyear and the Salt River Project won the Excellence in Innovation Award through a partnership to overcome water-supply challenges. (Photo: WESTMARC)

Excellence in Innovation Award recipient: City of Goodyear &amp; Salt River Project


How to overcome a water-supply challenge led to a landmark partnership between Salt River Project and the city of Goodyear. Due to geography, the city was not able to get direct delivery of its share of Colorado River water. SRP agreed to deliver Goodyear’s Central Arizona Project (CAP) water allocation for 100 years to a location within 5 miles of the city’s boundary. This partnership is landmark because SRP will be delivering Colorado River water to an entity completely outside its water service area — a first for the company. This partnership saves the city hundreds of millions of dollars in infrastructure costs had the city built its own water transmission system to the CAP system.


Goodyear was seeking to obtain access to its allotment of Colorado River water to help spur future growth and development. After researching several options — most of which required new construction of piping and would be very costly — city staff approached SRP officials with a proposal to utilize its existing infrastructure to deliver the water to a location near the city boundary.


Because the partnership is for 100 years, the Arizona Department of Water Resources recognizes the city’s full Colorado River entitlements for the first time. Besides saving the city money, this agreement also helps SRP keep its marginal costs down by having increased flows within its system.

















Economic Engine Award: City of Surprise Bell/Grand Bridge to Business Program


Quality of Life Enhancement in the Community: Valley View Community Food Bank


Quality of Life Enhancement in Education: Landmark Elementary School


Excellence in Innovation: Peoria Unified School District MET Professional Academy


READ MORE:


Arizona Republic, Beatitudes Campus, Lyft executives honored with ATHENA awards


Arizona Republic staffers win at the annual Rocky Mountain Emmy Awards


Westmarc's 2016 Best of the West (Valley) winners are ...
