


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The vote triggered a series of dramatic floor speeches in which many lawmakers shed tears. Some doubted whether they would stay in politics.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Arizona House Speaker J.D. Mesnard records the vote to officially expel Rep. Don Shooter from the House on Feb. 1, 2018. Carly Henry/azcentral.com
    

Rep. Michelle Ugenti-Rita walks with Rep. Kelly Townsend after House legislators voted to expel Rep. Don Shooter from office on Feb. 1, 2018 at the Arizona House of Representatives chambers in Phoenix.
(Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

On Thursday, the Arizona House of Representatives voted to expel Rep. Don Shooter over complaints that he sexually harassed women.


The vote triggered a series of dramatic floor speeches in which many lawmakers shed tears. Some doubted whether they would stay in politics. A few argued against removing Shooter.


Here are some of the key statements from the floor debate.


"I found a culture down where when I was elected that was shocking. And I committed to doing everything I can to make a change. There's dignity in this body, more than there was when I found it." — House Majority Whip Kelly Townsend, R-Mesa


"You guys need to knock if off. What we are doing here is important. We have kids down on this floor and in these desks. We're supposed to make an example to them. This is not OK." — Rep.  Becky Nutt, R-Clifton


READ MORE: Arizona House expels Don Shooter for sexual harassment



    Rep. Don Shooter speaks to the Arizona House during a House vote on whether to remove him from office following the release of a report detailing allegations of sexual harassment and inappropriate behavior at the Capitol. Carly Henry/azcentral.com
    

"The accusations go beyond friendship. ... All of us must pick a time when we stand up for what is fair and what is just." — Rep. Jay Lawrence, R-Scottsdale, who described Shooter as a friend


"I believe it's up to the people of his district to either expel him or not. I think that is the real judging body. And I am willing to censure Mr. Shooter, reprimand him, admonish him, and everything we can do. But when it comes to expulsion ... I think it's better for the people of his district to make that decision." — Rep. Noel Campbell, R-Prescott


"This is on par with two other difficult votes that I have made: One was to impeach a governor; the other was to expel a Democratic colleague in the Senate. Today, I stand before you with a broken heart." — Rep. Lela Alston, D-Phoenix


"For those who think that he's a good ol' boy, a class clown, he means well but just doesn't know how to behave: I can't disagree with you more. I have dealt with this behavior for six years ... It's been systematic." — Rep. Darin Mitchell, R-Goodyear


"The fate of any bill or an agency's budget should depend solely on its merits, not on whether the appropriations chairman or any other powerful lawmaker finds a lobbyist or a colleague attractive or whether that lobbyist or colleague responds to his advances." — House Minority Leader Rebecca Rios, D-Phoenix


READ MORE:


4 key takeaways from Shooter harassment report


Report: Rep. Shooter sexually harassed women


Sexist culture endures at Arizona Capitol, insiders say


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
