


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Arizona State Board of Education unanimously voted to appoint a receiver to oversee the Murphy School District amid a $2.2 million deficit.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The State Board of Education met in Phoenix, Monday, June 25, 2018.
    Tom Tingle/The Republic

Angelica Zavala and her daughter, Thaily Chaga, 5, protest in front of the Murphy Elementary School District offices in Phoenix on July 13, 2016. Several dozen parents, including Zavala, withdrew their children from the district, saying the kids are not getting an adequate education.
(Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

When Robert Donofrio retired as the longtime superintendent of Murphy Elementary School District in 2004, the small district had a "well-regarded" reputation, he said.


Murphy led its cohort of low-income, urban Phoenix schools in student achievement, and the district appeared to be a model of cohesiveness among parents, educators and community members.


Fourteen years later — as superintendents came and went, teachers cycled through in droves, and a large swath of parents became disillusioned with district leadership — Murphy's fate now rests with the state.


Monday, the Arizona State Board of Education unanimously voted to appoint a receiver to oversee the district's operation amid a $2.2 million spending deficit that publicly unraveled years of tension within the community and mismanagement in the district.


“If we don’t give them help, I don’t know what’s going to happen with these children. I think they’ve suffered enough.”


State intervention in public schools is rare in Arizona, and it is unclear how many years the receivership process will last for Murphy.


Five Arizona schools have gone into receivership since 2005, according to the state education board. Of those schools, one district, Cedar Unified in Navajo County has remained in receivership since 2011.


Murphy representatives who attended the state board meeting welcomed the decision, which essentially amounts to a state takeover, saying the district needs more oversight and guidance to get through this low point.


RELATED: Phoenix Murphy school district cuts teachers; class sizes balloon 


"It hurts me to be here today," Donofrio, who returned to Murphy in March as a volunteer consultant, said Monday before the board's vote.


Murphy, which operates four elementary schools with about 1,450 students in west Phoenix, will have overspent its 2017-18 budget by between $400,000 to $500,000. A proposed budget for 2018-19 shows $1.2 million in projected over-expenditures. 


Despite the deficit, teachers in the district are slotted to receive 10 percent pay raises as a result of additional state education funding.


Under Arizona law, the state board can authorize the receiver, Phoenix-based Simon Consulting, to override any decisions by the Murphy superintendent or school board that have anything to do with the operation of the district.


"There is absolutely nothing wrong with the state or the county walking in and monitoring this district’s financials," Eric Buckmaster, a former Murphy board member serving as a volunteer consultant, told the board.


“We’re asking for help. I don’t think of this as a black eye."


Parents, teachers and community members first learned of the budget deficit that led to Murphy's receivership three days before a raucous February school board meeting.


“We welcome your help and guidance. We welcome you coming in and telling us what you think we need to do.”


At that meeting, school leaders had proposed instituting furlough days and retroactively cutting teachers' pay for the school year by five percent to reduce a projected $2.2 million spending deficit. They needed to make those cuts, board members said at the time, or the district would not have enough money to operate beyond its spring break.


The Murphy board voted down the proposal following widespread backlash from teachers, parents and even some students who blamed then-Superintendent Jose Diaz, then-board president Richard Polanco and the rest of the school board for financial mismanagement and incompetency. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The meeting — three weeks before a statewide teacher activism movement heightened public awareness of low teacher pay — was a flash point for a community that has long been frustrated over the district's direction.


Dozens of Murphy teachers and instructional aides didn't show up to work that day in protest. And hours before the meeting, more than 150 angry parents and teachers marched outside the district office wielding signs that read, "teachers are human; treat them humanely."


At the meeting, when it was suggested by a board member that the district was at risk for state takeover, the crowd of hundreds of people loudly cheered in approval.


Diaz retired Feb. 28 after nearly four years as superintendent. Polanco resigned from the board the next day.


Donofrio, Buckmaster, and Bill Maas, a retired school finance official with decades of experience, were brought in as volunteer consultants to help the district stave off state intervention.


With guidance from the trio and county superintendent's office, the district reduced its deficit in part by canceling purchase orders and breaking an agreement with a third-party contractor the district used to staff certified teaching positions.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The cost-cutting negatively impacted teachers and students. At least one school, Kuban Elementary School, dealt with very large classroom sizes — as high as 47 students in one class — for the remainder of the year.


Murphy for years lost top-level administrators and left their positions vacant. The district's human resources director resigned in summer 2016 and the position remains unfilled.


Murphy's assistant superintendent for business services resigned the following summer and the position was outsourced to an outside consulting firm. 


Meeting documents show Murphy has no transportation director. After Diaz resigned, the school board appointed Bryan Borden, assistant superintendent for curriculum, instruction and assessment, as the district's interim superintendent.


Borden has also now left the district — Murphy had gone without a leader for about three weeks, according to Donofrio — leaving two more administrative vacancies.


Murphy Elementary School District Superintendent Jose Diaz will be retiring from the district, says Richard Polanco, president of the Murphy school board. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

The executive secretary for the superintendent and school board appears to also be vacant for the moment. The secretary, Patricia Ramirez, was put on paid administrative leave in mid-May while the district launched an investigation related to her conduct, according to a district document. 


RELATED: Opinion: Why does Murphy School District even exist?


Thursday, the board appointed Laurie Black, the director of the Murphy's Head Start program, as interim superintendent. 


Patricia Blanton, Murphy's director of student support services, told the state board Monday that teachers and staff were "very dedicated" toward their students, but also that they "have been tired, and many good people have left the district."


Blanton, the first Murphy administrator to publicly speak about the district's tumult since the February meeting, said the deficit "has been due to poor leadership." 


“We’re asking for help. I don’t think of this as a black eye.”


She said she felt district staff "has been maligned" and unfairly blamed for the deficit.


“I’m (director of) student support services, and yet I drive buses, I tutor, I substitute, I’ve helped serve lunch," Blanton said.


Blanton also told the board: "“We welcome your help and guidance. We welcome you coming in and telling us what you think we need to do.”


The Murphy board, following February's meeting, had operated with only two out of five members. County Superintendent Steve Watson has appointed three new board members to fill vacancies.


A longstanding criticism from parents and community members has been that the board lacks the competence to follow basic procedural policies. At a Thursday meeting, board members mistakenly attempted to adjourn the meeting before discussing the last item on their agenda: A presentation on Murphy's 2018-19 budget.


Donofrio said he found "several things that were suspect" with the district's finances once he began consulting.


He accused Diaz and Polanco of adopting a 2017-18 budget they "knew was going to not flow, so much so that the chief financial officer resigned rather than be part of that."


“They do not know how hard I have tried.”


Diaz had not responded to multiple requests for comment by The Arizona Republic since his retirement.


Donofrio, who was Murphy's superintendent for 18 years, took issue with the board's decision to approve a 10 percent performance-based bonus for Diaz in December "for an F, two D's and a C," referencing the Murphy's school letter-grade marks.


Diaz earned a base salary of $110,000, according to his 2016-17 contract.


The first public indication of unrest in the Murphy district came in July 2016. Two dozen parents protested outside the district office in summer heat. They crowded the office's lobby as they tried to withdraw their kids from the district and enroll them elsewhere.


The parents were fed up with the district's over-reliance on long-term substitutes and ballooning classroom sizes.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

That school year, 19 of Murphy's 87 teachers were long-term substitutes, according to a teacher-certification database created by The Republic. Only 48 teachers — or 55 percent — of the district's teachers held the state's full qualifications of a standard certificate.


A relentless decline in student enrollment has exacerbated Murphy's challenges.


About 900 kids have left the district over the past decade, accounting for a 39 percent decrease in enrollment and $3 million less in per-pupil dollars, the main source of funding for public schools.


In an interview with a Republic reporter the day of that July protest, Diaz said he was doing everything he could to steer the district in the right direction. 


Diaz spoke about a rough childhood in Mexico that fueled his desire to teach students from poor upbringings. 


MORE: Arizona's #RedForEd movement evolves into quieter, broader political force


His father was killed when he was 2. He lived in a home with no electricity and walked three miles to and from school. He commonly referred to Murphy students as "my babies."


As irate parents gathered outside his office, Diaz said all he needed was a fair shot at leading the district.


"They do not know how hard I have tried," Diaz said at the time.


At Monday's gathering, state board members seemed to believe that the Murphy district will not be able to overcome its challenges on its own.


“No offense to anybody in Murphy, but it's very dysfunctional at this point," said State Superintendent of Public Instruction Diane Douglas, who sits on the state board.


“It’s almost hard to imagine how they’re going to come through this, at this point," Douglas said. "If we don’t give them help, I don’t know what’s going to happen with these children. I think they’ve suffered enough.”


Reach the reporter at Ricardo.Cano@gannett.com and 602-444-8236. Follow him on Twitter: @Ricardo_Cano1.



    Arizona is in the midst of a teacher shortage. Many schools and students are grappling with the consequences. What's behind the shortage? Republic reporter Ricardo Cano explains in this episode of azcentral Rewind.
    

READ MORE: 
