


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Some of the most satisfying makeovers in Phoenix will be on display at the annual Historic Roosevelt Neighborhood home tour on Sunday, Nov. 19.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A 2nd Avenue home is pictured on Monday, Nov. 6, 2017, in Phoenix.
(Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

Everybody loves a good makeover, right?


So get ready: Some of the most satisfying makeovers in Phoenix will be on display at the annual Historic Roosevelt Neighborhood home tour on Sunday, Nov. 19 — including the neighborhood itself.


Designated in 1986 as the first residential historic district in Phoenix, Roosevelt stretches from McDowell Road to Fillmore Street and from Central to Seventh Avenues, an area that today mixes brand-new condos with pre-war bungalows, and century-old churches with locally owned coffee shops.


Andie Abkarian, president of the Roosevelt Action Association, which organizes the tour, has lived in the neighborhood for almost 20 years and is excited to show off the balance of past and present that she said makes it special.


The Great Arizona Puppet Theater is pictured on Monday, Nov. 6, 2017, in Phoenix. It was nearly destroyed in the 1970s during the construction of I-10. (Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

"Roosevelt has such a great history," she explained. "The first movers and shakers in Phoenix lived here starting in the late 1800s."


With spacious lots and roomy — by territorial standards — houses, Roosevelt was once known as the "Silk Stocking" district because so many judges, attorneys and influential businesspeople built homes there.


By the mid-20th century, though, many residents had moved to the suburbs, leaving abandoned properties behind. But after remaining Roosevelt loyalists formed the action association in 1981, they were able to spur revitalization efforts that Abkarian said continue today.


"When we started, there wasn't a lot going on here," she admitted. "There was a lot of potential, but this wasn't really considered a place to be."


Today, however, the Roosevelt district is a popular incubator for arts and small businesses, as well as a living time capsule, with many historically significant buildings that date back a century or more. Where trolley lines once ran, bike routes and light-rail stations now offer more modern transit options, but the tree-lined streets and shady porches still keep old Phoenix alive.


That turnaround is a source of pride for Abkarian, who also loves her neighborhood's proximity to Hance Park, Burton Barr library and the downtown commercial districts and performance venues.


"It's definitely lively here now," she said.


The upcoming event, which celebrates that revival and serves as a fundraiser for neighborhood projects, will include food trucks and craft vendors as well as self-guided explorations of several homes and buildings within easy walking distance of one another — and nearby restaurants offer additional options for snack breaks along the way.


The tour will showcase the area's transformation through the decades, during which some older buildings have been restored, others have been replaced by new construction, and still, others have been adapted to new uses.


The interior of the Great Arizona Puppet Theater is pictured on Monday, Nov. 6, 2017, in Phoenix. The structure was designed by well-known Mormon architects Pope and Burton in an elegant Spanish Mission Revival style. (Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

One of the most impressive adaptations, the building that houses the Great Arizona Puppet Theater will be featured this year. Built in 1929 as the Phoenix Second Ward meetinghouse of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the structure was designed by well-known Mormon architects Pope and Burton in an elegant Spanish Mission Revival style. It was, however, nearly destroyed in the 1970s during the construction of I-10. Although public protest saved the church from demolition, it sat empty until 1996 when the puppet theater purchased it from the highway department.


Nancy Smith, the theater's director, said the group has been slowly restoring the building to its original glory.


A lobby, box office and gift shop now occupy the former chapel, while performances take place in the old social hall. But despite the change in use, the theater aims to preserve as much as possible of the 1929 design.


"Of course it doesn't look like a church anymore," Smith acknowledged, "but we try to use the same finishes and respect the history."


To that end, the group was able to get a copy of the original plans from the Latter-day Saints archives in Salt Lake City, and even tracked down a man who had attended services at the meetinghouse as a child and was able to recall details of the interior that had been lost to time and weather.


Although the tour will invite visitors into the restored auditorium and lobby areas, it will also allow a behind-the-scenes glimpse into parts of the building not usually open to the public, including Sunday school classrooms that now house sewing and puppet-making studios.


Tour participants who stop by after 2 p.m. can watch a bit of "Imagine This!," the theater's annual co-production with students from nearby Kenilworth School, but other puppets will be on display all day, as well as historic photos that illustrate the continuing rehabilitation of what Smith called "a really, really, really beautiful building."


"We've seen a lot of changes since we moved here," Smith said, "and I feel like we've grown up with this area, so we're super excited for people to see it all."


Caroline Van Slyke poses for a portrait in her 2nd Avenue bungalow built in 1903 on Monday, Nov. 6, 2017, in Phoenix. (Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

A few blocks away, Caroline and David Van Slyke are equally excited to show people the 1903 bungalow that they've nicknamed the "Boho Farm and Home."


When the couple first saw the building in 2014, however, it was nothing to celebrate.


Vacant for years, the derelict house was boarded up, and the yard, barricaded by chain link, was a slab of brown dirt too barren to grow even weeds.


"When we walked in, it was scary, scary, scary," remembered Caroline. "Just ... scary."


But the couple wanted to be closer to David's job downtown, and Caroline — an interior designer with a passion for gardening — loved the idea of bringing the untended property back to life.


Today, their quarter-acre lot is an oasis of color and vitality. Roses, fruit trees and organic vegetables surround the small brick house. Chickens and ducks graze in the backyard, which also features a new pizza oven and a re-created "carriage house" for guests. Inside the main home, artwork and bright paint cover the walls, and a marble-topped kitchen island serves as a hub for the farm-to-table dinners the Van Slykes host in spring and fall.


Although the transformation has been dramatic, Caroline sees it as just another chapter in a larger saga.


"I like that this house has a story that went on before us and it will go on after us," she explained. "This house is older than Arizona statehood. It has a life outside of us."


The backyard and guest house are pictured at a 2nd Avenue home on Monday, Nov. 6, 2017, in Phoenix. (Photo: Sean Logan/The Republic)

Along with the resurrection of the Van Slykes' bungalow, and the painstaking renovations at Great Arizona Puppet Theater, Abkarian said the tour will feature a diverse mix of properties that should appeal equally to history buffs and architecture aficionados.


And, for anyone who wants more details, Marshall Shore — known as Arizona's Hip Historian — will lead private tours-within-the-tour, offering his own insights into the legacy and evolution of the Silk Stocking district.


But no matter how participants opt to explore, Abkarian feels confident they'll come away with a new appreciation for her neighborhood.


"People love our tour because it's such a great mix of interesting houses and history, but also because Roosevelt has so much character. It's just a great place."


Details: 10 a.m.-3 p.m. Sunday, Nov. 19, beginning at Fifth Avenue and Portland Street. Tickets: $13 in advance; $16 after Nov. 18. Private tours with Marshall Shore are $22 in advance; $25 after Nov. 18. http://www.rooseveltneighborhood.org/historic-home-tour


READ MORE:


Cool Home: Architect couple transform Tempe bungalow into unconventional paradise


Cool Home: Couple adds contemporary flair to midcentury 'Haver home'


Art or eyesore? Peoria man paints home in rainbow stripes
