


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Phoenix woman Mary Frances Bauer was sentenced to 33 months in federal prison for defrauding dozens of charities for more than $1 million.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Crime
(Photo: azcentral.com)

Just in time for the holidays, dozens of local and national charities that were defrauded out of more than a million dollars by a Phoenix woman were given justice.


Fundraising consultant Mary Frances Bauer, 54, was sentenced on Monday to 33 months in federal prison by U.S. District Judge G. Murray Snow in Phoenix.


Bauer, also known as Mary Almassy, was also sentenced to three years of supervised release and must pay more than $1 million in restitution, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.


Prosecutors said Bauer defrauded charities dedicated to curing debilitating diseases, educating children, and saving injured wildlife between January 2009 and August 2014.


Her schemes involved charging consultation fees to charitable organizations with the promise of large donations. Bauer would tell charities that she and her associates could get access to wealthy philanthropists from out of state, prosecutors said.


As sole owner and operator of Fundraising Consultants, Ltd., Bauer "used fictitious employees, associates, and donors to lull the non-profits into continuing to pay ... fees, and then she used the fees to fund the fraud and pay her personal expenses."


She pleaded guilty to wire fraud in June.


"Frauds against charities are far-reaching, because they hurt not only the organizations, but the people the charities seek to serve, and the persons who have given to support the cause," said Elizabeth A. Strange, First Assistant U.S. Attorney for the District of Arizona.


Bauer is expected to start her sentence by Feb. 12, per the U.S. Attorney's Office.


READ MORE:


$10M excessive force lawsuit filed over man's death


Phoenix police extend landfill search for missing mom


Man arrested in 'Thirsty Cowboy' armed robberies


2005 sex assault kit helps identify suspect in string of sex assaults
