


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

At least 22,000 people rallied in Women's Marches in Arizona, adding to the thousands across the world who marched.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Marchers gathered in Phoenix on Sunday, Jan. 21, 2018, a year after hundreds of thousands across the country gathered in protest after President Donald Trump's first day in office. Johanna Huckeba/azcentral
    Wochit

Handmaids' Resistance participate in the Women's March to the Polls 2018 at the Arizona State Capitol in Phoenix on Jan. 21, 2018. Handmaids' resistance wants to raise awareness to attacks on women's reproductive freedoms and access to life-saving healthcare.
(Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

At least 22,000 people participated in women's marches in Arizona this weekend, adding to the hundreds of thousands who rallied across the country and around the world Saturday and Sunday in support of female empowerment.


In Phoenix, the "Women's March to the Polls" drew at least 20,000 to the Arizona State Capitol on Sunday, the anniversary of the Women's March on Washington and its sister marches, which drew millions of people into the streets to protest President Donald Trump's first day in office a year ago.


More than 2,000 people participated in marches also in five other Arizona cities and towns Saturday. About 1,400 attended a march in Prescott, according to Prescott eNews. Hundreds of people marched while in Sedona as it rained, and hundreds more marched in Flagstaff while it snowed.


Elsewhere on Saturday, a slew of celebrities addressed a crowd of hundreds of thousands of demonstrators in Los Angeles and at least 200,000 turned out in New York City on Saturday.


Cher speaks at the Women's March: "Power to the Polls" event on Jan. 21, 2018, at Sam Boyd Stadium in Las Vegas, Nevada. (Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

MORE: 'The real march is on Election Day': Women march around the world for a second day


Thousands more rallied outside Prime Minister Theresa May's home in London, and in Australia, more than 1,500 people linked arms around Sydney's Hyde Park in a chain of solidarity, chanting "We are unbroken."


The Phoenix march came one day after 4,500 people gathered at the Capitol for the Arizona for Life March and Rally, part of the nationwide anti-abortion movement.


Several underrepresented groups organized separate meetups to congregate with the main event in Phoenix Sunday, including one meeting billed on Facebook as, "Honoring Indigenous Women Leading The Women's March."


Arizona indigenous women are gathering before the Women's March in Phoenix on Sunday, Jan. 21, 2018, to raise awareness about missing and murdered indigenous women. (Photo: Lorraine Longhi/The Republic)

After reaching out to the organizers of the Women’s March and learning that there were no indigenous women on the committee, Nalene Gene and Eve Reyes-Aguirre worked to educate the organizers about the separate issues and priorities facing indigenous women.


"Looking at the women marches in general, we noticed a pattern of invisibility with indigenous women and women of color,” said Eve Reyes-Aguirre, who is running for U.S. Senate and says she is the only candidate advocating for indigenous women as part of her platform.


SEE ALSO: Is the Women's March more inclusive this year?


The Indigenous Women's march focused on the missing and murdered indigenous women in their communities, she said.


"This is happening everywhere," said Reyes-Aguirre. "We’re here to support them and raise awareness that this is a huge issue for all indigenous women."


More than four in five, or 84.3 percent, of Native American women have experienced violence in their lifetime, with over 90 percent having experienced violence at the hands of a non-tribal member, according to a Department of Justice research study. 


Native American women are 2.5 times as likely to experience violent crimes, and at least 2 times more likely to experience rape or sexual assault, compared to all other races, according to a policy paper by the National Congress of American Indians.


Honor Fisher drove a group of 12 people from the Colorado River Indian Tribes near Parker, a 2½-hour drive from the state Capitol in Phoenix. She said at least 75 tribal members made the drive for the march.


Wenona Benally tells the story of the murder of Loreal Tsingine to the crowd. &amp;ldquo;We are strong, we are beautiful and we are here today... We March in solidarity with all of you.&amp;rdquo; (Photo: Ryan Santistevan/The Republic)

"That’s why we wear the red. It’s to honor the murdered and missing," she said. 


Speaking to the crowd before the march, Wenona Benally, a Navajo member of the Arizona House of Representatives, recounted the death of Loreal Tsingine to the crowd. Tsingine was shot five times and killed in 2016 after a Winslow police officer responded to a report of a convenience-store theft. 


MORE: The death of Loreal Tsingine, as told by the Winslow police officer who shot her


"Make no mistake. We are resilient," said Benally to an emotional crowd. "We will never forget their names and we will never give up seeking justice on their behalf."


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

An array of women addressed the expansive crowd from a small stage in front of the state Capitol before the march began. The sound system boomed to the edge of the crowds on the north and south ends of the capitol lawn. 


Transgender activist Juli Myers encouraged attendees to not simply support transgender issues, but ask questions and listen to what the transgender community has to say.


Myers also derided the announcement this week that the Department of Health and Human Services created a Conscience and Religious Freedom Division, which could benefit health-care workers who want to deny people care based on their moral or religious beliefs. 


Another speaker, Laila Ikram, is the first woman to create a civil rights law firm in Arizona. She said that since childhood and into adulthood, she has struggled with being discriminated against because she wears a hijab.


"I couldn’t give in to the status quo," Ikram said. "I joined the (Equal Employment Opportunity Commission) and I saw firsthand what the harassment women and Muslims face in the state."


She referred to one case in which employees at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport from several African countries had been repeatedly called monkeys by a manager. The EEOC was able to win $250,000 for the employees.


"At that point, I understood that the way to fight back against discrimination and harassment is through the legal system, so I went to law school."


Iris Marku, of Phoenix, left, and Mikele Keiffer, of Phoenix, participate in the Women's March to the Polls 2018 at the Arizona State Capitol in Phoenix on Jan. 21, 2018. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

Imelda Ojeda, one of the Phoenix march organizers, said there was a lot of outreach through Spanish media to attract the Latino community to the march in hopes of bringing more diversity to this year's march.


"Last year we noticed the crowd was more of one specific group," Ojeda said. "So this time because of the theme, we were being more inclusive, not just with women’s issues but with immigration and education."


She said the effort to include someone from every group was important for the 2018 event, "March to the Polls." 


"We know that the power of the women’s vote and the minority vote is going to make a big change, especially in Arizona during a controversial election year," Ojeda said. "Historically, Latinos have a low turnout in voting."


Balsz School District Governing Board member Channel Powe talked about being a black woman in an elected office. 


"When I am under attack as a woman, as a black woman, as a confident black woman who speaks up and speaks out as an elected representative, it is incumbent upon you. We don't need allies, we need comrades," Powe said, earning cheers from the crowd. 


She also spoke at gathering for black women before the march, in the nearby Wesley Bolin Memorial Plaza, as did Berdetta Hodge, who last November became the first black woman elected to the Tempe Union High School District governing board.


March organizer Eva Burch said last year's event was mostly a protest, whereas this year it's about volunteering, voting and making an impact in the midterm elections.


Many attendees browsed dozens of tables representing organizations and candidates ranging from Planned Parenthood of Arizona and the ACLU to community efforts including Stand Indivisible Scottsdale and azresist.com, an event calendar of activists. 


Volunteers with Mi Familia Vota and the Elections Department of the Maricopa County Recorder's Office said at least 100 people registered to vote during the march. 


April Reed, vice president of advocacy for Ability360, which offers programs to empower people with disabilities, visited with attendees at a table on the Capitol's north lawn. 


"I think sometimes for people with disabilities it’s easy for us to isolate or to think that people don’t see us when we could be one of the most powerful voting blocs," she said. People with disabilities make up the largest minority group in the country.


"We don’t care how you vote, we just want you to use that vote," she said. 


A spokesperson for Planned Parenthood Arizona said that by the end of the march, approximately 1,000 people had signed up to volunteer with the organization.


SEE ALSO: Las Vegas Women's March 2018 draws thousands to Sunday event


Andromeda Col&amp;ograve;n participates during a Women's March to the Polls 2018 at the Arizona State Capitol in Phoenix on Jan. 21, 2018. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

Donald Trump supporter Ed Mendez, 44, stood near the end of the march holding a flag  Trump's face alongside an eagle and fireworks.


"I wanted to come to see if the march was more about women or about messages against the president," Mendez said. "Look at the signs. There are some women who are really at the march for women’s rights but a lot of people show they’re against the president."


His friend, Tahnee Gonzalez, said that if the march was just to support women she would have gladly attended, but that she tried to talk to other women and was shut down because of her pro-Trump clothing.


"How can (women) sit here and say they’re not equal when a woman helped get our president elected?" Gonzalez said, referring to the women who worked on Trump's campaign including Kellyanne Conway. "It’s complete nonsense, so I’m out here to debunk this phony march."


At one point, dozens of marchers surrounded Mendez and Gonzalez, arguing with them about feminism, Trump and the fact that Gonzalez brought her school-age daughter. 


"I always make my daughter aware of what’s going on because if they’re not aware then they are going to become victims," Mendez said. "A lot of people gave me flack for having her out here but they had their children out here as well."


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE:


Women's March in Arizona: At least 20,000 rally in Arizona


At least 36,000 attend women's marches across Arizona in 2017


Arizona ranked most 'pro-life' state in U.S. by anti-abortion group


7 facts to know about the Winslow shooting


Hundreds sign Camelback High student's petition to address sexual harassment


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.