


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Surprise may soon have one of the strictest bans on cellphone use in metro Phoenix. The suburb may ban the use of handheld cellphones while driving.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    How much do you know about distracted driving? Take this quiz and find out.
    Wochit

Willow Canyon High School students act out a scene involving a drunk and distracted driver at a mock crash event in March 2018.
(Photo: Dysart Unified School District)

A teenage boy, dressed in a tuxedo, lay bloodied and still on a crushed car hood. Another teen who had been driving while distracted and drunk was taken away in handcuffs. Passengers were in hysterics.


It was only a mock crash, but the scene, acted out by Willow Canyon High School students on their football field in March, made an impression on Surprise City Councilman Skip Hall.


After attending the event, Hall is proposing a city law, to be discussed Tuesday by the City Council, that would ban the use of hand-held cellphones or portable electronic devices while driving in the city. The proposal has the support of Surprise Police Chief Terry Young, and Hall said there is a good chance it will become law.


The law would make it illegal to talk on a cellphone, send a text message or otherwise use a phone while driving in the city, unless the phone is in hands-free mode. Police could pull over drivers they suspect are violating the law, and could issue a ticket with a $250 fine on the first offense.


If approved, it appears the law would be the strictest of its kind in metro Phoenix.


There is no statewide, all-driver ban on using hand-held communications devices while driving in Arizona, but several counties and cities in the state have related laws. Coconino and Pima counties, Oro Valley, Sedona, Tucson and some other cities ban the use of hand-held cellphones while driving, but no Valley city does.


Tempe has a distracted driving law that lets police cite drivers for talking on the phone or texting, but only if police think the drivers pose a risk to themselves or others. Some other cities, such as Flagstaff, Fountain Hills and Phoenix, ban texting while driving, but not the overall hand-held phone use.


In Surprise, Hall said the law would put the dangers of distracted driving “on the top of people's minds.”


Chief Young said he supports the new law as part of the city’s effort to reduce traffic collisions.


Nationally, about 10 percent of about 35,000 people who died in vehicle crashes in 2015 died at the hands of a distracted driver, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports.


City police last year began to focus on enforcing traffic laws after seeing an uptick in vehicle collisions and hearing from residents that they wanted it to be a priority, Young said.


The number of crashes in Surprise rose to 1,973 in 2016 from 1,574 in 2013, a 25.3 percent jump. Young said the crashes have increased as the city's population increases, but he also attributes the trend to the increased smartphone use. The department doesn’t keep data on which crashes involve distracted driving, he said, so that theory would be hard to confirm.


City police have recently cracked down, issuing more than double the number of traffic citations in 2017 (4,278) than in 2016 (1,937). 


Since early last year, the department has also advertised safe driving's importance through a “Drive Wise, Surprise” campaign. Signs are posted in high-risk areas, advertising taglines such as "Tailgating is only fun in sports," and "There's no autocorrect for bad driving."


The city of Surprise's Drive Wise campaign features posters with safe driving messages. (Photo: City of Surprise)

For more than a decade, the Arizona Legislature has considered and failed to ban texting and driving. Arizona is one of just three states — Missouri and Montana are the others — in which texting and driving remain legal for all or some drivers, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. Sixteen states also have a blanket ban on hand-held cellphone use while driving.


The state Legislature enacted a law that takes effect July 1 that restricts new drivers from cellphone use during the first six months after receiving their license.


During legislative debates considering bans for all drivers, opponents have pointed out that police could use a general law that requires people to drive at a “reasonable and prudent speed” to cite those who are using their cellphones while driving.


Young agreed this law could technically be used. For example, he said, “You could say a reasonable and prudent speed to drive while reading a book is zero,” he said. But Surprise officers aren’t directed to enforce that law in that way, he said, and if they tried, it would be harder to defend in court compared with a straightforward law against cellphone use while driving.


Under the proposal, which Young helped Hall draft, there would be exceptions. Those will be discussed by the council, but may include any use of phones while driving by emergency response operators, fire department personnel, law enforcement and others responding to emergencies.


Surprise Mayor Sharon Wolcott said she supports the concept for the Surprise proposal, but said she wanted to discuss the details.


Other Arizona cities that have banned the use of hand-held phones while driving have had difficulties enforcing their law.


In Sedona, with so many tourists driving around who may not know the local laws, it's difficult to take a hard line on the law, Sedona Police Chief David McGill said. Also, since the law is different depending on what city you're in, not everyone knows what the law is where, he said.


Sedona police have issued 154 warnings and 39 citations for hand-held cellphone use while driving since the city's law took effect April 1, 2014, McGill said.


McGill said that number seems low, compared with how often he sees people on their phones while driving. He also said there's no real way to know whether the law is preventing crashes — especially when the city sees few crashes to begin with.


But McGill said he staunchly supports hands-free cellphone laws for drivers. He came to Sedona 18 months ago after serving in law enforcement for 30 years in California, where it's illegal statewide to talk or text while driving. He said he is frustrated with Arizona legislators for not enacting a statewide ban.


When the Tempe City Council considered its now-imposed ban a few years ago, a group that studied the issue for the council heard from other cities with bans that it's difficult for law enforcement to prove that someone was texting and driving at the same time. The group recommended in a report to the council that, if the city chose to impose a ban, the ban should be applicable only when the driving constitutes a risk to that person or others.


The Governor’s Office of Highway Safety awarded the Surprise Fire-Medical Department with two grants for this year, one for the mock crash event and one for seat belt safety, that together totaled $16,030.


The mock crash event was hosted before prom to “highlight the repercussions that come with poor choices,” said Zachery Fountain, a spokesman for the Dysart Unified School District, which helped stage the event. Firefighters, first responders and police participated.


Young said it's "incredible" how often his officers see people on their phones while driving.


“If you saw someone weaving before, you used to assume that person was impaired,” he said, “but you get up there and look now and that person’s on the phone.”


A law would help raise awareness, which can help change behavior, he said.


“We can put more cops out there and write more tickets,” he said, “but the most efficient way is to create a safe driving culture.”


READ MORE ON TRAFFIC SAFETY:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
