


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Nichole Segay, 16, said a male student athlete groped her in April and Camelback High School never disciplined him.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The Camelback High School junior talks about reporting a groping incident to school officials last school year. She says her allegations against a fellow athlete were questioned and minimized. Patrick Breen/azcentral.com
    

Nichole Segay wipes tears from her eyes after telling her story during the Phoenix Union High School District Governing Board meeting in Phoenix on Nov. 2, 2017.
(Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

Nichole Segay has been a runner for as long as she can remember.


The 16-year-old comes from a long line of runners. Her sister is currently training in hopes of running in the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo, inspiring Nichole's own Olympic dreams. 


"Running was a way for me to — I had a lot of stuff going on when I was younger, so it was kind of a way to cope with it, so like stress and tragedy. I usually feel happy, at peace, but lately I've been stressed," she said.


Nichole was a 15-year-old sophomore at Camelback High School in April when, she said, a male student athlete sexually harassed her before track practice.


Six months later, she is publicly accusing the school of improperly handling her allegation.


"I am standing before you to tell you that my school administration and faculty have failed me," she told the Phoenix Union High School District governing board during a Nov. 2 meeting. 


"I have question after question, but no one I can trust to answer them at my school," she said to the board. "Why was the student who committed this act not punished? Why is there no protocol to take sexual harassment and sexual assault seriously?"


On Friday, the Phoenix Union High School District provided a written statement about the situation: "We take seriously every allegation of harassment and investigate fully in order to determine the most appropriate course of action."


In late April, Nichole said, she was stretching before practice on campus when a male athlete grabbed her buttocks. Her reaction was "disbelief," she said. 


"I guess disappointment is a good word. And ashamed of me and him," she told The Arizona Republic before the meeting.


Her mother, Belinda Segay, said she texted one of the school's coaches to tell him what happened, and he told her he would "handle it." Belinda or Nichole heard nothing further during the last few weeks of school. 


Over summer break, Nichole heard about pop singer Taylor Swift's legal victory against an ex-radio DJ who groped her, and it made her rethink her own experience. 


Belinda said, "I was cooking dinner, she comes in and goes, 'Mom, what happened to me, was that sexual assault?' I said yes, and she was shocked. Yes, it was unwanted touching. People think sexual assault means rape, but it means a lot of things."


Since the new school year began, the Segays said they have had meetings with the coach, the athletic directors for the school and the district, and the principal, but said that all have been frustrating and futile.


They later heard that the coach only told the boy not to do it again. Nichole said she feels tension and isolation at school and during cross-country team practices this fall. 


READ:  County attorney seeks more victims in Hamilton sexual-assault case


In mid-October, mother and daughter filed an incident report with the school resource officer, a step Belinda said she now knows should have happened the day her daughter said she was groped.


Within days, Nichole received an apology letter from the boy.


The Republic is not naming the accused boy because he is a minor.


"I'm not frustrated with the kid or what happened," Nichole said. "I'm more frustrated with how it was dealt with, like the coach not really doing anything, confronting him, and the principal and athletic director not really doing anything."


“I am standing before you to tell you that my school administration and faculty have failed me. ... Why was the student who committed this act not punished? Why is there no protocol to take sexual harassment and sexual assault seriously?”


The school district has policies requiring its employees to report all claims of harassment, district spokesman Craig Pletenik said Thursday, speaking generally.


When a student tells any adult on campus about an allegation of harassment, the adult is required to fill out a form documenting the allegation and submit it to the principal or assistant principal. Students also can fill out the form and submit it themselves. 


"Every charge has to be investigated. Every allegation," Pletenik said, adding that harassment claims also have to be reported to the U.S. Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights. 


"If an employee does not take that report and take it to the next level, which would be the principal or assistance principal, they’re subject to discipline themselves," Pletenik said. 


The form to report a student complaint is one of the first pages in the district's student handbook, which defines sexual harassment as "unwelcome sexual advances" and "physical conduct of a sexual nature" including but not limited to "touching, pinching, grabbing, impeding or blocking movement, and lewd gestures." 


"A substantiated charge against a student or staff member in the District shall subject that student to disciplinary action which may include suspension or expulsion," the handbook states. 


Nichole Segay, 16, wipes her tears after speaking before the Phoenix Union High School District Governing Board during a board meeting in Phoenix on Nov. 2, 2017. (Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

After Nichole spoke on Nov. 2, the governing board requested a report on the incident.


On Nov. 4, Nichole was among hundreds of runners who competed in the Arizona Interscholastic Association State Cross County Tournament in north Phoenix. She completed the hilly 5,000-meter race that weaves across the Cave Creek Golf Course with a time of 23:47, finishing 137th out of 192 finishers. 


Under cloudy skies and with near-perfect temperatures, her time was 24 seconds faster than a week prior at the AIA sectional tournament. She set her personal record of 22:29 in 2015, her freshman year.


Spokesman Pletenik said Monday that "the issue is currently being investigated at the district level now, in human resources. We’re not going to comment on personnel matters at this point."


MORE:  Ex-Mountain Ridge wrestlers accused of sexually assaulting teammate


Federal law prevents school personnel from discussing student education records.


Pletenik said the accusation was investigated at the school level, but whether it was investigated shortly after it was reported or not until this school year "is part of the district investigation."


Nichole and her mother said they believe people aren't taking Nichole seriously in part because she is Navajo and a girl. 


The incident and its fallout have ruined Nichole's desire to play sports for Camelback High. Running no longer offers the relief it once did, she said, but she plans to keep running. 


Nichole said she hopes speaking out will push school officials to re-evaluate how they handle harassment on campus and to reprimand the coach she believes did not help her.


"I want there to be change in protocol so that doesn't happen again," she said. "I've heard about all this all the time, and I never thought it could happen."


Nichole said other girls at school have thanked her for speaking up, and that one told her the same thing happened to her and instead of reporting it, she just quit sports.


"I just don't want that same thing that happened to me to happen to someone else," Nichole said.


Arizona Republic reporter Jason Pohl contributed to this article. 


READ MORE:


After Hamilton arrests, many Phoenix-area anti-hazing rules unchanged


How a single email launched Hamilton football hazing investigation that led to assault charges
