


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton's eventual resignation could dramatically affect not only the race to replace him, but the course of city business.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton, who has served at the city's helm for seven years, will have to resign sometime in the next seven months to run for Congress. Sean Logan/azcentral.com
    

Phoenix does not have a regular election next year. However, Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton will be resigning to run for Congress, leaving his seat on the ballot in 2018. Council members Daniel Valenzuela and Kate Gallego are running for mayor, which will leave their seats vacant. The city will have to hold a special election when that takes
(Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

When Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton launched his congressional campaign in October, he answered questions about his own political future but triggered uncertainty about the city's.


Stanton, who has served at the city's helm for seven years, will have to resign sometime in the next seven months.


He hasn't said when he will leave, but the timing of his resignation could dramatically affect not only the race to replace him, but the course of city business.


Stanton's departure will give rise to multiple other resignations as council members — Daniel Valenzuela, Kate Gallego and potentially others— compete to succeed him. It also will bring about temporary replacements and pricey special elections.


Councilwoman Kate Gallego and Councilman Daniel Valenzuela. (Photo: City of Phoenix)

During this time of transition, the City Council likely will decide on important and expensive matters, including potential renovations of the Phoenix Suns' arena. The absence of the mayor and current council members — or the addition of replacement members — could alter the fates of those projects.


Phoenix elections are nonpartisan, but politics does come into play. The timing of Stanton's resignation and the subsequent moves of Democrats Valenzuela and Gallego running for mayor could help or hurt Democrats' chances of keeping the city's top spot. It could prompt Republicans to go after the post, or encourage them to pass on the race. 


Valenzuela and Gallego have launched mayoral campaigns already, and some community members have lined up to run for the council seats they eventually will leave. But the length of the campaign process and the date of elections depend entirely on Stanton.


Stanton must resign by May 30, but he could resign before then to focus more attention on his congressional race. 


Nearly a month has lapsed since Stanton's announcement, but he's still tight-lipped about when he will step away from his current role — saying he will make an announcement when he makes a decision.


"I will be working with members of the council and also working with the community to make sure that the transition is as smooth as possible," Stanton said in a recent interview.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Arizona has a "resign to run" law that requires elected officials to leave office before they can run for another position.


In the past, elected officials couldn't begin fundraising or publicly announce their intentions to run for new offices until they stepped down from their current roles.


But in 2013, the state Legislature revised the law, allowing elected officials to launch their campaigns and stay in office until they submit election petitions.


"It lets people be honest and announce their intentions to everybody instead of playing coy and telling everyone, 'I'm thinking about running,' " said Sen. John Kavanagh, R-Fountain Hills, who sponsored the revised "resign to run" measure. 


"It just gets rid of the charade that was embarrassing," he said. 


Consultant and former Democratic legislative leader Chad Campbell said the law can create confusion if an elected official decides to stay in office longer and change the anticipated election timeline.


"In the case of this scenario, (the 2013 law) makes it more complicated. For this specific race, it's made it more complicated because no one knows when dominoes will fall. Everyone has lined them up … but no one has knocked then over," he said. 


Richard Herrera, an Arizona State University associate professor of political science, said it's typically better for candidates to step away from their current political posts so they can spend more time fundraising and campaigning. 


"You want to maintain visibility and certainly as mayor you do, but at the same time you don't have time to go full-bore after the congressional seat," Herrera said.


The special-election process triggered by Stanton's resignation will prompt multiple other departures, multiple races and, potentially, multiple election dates. 


The council will choose one member to serve as interim mayor until Phoenix can hold a special election. The interim mayor will represent his or her district and the city as a whole simultaneously.


That election could be held in May, August or November 2018 depending on the date of Stanton's resignation. The sooner he resigns, the sooner the city can call for an election.


Within 10 days of Stanton's leaving, anyone interested in running for his seat must declare. 


Councilman Michael Nowakowski hasn't ruled out a run, he said in an interview.


All council members running for mayor also will have to resign from their seats, which means special elections to fill those vacancies. 


The remaining council members will call for applicants interested in the open seats and will select temporary replacements until new members are elected. 


Depending on how many candidates compete for the mayoral and council positions, the process could require one or two elections. Winning candidates must get 50 percent or more of the vote in an initial election to avoid a runoff.


Complicating matters further, the mayoral and city council elections might not be on the same ballot. If the mayor and council members don't resign in quick succession, the city will have to hold multiple elections.


Each election could cost the city anywhere from $300,000 to $1.2 million depending on the date and how many races are on the ballot, according to the city.


It's possible that the City Council could be down to five members at one time, which could change the outcomes of high-stakes decisions.


If Nowakowski decides to run for mayor, and he, Valenzuela and Gallego decide to resign immediately after Stanton, the remaining five members of the council — who are some of the more conservative — will select their temporary replacements.


Phoenix City Hall is in limbo as City Council members and the public await Mayor Greg Stanton's resignation. (Photo: Republic file photo)

Campbell the consultant said Democratic insiders are wondering if there will be some coordination for the sake of maintaining a liberal stronghold on the council — or just avoiding pandemonium. 


Gallego said she'd prefer to stagger the resignations to allow the city to continue conducting business in an orderly fashion.


"There's no plan in place right now, but I think it would be best to have the resignations spaced over time," Gallego said. 


Stanton said he intends to work with members of the council to ensure the city's positive progress continues through his transition. 


Valenzuela said the timing of his resignation is "at the mayor's discretion." There's nothing precluding Valenzuela or Gallego from resigning before Stanton, but Valenzuela said he doesn't intend to leave his post early.


"(Stanton) hasn't made it official, and I have a job to do here," Valenzuela said. 


The council replacements could be installed before significant votes expected in the coming year, such as those on the city's budget and expected major renovations to Talking Stick Resort Arena.


If Stanton, Gallego and Valenzuela leave before the council votes on the arena, the Suns may not have the votes to secure their desired renovations, Councilman Jim Waring said.


"People who are interested in bringing things before the council might want to get that sucker out there before the resignations," he said. 


 


Elections at different time of the year bring out different voters and can give a boost to certain candidates.


Campbell said the date of the mayoral election will determine not only which party has an advantage, but who else will run.


If the election is in May, it will be the only race on the ballot, which will likely result in fewer ideological-based voters and more traditional city voters, Campbell said. This will probably help Democrats, he said. 


If the election is in August, it will coincide with the state, county and federal primary elections. These races draw "hyperpartisan" voters, which could benefit Republicans, Campbell said.


A November election would likely draw the largest electorate, as it will coincide with races including U.S. Senate and Congress.


Who benefits from a big turnout? 


"It's hard to tell. It depends on who is on the ballot. It's just hard to predict right now," Campbell said. 


Another wrinkle: August elections typically see lower turnout because some people don't stay in Arizona during the summer, ASU's Herrera said. Republicans typically fare better with low turnout, he said.


Chad Willems, president of conservative Summit Consulting Group, agreed that August would likely be the best chance for a Republican candidate.


"In politics, timing is everything really," Willems said. 


However, Willems speculated that the current council will do whatever it can to avoid an August election. 


About 17 percent of registered voters cast ballots in Phoenix's August election this year. The city's November 2016 election saw turnout of about 47 percent. 


The city hasn't had a May election since 2008. About 21 percent of registered voters participated in that election. 


No Republicans have announced their intent to run for mayor, but consultants on both sides of the aisle expect that to change. 


"You're talking about the fifth-largest city in the country, so it would be shocking if a Republican doesn't jump in," Campbell said. 


Willems said he's heard whispers about a "mystery Republican" who plans to run, but he has yet to hear a name.


“Republicans haven't had a good track record in winning citywide mayoral elections in the city of Phoenix, but with our electoral climate so politicized and hypercharged these days, I wouldn't say never.”


"Republicans haven't had a good track record in winning citywide mayoral elections in the city of Phoenix, but with our electoral climate so politicized and hypercharged these days, I wouldn't say never," Willems said. 


The last Phoenix election that resulted in a Republican mayor was in 1999, when Skip Rimsza easily won re-election. 


Herrera said a conservative candidate definitely could win the mayoral race because there are still more Republicans than Democrats in the region.


"Republicans always have a legitimate chance at winning a Maricopa County-wide or (Phoenix) citywide election," Herrera said.


Some speculated that Sen. Kate Brophy McGee and Rep. Heather Carter, prominent conservative state lawmakers, were exploring a run for the city's top spot.


But they told The Arizona Republic they do not plan to seek the mayoral post and are both running for the state Senate instead.


Republican Moses Sanchez, a Navy veteran and former Tempe Union High School District governing board member, also has been mentioned as a possible candidate.


"I have received a lot of encouragement and serious support to run. I'm talking it over with my family and expect to make a decision in the next couple of weeks," Sanchez said in a statement.


Skip Rimsza is sworn in as Phoenix mayor in January 1996. (Photo: File photo)

Rimsza's pathway to the city's highest office may sound familiar.


Rimsza was a council member in March 1994 when then-Mayor Paul Johnson resigned to run for governor. Vice Mayor John Nelson took over for 11 days until Councilwoman Thelda Williams was selected as interim mayor. She served for about seven months.


Shortly after Johnson's resignation, Rimsza stepped down to run for the mayoral post. He won in October and went on to serve for about nine years.


Councilman Sal DiCiccio was in the start of his first term during the Johnson-Rimsza switch. The transition wasn't stressful then, he said, and if Stanton does resign it won't be stressful this time, either. 


Diciccio said Williams' interim mayorship was extremely efficient because there was no political maneuvering in the way. The council passed an extensive desert preservation measure during Williams' short time at the helm.


"Things actually get done because they don't have any other reason to not get things done," he said.


DiCiccio said it's the time before resignations — the period the city is in now — that concerns him, because the mayor and council members are distracted with their campaigns instead of focusing on their current posts.


"(Politicians') heads are always in another game. That's why they're always ineffective," he said.


In an interview, Johnson offered a piece of advice to the council members and future mayor as they wade through the transition: Check hyperpartisanship at the door and remember that the city serves all residents — not just the ones who agree with them.


"Hopefully whoever ends up being elected can pull the city together and realize that different groups all deserve a right to be heard and they all deserve a right to be at the table," Johnson said.


Most council members say businessinside City Hall seems normal. 


Waring said he's seen Gallego and Valenzuela in multiple meetings since their announcements and didn't notice any tension.


"It's a little surprising, because if you're running against each other, it's usually a little awkward," Waring said. 


Councilwoman Debra Stark said the drama of the special elections still seems so distant until someone actually steps down. 


She said she's fielded several calls already from residents who are interested in running for Gallego's and Valenzuela's seats. She's advised them to get to know the districts but also to realize that the election process is just beginning, she said. 


"Let's just slow down. No one's left yet. Let's all take a deep breath," Stark said. 


Stanton said he will continue his hands-on approach to governing and remain accessible to his constituents as he begins his congressional campaign. 


"That's going to continue until the last day, the last hour, the last moment that I'm here. That's just who I am," Stanton said.


READ MORE:


AG: Phoenix Councilman Michael Nowakowski did not break law with land deal


Phoenix ends public access to downtown alley; activists fear more closures to come


Phoenix approves sale of downtown Sheraton for $255 million
