


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Here's what you need to know about beating traffic and parking for the Playstation Fiesta Bowl at University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Traffic congestion at University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale in November 2016.
(Photo: Deirdre Hamill/The Republic)

The Washington Huskies and Penn State Nittany Lions players will stand shoulder to shoulder at Glendale's University of Phoenix Stadium on Saturday, but that doesn't mean you have to drive bumper-to-bumper while getting there.


Festivities begin early with the PlayStation Fiesta Bowl Fan Fest Pregame Party on the Great Lawn of the stadium, near Loop 101 and Bethany Home Road, opening at 9:30 a.m., and other activities at the nearby Westgate Entertainment District.


Gamegoers can enter the stadium beginning at noon. Kickoff is at 2 p.m. 


Here's how to make your commute as painless as possible, according to Glendale's Traffic Management Center.


Normal traffic routes don't always apply during special events like the Fiesta Bowl. Rather than rely on GPS apps like Google Maps or Waze, Glendale recommends drivers plan where to park beforehand. Those who purchased parking passes can follow directions printed on the back. 


Drivers should avoid Maryland Avenue between 93rd and 95th avenues, as well as the stretch of 95th Avenue in front of the stadium, as those roads are closed to everyone but shuttles and pedestrians.


An aerial view of University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale on July 21, 2016. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

Those who still need a parking pass can buy one through the Fiesta Bowl website, though they require pick-up at the ticket office in Scottsdale. Stadium parking prices break down as follows:


The Fiesta Bowl parking lot opens at 9 a.m.


Anyone visiting Westgate between 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. on Saturday will have to pay a $10 parking fee, while Tanger Outlets customers must fork over $20 to park between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m.


There are two ride-share pick-up/drop-off areas: one at Westgate and the other just south of the stadium.


Visit www.fiestabowl.org for ride-share discount information.


Get traffic updates on gameday at the Arizona Department of Transportation's www.az511.com or dial 511.


Glendale provides real-time traffic information on Twitter @GlendaleAZPD.


READ MORE:


Glendale spends $17 million to end parking battle with Arizona Cardinals


Penn State-Washington Fiesta Bowl matchup will break tradition, could bust myths


PlayStation Fiesta Bowl quarterbacks share off-field cause, on-field rise


'American Ninja Warrior' coming to Glendale in February


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
