


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Leaders are now calling the area east of Phoenix the "PHX East Valley" in an effort to build name recognition nationally and attract more business.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Mesa wants to create an innovation district in a revitalized downtown. What does that mean?
    Wochit

Former Gilbert Mayor and East Valley Partnership President John Lewis speaks during a realty event for PHX East Valley.
(Photo: Kasten Long Commercial Group)

The East Valley wants some name recognition. And to get it, they're getting an assist from their largest neighbor: Phoenix.


The East Valley Partnership is now calling the area east of Phoenix the "PHX East Valley" and leaders from the organization are trying to spread the new region's name far and wide.


The region includes Mesa, Chandler, Tempe, Gilbert, Queen Creek and Apache Junction. The push, they say, will lead to national name recognition and help attract more business to an area on the cusp of a boom.


John Lewis, president of the East Valley Partnership and a former mayor of Gilbert, said the push to brand the East Valley as "PHX East Valley" actually began four or five years ago. He said when former Mesa Mayor Scott Smith led the U.S Conference of Mayors, many were unsure what he meant by East Valley.


Lewis also cited the success of Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport after it was renamed in 2007 from Williams Gateway Airport.


"Immediately, it gave recognition to people outside Arizona where the Mesa-Gateway Airport was located and it helped open the door for commercial traffic," he said.


The branding effort was just one topic of conversation at a realty event exploring the region's growth, calling it "the fastest growing area in the U.S."


Economic development representatives from nearly every city attended. Some even set up booths — like a technicolor display by Gilbert that gave out artisanal keychains — trying to entice commercial developers.


Mesa will maintain ownership of the land where the Habitat Metro project, a 15-story apartment and hotel building downtown next to Mesa Arts Center, is planned. (Photo: Allen + Philip Parters)

Jaye O'Donnell, assistant director for economic development in Mesa, previewed a few upcoming development agreements:


O'Donnell also updated attendees on Fiesta Mall, which is almost entirely vacant. She said the challenge in developing the site lies in its four different owners, who are now working on "aligning their vision." The owners of much of the interior of the mall envision a mixed education and health-care campus.


Downtown Mesa, with the Mesa Arts Center and shops along Main Street and Center, has been pinpointed as central to development. The light rail runs down Main Street on Jan. 17, 2018. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

O'Donnell and other panelists stressed the need for multifamily housing like apartment buildings, citing an increase in population and workforce, particularly in Mesa.


Occupancy is at around 94 to 95 percent around metro Phoenix, according to broker Linda Fritz-Salazar. That means, she said, turnover in apartments is swift.


MORE: 10,000 apartments opened in Phoenix area. Study says it's not enough


More jobs are on the way for PHX East Valley, Lewis said. And that means more people.


"We need to find places for the individuals coming," he said.


Reach reporter Lily Altavena at laltavena@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8927. Follow her on Twitter: @LilyAlta.


READ MORE:


Tempe tax break to private developer may go to Arizona Supreme Court


5 things you need to know about planned 272-acre Gilbert Regional Park


Mesa exploring creating innovation district downtown, anchored by ASU


'A long time coming' for $6M Chandler Museum now under construction


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
