


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Phoenix Municipal Court judge has dismissed charges against a candidate for the Arizona Senate who was accused of domestic violence.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Redeem Green Robinson is running for state Senate in Legislative District 30.
(Photo: Redeem Green Robinson)

A Phoenix Municipal Court judge has dismissed charges against a candidate for the Arizona Senate accused of domestic violence.


Redeem Green Robinson, a political activist running for state Senate in west Phoenix, was arrested April 17 when police responded to a call about a fight at an apartment he shared with his now ex-girlfriend.


He was charged with misdemeanor assault and criminal damage over the incident.


Charges against Robinson were dismissed Nov. 21, when he was scheduled to stand trial. The case was dropped because the City Prosecutor's Office wasn't prepared to proceed, court records state.


Robinson has repeatedly said he's innocent and acted in self-defense. He said the dismissal shows he was wrongly accused.


"It’s a weak case, and there’s a reason why I did not plead guilty and took it to trial," Robinson said. "I believe people know my character. I am the most gentle person you will ever meet."


The case was dismissed without prejudice, which means prosecutors could refile charges against Robinson. On Monday, a spokesman for the City Prosecutor's Office said the city won't say whether it intends to refile charges.


According to the police report, the fight between Robinson and his then-girlfriend started during an argument over his lost debit card and escalated to pushing and destruction of electronics and a door.


Robinson is running for state Senate in the 2018 Democratic primary for Legislative District 30, which includes parts of west Phoenix and Glendale. He said he plans to stay in the competitive race.


Robinson's now ex-girlfriend initially told police that she wanted to prosecute. In June, however, she told police that she no longer wanted to prosecute the matter, the police report states.


The ex-girlfriend could not be reached for comment on Monday.


According to the police report, Robinson told officers his girlfriend lunged at him after he told her that her children were bad and he didn't want them living in the apartment anymore.


Reach the reporter at dustin.gardiner@arizonarepublic.com or follow him  on Twitter: @dustingardiner.


READ MORE:


Big raises, bonuses at one Arizona agency, as state social workers get $1-a-day bump


Officials, neighbors criticize Ducey plan for inmates in Durango Jail
