


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Original ChopShop, a popular healthy-restaurant chain with local roots, continues its expansion around Phoenix by opening its seventh branch May 26.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Wooden tables and chairs fill the dining room at the Original ChopShop Arcadia location in Phoenix.
(Photo: Dreylon Vang)

Good news for Arcadia residents: The Original ChopShop is opening in your neighborhood on Saturday, May 26. 


Known for protein bowls, fresh-pressed juices and other health-forward fare, the restaurant is on the northeast corner of 32nd Street and Campbell Avenue. This will be the seventh branch for the chain with local roots.


The Arcadia location was a natural fit for the neighborhood, CEO Jason Morgan said.


"Folks can walk, bike and push strollers,” to this location, he said, just as they do at other Valley locations, including the original Original ChopShop in Old Town Scottsdale.


Pictured is Original ChopShop's spicy Korean bowl. (Photo: Original ChopShop)

The most popular menu item is the teriyaki chicken protein bowl ($10), but don’t overlook the quasi-spicy, not-quite-as-sweet Korean steak bowl. All protein bowls come with a choice of brown rice or sweet potato hash, or, for an extra dollar, choose antioxidant-rich Forbidden rice or quinoa.


Other menu favorites include:


Can’t leave the office for lunch? Try the ChopShop’s new catering menu, designed to go beyond typical cold sandwiches with interesting hot and cold selections suited for 10 to 200 people.


A grinder from Original ChopShop. (Photo: Original ChopShop)

While ChopShop was born in Phoenix, it's now growing up around the country. Private investment firm Hargett Hunter Capital Partners purchased the concept from local founders Ryan and Caitlin Jocque in 2016.


At the time, Morgan announced that four more Valley locations were in the works, and two short years later, the Original ChopShop more than doubled its “just feel-good food” footprint.


A view of the patio at the Original ChopShop Arcadia location in Phoenix. (Photo: Dreylon Vang)

One more outlet is coming later this summer, at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport's Terminal 3, just past security. The company also is exploring Peoria and Ahwatukee for future locations and is expanding the brand in the Dallas area.


MORE: Panera, Shake Shack, Postino coming to Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport


New location: 4503 N. 32nd St., Phoenix. 480-565-4358.


Hours: 7 a.m.-9 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, 7 a.m.-8 p.m. Sundays.


Other locations: originalchopshop.com.


Angels Trumpet Ale House opening 2nd Phoenix location


Tempe's new Alamo Drafthouse Cinema offering food, drink discounts May 18-23


Restaurants, stores take over historic buildings in Phoenix's 'funky' Melrose District


Eat Here First in May: 3 new restaurants to try before everybody else does



    We welcomed 30 new restaurants to Phoenix last month. It was a good time for expansions and creative newcomers. Here's a look at the newbies.
    Jennifer McClellan/azcentral.com

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
