


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The board that oversees the taxpayer-funded Maricopa Integrated Health System approved a deal Wednesday to buy and renovate Maryvale Hospital.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Readers can send news tips to azcentral.com via the newspaper's social media channels, email or by calling the office.
    Wochit

Abrazo Community Health Network closed its Maryvale hospital in December, citing a decline in demand for care at the West Phoenix facility.
(Photo: Abrazo Community Health Network)

The shuttered Maryvale Hospital in west Phoenix will be revived as an emergency department and behavioral health hospital under a $60.1 million deal approved Wednesday by the Maricopa Integrated Health System’s district board.


MIHS agreed to purchase the hospital, located at 51st and Campbell avenues, from Tenet Healthcare for nearly $7.6 million and will spend $52.5 million to renovate and equip the aging building.


MIHS said the 250,000-square-foot facility will be converted into a behavioral health hospital with up to 203 beds.


The hospital also will include an emergency department to serve the Maryvale neighborhood. Maryvale Hospital had about 40,000 emergency room visits a year before Tenet-owned Abrazo Community Health Network closed the facility in December.


RELATED: Maryvale hospital to close on Dec. 18, Abrazo announces


The behavioral health hospital is the second big-ticket construction project funded by Proposition 480, a $935 million bond authorization approved by voters in 2014 to replace Maricopa Medical Center and fund other upgrades to the taxpayer-funded county health district. 


MIHS's board last October authorized building a $70 million, 127,000-square-foot clinic at Grand Avenue and Cotton Crossing in Peoria. The clinic, now under construction, will include a dental clinic, dialysis clinic, lab services, operating and procedure rooms, pharmacy and urgent care when it opens in early 2020.


MIHS originally planned to build a new behavioral health hospital on its main campus at 24th and Roosevelt streets. But MIHS Board Chair Susan Gerard said  purchasing and renovating Maryvale Hospital for emergency care and behavioral health made more fiscal sense. 


"It saves us money," Gerard said of converting Maryvale Hospital instead of building a new behavioral health hospital. Under "our master plan, we didn’t have enough money in our bond to do everything. Now we can. That is huge."


MIHS is still planning to build a new hospital on its main campus to replace the aging Maricopa Medical Center. 


When Abrazo announced last year it would close Maryvale Hospital, community leaders expressed concern that the neighborhood would be without crucial medical services. 


MORE:Banner Health, Select Medical to join forces on physical-therapy centers, rehab hospitalsWidespread flu causing long hospital waits in Arizona, health officials sayPhoenix Fire Department increasingly taps taxis to take 911 callers to hospital


MIHS officials said the deal will restore full-service emergency medical care to the west Phoenix neighborhood and provide access to behavioral health services.


Though other hospitals are located not far from Maryvale Hospital, MIHS officials said the hospital will provide critical behavioral health services to the West Valley.


MIHS, the metro region's safety-net health system, runs Desert Vista Behavioral Health Center in Mesa. The county health district also provides behavioral health services at its main campus at in Phoenix. MIHS patients who live in the West Valley must travel to near downtown Phoenix or Mesa to receive behavioral health care. 


The proposed contract approved by MIHS' board calls for Maryvale Hospital owner Tenet Healthcare to pay a 1 percent commission to Arizona Land Advisors LLC when the deal closes.


READ MORE:Audit: Arizona fails to collect $36.7 million in drug rebatesBills take aim at Arizona's booming drug rehab industry$2,169 hospital bill for 90-minute visit to get Tamiflu stuns Arizona manData glitch leaves Arizona without public health tool that tracks deaths


 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
