


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Critical federal workers remained on the job, but thousands of others across the state were kept home from working because of the lapse in funding.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    A government shutdown could have an impact on everything from your passport application to those beloved Panda cams.
    USA TODAY

The dome of the Capitol Building is visible behind a closure sign that is posted outside of the Library of Congress in Washington, Monday, Jan. 22, 2018. The federal government shut down Friday, halting all but essential operations.
(Photo: Andrew Harnik, AP)

People who need help on taxes, have an immigration court hearing or need to collect firewood on federal land were among the thousands of Arizonans out of luck Monday thanks to the federal government shutdown. 


Critical federal workers remained on the job, but thousands of others across the state were kept home because of the lapse in federal funding. Arizona has about 55,000 federal workers.


Those pulled off the job include 860 people with the Arizona National Guard.


"This action will cause great hardship to our Department of Emergency and Military Affairs team, which has already been strained by past administrative furloughs of both our state and federal employees," said a note on the subject from Maj. Gen. Michael McGuire to soldiers, airmen, civilian employees and their families.


SEE ALSO: Locked doors, quiet halls at federal building


The National Guard furloughs only affect certain pay classes, according to the memo.


People who need help from the IRS have nobody to answer their questions at the Phoenix office, though they are reminded the government still expects to collect their dues.


"Due to the current budget situation, all IRS offices are closed," said the phone message at the Phoenix IRS office.


"We will resume normal operations as soon as possible. Under federal law, all tax payments and filing deadlines remain in effect during this period. People should file and pay their taxes as normal."


TALKING POLITICS: Listen to our Arizona politics podcast, The Gaggle, on Apple Podcasts, SoundCloud, Stitcher or Google Play.


National Forest Service offices around the state also told callers they were closed.


Many camping and recreational facilities, especially in the high country, are closed this time of year because of the cold and snow anyhow, but the offices are used by those seeking to collect firewood from national forests.


"This U.S. Department of Agriculture office is currently closed due to the lapse in federal government funding," said the message at the Springerville Ranger office. "The office will reopen once Congress restores funding."


Gov. Doug Ducey announced Monday the state transferred $187,873 to the Department of Interior to keep the Grand Canyon open and functioning this week if the shutdown continues.


MORE: Grand Canyon open and free in midst of government shutdown


The Arizona Game and Fish Department also offered to help the federal government by staffing boat ramps and other outdoor facilities that might be closed.


The U.S. Immigration Court in Phoenix was closed, though people detained by law enforcement will continue to be serviced by courts in the detention centers, according to a person answering the phone who was not authorized to speak publicly.


U.S. District Court in Phoenix remained open and fully staffed, Clerk Brian Karth said, but a prolonged shutdown of longer than about two weeks would force the facility to focus only on critical criminal cases, he said.


"We are curtailing unnecessary travel or anything else that might not be mission-critical," Karth said.


READ MORE:


How the federal government shutdown could affect Arizona


Trump's had some very different views on government shutdowns over the years


Government enters partial shutdown mode after Congress fails to agree on spending bill


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.