Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

The Isla Blanca Park boat ramp, nearby restrooms and parking lot will close March 1 as construction of an amphitheater and multipurpose building in the Dolphin Cove area continues.


County Parks Director Joe Vega said in a news release his department will work with the contractor to ensure the amenities reopen no later than May 31.

“The daily presence of ongoing construction activity, use of heavy equipment and the soon to be removed paved entrance road is cause for concern recharging the safety of our campers and park visitors,” Vega said.


Public boat ramps on South Padre Island are located at the end of Polaris Street and on the bay at the end of Palm Street. There is a public ramp at Pompano Park in Port Isabel, and the Jaime J. Zapata Memorial Boat Ramp is located at 44270 State Highway 48.

The county held a groundbreaking ceremony Feb. 7 for the $6.2 million Isla Blanca Park project, which includes an amphitheater that will seat 4,000 and a 6,800-square-foot multipurpose building. Construction is expected to be completed by late summer.


The county will spend $17 million in gulf side improvements and $13 million in RV site improvements at the park, County Judge Eddie Trevino Jrsaid.


nadia@brownsvilleherald.com

