Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN LEON, Texas (AP) — Crews are putting millions of pounds of Kentucky limestone on the floor of a Texas bay for a 21-acre oyster reef on a private lease. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Robert Walter Pensado

Robert Walter Pensado

The Precinct 1 Constable’s Office has arrested and charged a former Port Isabel High School coach and math teacher with having a sexual relationship with a student.


Robert Walter Pensado, 43, has been booked into Cameron County Carrizales-Rucker Detention Center on a charge of sexual assault and improper relationship between an educator and a student, jail records show.


Precinct 1 Constable Pete Delgadillo said the U.S. Marshals assisted in arresting Pensado at his Brownsville home on Wednesday.

According to Delgadillo, the relationship started in January 2017 when the teenager enrolled in Port Isabel High School and continued after Pensado left the high school in May 2017.


The girl’s mother, who filed the report, told authorities Pensado gave her daughter the phone and her daughter told her that Pensado provided the phone so they could communicate with each other.


“We immediately seized that phone, tagged it as evidence and got a search warrant,” Delgadillo said.


Authorities accuse Pensado of taking the teenager to places, including Beach Access 6, to have sex.


“When the student, the victim, was taken to Monica’s House, she spilled it out and said that a teacher would take her places to have sexual intercourse and according to the victim he was doing stuff she didn’t want to do. She would tell him ‘No, no, stop, stop’ and he woud continue to do it. In other words, he forced himself on her,” Delgadillo said.

Pensado was also a teacher at Rio Hondo High School for a short time, but resigned after being notified of the investigation.


He remains in jail on a $50,000 bond for each count and faces two to 20 years in prison on each count, Delgadillo said.


mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

