Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph..

Generally clear. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 10:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


NEW YORK (AP) — Television networks moved swiftly Monday from deciphering a mystery to setting up battle stations in their coverage of President Donald Trump's nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

HOUSTON — In what turned into a Texas standoff between Frankie Montas and Gerrit Cole, it was Cole who flinched first. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

A view of the new railing at Point Isabel Lighthouse in Port Isabel Friday.

A view of Point Isabel Lighthouse at Port Isabel Friday after receiving a railing replacement and structure repair and will reopen to the public Tuesday, Jan. 2, 2017.

A view of the new railing at Point Isabel Lighthouse in Port Isabel Friday.

A view of Point Isabel Lighthouse at Port Isabel Friday after receiving a railing replacement and structure repair and will reopen to the public Tuesday, Jan. 2, 2017.

PORT ISABEL — For anyone who’s missed the view from atop the Port Isabel Lighthouse, the wait is finally over.


The lighthouse reopens Tuesday to visitors, who can take the 75 steps up to the catwalk and see as far as 16 miles on a clear day.


Valerie Bates, Port Isabel’s marketing director, said the community is elated to have the landmark open again.

The lighthouse attracts thousands of visitors per year, Bates said, and its closure impacted traffic to downtown Port Isabel.


“Now that it’s going to be open and an immersive experience, we’re really excited,” she said. “Lighthouses are on people’s bucket lists.”


The lighthouse, which is a state park, closed for renovations in October 2016 and was scheduled to reopen three months later. However, back-and-forth between the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department and the Texas Historical Commission over some of the renovation plans caused delays, Bates said.

The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department spent more than $600,000 to replace lighthouse railing, repair the exterior and make improvements to the adjacent Keepers House. The catwalk, which had been closed since 2014 due to deterioration, will be open for visitors.


Bates said the city is planning a grand reopening celebration for mid-January and will finalize an announcement soon.


The Port Isabel Lighthouse’s original construction was completed in 1853, and it was decommissioned in 1905. It stands 72 feet tall and is the only lighthouse on the Texas Gulf Coast open to the public, according to a news release.


nadia@brownsvilleherald.com

