Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 94F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSOULA, Mont. — A man told investigators he left a 5-month-old baby boy in the woods after a weekend car crash because the baby was very heavy, court records said. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

McALLEN — The Monitor has promoted a Rio Grande Valley journalist and seasoned newsroom leader who, together with the newspaper’s publisher, will oversee its editorial coverage.


Effective immediately, Michael Rodriguez has been tasked with helming the newsroom as deputy editor.

Rodriguez, 36, is a native of San Benito who previously served in a dual capacity as metro editor for The Monitor and editor of its sister paper, the Mid-Valley Town Crier. The 14-year veteran journalist, who has also served as managing editor for community newspapers in San Benito and Port Isabel, will continue leading MVTC’s editorial arm.


In addition, staff members learned Tuesday that Stephan Wingert — regional vice president for AIM Media Texas, which owns The Monitor — will be serving as both publisher and editor.

According to Wingert, these moves are part of a departmental restructuring designed to bolster newspaper operations. Taking such an approach meant eliminating The Monitor’s executive editor position, which Carlos Sanchez held for nearly five years.


“We wish Carlos well in his future endeavors and appreciate his service to our readers and community,” Wingert said. “This is a strategic decision to streamline our news operation. Our readers can continue to expect quality local journalism. We remain committed to being the most trusted source of local news.”


Rodriguez said The Monitor will maintain its focus on community news and looks forward to the task ahead of him.



Departure of editor 