Clear skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph..

Clear skies. Low 77F. Winds ESE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 8:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


WASHINGTON — After days of frenzied lobbying and speculation, President Donald Trump decided on federal appeals Judge Brett Kavanaugh for his second nominee to the Supreme Court, setting up a ferocious confirmation battle with Democrats as he seeks to shift the nation's highest court further…

If Carmelo Anthony chooses Mike D’Antoni over LeBron James that would be a biggest upset since Paul George picked Oklahoma City over Los Angeles. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

The latest exhibit at South Texas College’s Library Gallery offers contrasting thoughts and directs us on a path through humanism into the realm of science. 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

A view of the facade of what use to be the Yacht Club Hotel in Port Isabel built circa 1926.

A view of the facade of what use to be the Yacht Club Hotel in Port Isabel built circa 1926.

Port Isabel officials’ plans to rehabilitate the historic Yacht Club Hotel came to a close in February, when the city sold the building to a local family.


Laura Martinez said she, her parents and two brothers don’t yet have final plans on what they will do with the property but were moved to purchase and restore it.

“I can tell you what we do is going to benefit the city of Port Isabel and the community,” she said. “We’re passionate people and we’re all very busy, but we feel deeply about the yacht club.”


While it’s the beginning of the revitalization process for the Martinez family, the sale marked the end of about four years of work by city and economic development corporation officials with similar ideas of returning the dilapidated building into a semblance of its former glory.

Ultimately, the city spent about $2.5 million in loan funds and returned grant money meant to help it establish a culinary arts institute that never materialized. The yacht club revitalization is the subject of a forensic audit, expected to be presented to the City Commission this week, that was requested by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which awarded the city a grant for the project.


The two-story Spanish Colonial Renaissance building was constructed in 1926 and counted President Warren G. Harding, gangster Al Capone and famed pilot Amelia Earhart as guests during its heyday.


nadia@brownsvilleherald.com

