


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Two Arizona men were arrested in connection with the unrelated deaths of two women in the 1980s — one in Wisconsin and one in Texas.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Mark W. Bringe
(Photo: Pima County Sheriff’s Department)

Two Arizona men were arrested within the past week in connection with unrelated murders in other states that had remained unsolved since the 1980s.


Mark W. Bringe, 70, of Sahuarita, was arrested Monday on suspicion of killing his wife in a case that had remained open since her body was found 30 years ago in Wisconsin, according to officials in both states.


He is facing a charge of first-degree murder in the death of Lorelei J. Bringe, said Raul Garcia, spokesman for the Arizona Department of Public Safety.


DPS had been working with the Columbia County, Wisconsin, Sheriff's Office for the past year.


The woman was found dead with a single gunshot wound to the head in a wooded area near her home in Poynette, Wisconsin, about 95 miles west of Milwaukee, in August 1988, according to the Sheriff's Office, which issued a statement about the arrest. 


Mark Bringe had told Wisconsin authorities at the time that his wife committed suicide, the Sheriff's Office said.


The Columbia County Sheriff's Office continued investigating the death, but the case eventually went cold. It was reopened as a homicide investigation by the Columbia County Sheriff's Office Detective Division in 2014, according to the press release.


Investigators, assisted by several other agencies, combed through evidence more closely, interviewed witnesses and exhumed the woman's body, the Sheriff's Office said.


In 2017, investigators twice came to Arizona to interview Mark Bringe and last June he was served a search warrant on his Arizona home, officials said. 


According to to the press release, Bringe is awaiting extradition back to Wisconsin.



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Larry Moore (Photo: Prescott Police Department)

A Prescott man was arrested Friday in connection with a homicide in Texas from 1987. 


Larry Moore, 65, was arrested on suspicion of killing Dianna Lowery, who was found dead in her home in January 1987, a Bexar County District Attorney's Office press release said. 


Lowery was found dead in the bathtub in her home in San Antonio. An autopsy determined her death was a homicide, but there wasn't enough evidence at the time to arrest a suspect, the press release stated.


The case remained cold for about two decades, until Lowery's mother contacted the San Antonio Police Department asking for justice for her daughter.


The investigation resumed and led authorities to Moore, who lived in the duplex next door to Lowery in 1987. He was the owner of both apartment units, with spare keys that allowed him access into her apartment, the press release stated. 


On Feb. 6, a warrant was issued for his arrest.


Officials located Moore in Prescott from driver's license information, which revealed that Moore had a Prescott address listed, according to Prescott police. 


Moore was arrested on Feb. 9, when Prescott police contacted Moore in a parking lot.


Prior arrangements with the Yavapai County Sheriff's Office had to be made to transport Moore to the jail because he suffers from a degenerative disease and is confined to a wheelchair, police said.


Moore is awaiting extradition to Bexar County and faces charges of strangulation while committing or attempting to commit kidnapping and sexual assault, police said.


READ MORE:


Suspect arrested in fatal stabbing at convenience store in north Phoenix


Arizona prison officer arrested on suspicion of sexual conduct with minor


Police: Person of interest sought in Maricopa homicide


Cold case: Prescott woman was celebrating her birthday before her murder in 2002


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.