


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The string of burglaries and robberies began on Feb. 26.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Phoenix police detained four people on Tuesday after a drawn-out and dangerous cross-Valley chase where one suspect fled into a neighborhood and another car-jacked a woman and sped into Phoenix.
    

Scotty Hernandez
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

One of the two men arrested following a two-hour police pursuit in Phoenix and the West Valley on Tuesday is a suspect in an armed robbery and burglary that took place in the past week, according to Maricopa County court records. 


Scotty Hernandez, 22, is linked to crimes occurring Feb. 26 and March 6. The second man, Dosmieke Sinclair, also 22, was arrested in connection with Tuesday's pursuit, which began after police spotted a vehicle suspected of being involved in last week's crimes.


During a Feb. 26 incident, a man approached victims standing outside near 35th Street and Encanto Boulevard and demanded valuables while pointing a silver semiautomatic handgun at them, court records said. The man stole the victims' gold and silver jewelry, two iPhones and their blue 1999 Audi sedan.


The victims also reported seeing another man arrive in a separate vehicle and point a black rifle at them while the man who robbed them fled the scene, court records said. DNA samples were collected at the scene.


MORE: Police chase ends in violent, head-on crash in Tempe


At 5 a.m. on March 2, two men used an angle grinder, sledge hammer and pry bar to force their way into a Domino's restaurant near Ninth Street and Camelback Road in Phoenix, court records said.


While inside they unsuccessfully tried to break open the restaurant's safe, eventually fleeing in a blue Audi sedan with a California license plate that police later discovered was fake, court records said.


The vehicle also had paint damage consistent with paint damage to the stolen vehicle from the earlier robbery, records said.


MORE: Man shot in Tucson hostage incident in October arrested


On Tuesday around 1:45 p.m., Phoenix police officers spotted the vehicle near 24th Street and Indian School Road and attempted to pull the driver over, court records said.


The driver fled and that's when a police pursuit began that lasted nearly two hours, stretching into the West Valley and continuing back into Phoenix.


The driver, identified in court records as Hernandez, drove to a property near Harrison Drive and Dysart Road in Avondale, where a man later identified as Sinclair got out of the passenger seat and ran into a unit at the complex.


Dosmieke Sinclair (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Sinclair was carrying a black rifle or a shotgun in his hands, court records said. Phoenix television stations covering the pursuit live from helicpters showed the man bolting from the car.


He was eventually taken into custody after negotiating with officers, records said.


Sinclair told investigators he fled the vehicle with a shotgun because he "did his friend a favor" even though he admitted being a prohibited possessor as a convicted felon on federal probation, records said.


Sinclar said he was "fully aware" of his prohibited status and said that he has "no problem paying the consequences to help his friend," records said.


MORE: 2 critically hurt when 30-mile Phoenix police chase ends in rollover


He added that he didn't know the Audi was stolen until the driver, later identified as Hernandez, fled from police. 


According to court records, Sinclair only was booked on one count of unlawfully possessing a weapon and has a preliminary hearing scheduled for March 16.


Previously, Sinclair was convicted of conspiracy to transport undocumented persons for profit, according to records. 


As Sinclair was being arrested on Tuesday, Hernandez continued fleeing from police, with two other people in the car, records said.


Officers deployed spikes that punctured one of the vehicle's tires near 99th Avenue and Buckeye Road.


Hernandez got out of the car at 107th Avenue and Van Buren Street and used a steel knife to break the driver window of a pickup truck stopped in traffic and pulled the driver out, records said.


Hernandez fled the scene in the truck and eventually abandoned the vehicle in the 1700 block of West Mountain View Road before running into a nearby apartment where he was arrested, records said.


Police monitor the area around the Monte Vista apartment complex where an armed-robbery suspect fled after stealing a white pickup truck on March 6, 2018 in Phoenix. According to police the suspect's parents lived at the complex. (Photo: Thomas Hawthorne/The Republic)

Officers secured the stolen Audi and found 23-year-old Alexis Barragan and Joseph Campuzano inside.


Barragan was arrested on an outstanding warrant for failure to appear in court and a shoplifting charge, Phoenix police spokesman Sgt. Jonathan Howard said.


After his arrest, Hernandez  admitted his involvement with the first armed robbery, the attempted burglary at Domino's and the robbery of the pickup truck to investigators, records said.


MORE: Baby in stolen vehicle safe after chase, say Pima County sheriff's deputies


Hernandez told investigators that he was only the driver in the attempted Domino's burglary but that he knew the two men planned on burglarizing the restaurant, records said.


He anticipated getting a portion of the stolen money, records said.


One of the burglars left a shotgun with Hernandez while he was in the car at the Domino's burglary,  prompting officials to seek a charge of first-degree burglary, records said. 


He also faces felony charges of armed robbery with a deadly weapon, vehicle theft, aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, robbery and unlawful flight from law enforcement.


A preliminary hearing is set for March 16.


READ MORE:


Phoenix police: Mom missing, baby found abandoned


Phoenix man arrested on suspicion of possessing child pornography


Escaped zebra hit, killed by car in Chandler


$7 million settlement approved in Arpaio-era jail death


 
