


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The suspect in the carjacking crime spree was arrested after being hospitalized since October, the Tucson Police Department said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is the difference between misdemeanors and felonies in Arizona?
    Wochit

Elijah Lawrence
(Photo: Pima County Sheriff's Department)

The suspect in a carjacking who was shot by police as he held a hostage in October has been released from a hospital and booked into jail, the Pima County Sheriff's Department said Tuesday.


Elijah Lawrence, 25, was arrested on suspicion of aggravated assault, armed robbery and kidnapping in connection with the incident, which occurred in Tucson, the Sheriff's Department said in a press release.


Lawrence was transported to the Pima County Adult Detention Complex after recovering in a medical rehabilitation facility from a gunshot wound and subsequent surgeries suffered when he was shot by sheriff's deputies, officials said. 


The  shooting took place on East Aviation Parkway and East 34th Street in Tucson on Oct.4. 


Lawrence is suspected of attempting to carjack a vehicle that day before successfully carjacking another and taking a man hostage, firing gunshots and pointing a weapon at his hostage and deputies, the Sheriff's Department said.


Sheriff's deputies and Tucson police, with help from the state Department of Public Safety, pursued Lawrence, confronting him after he struck a traffic median, officials said.


Deputies confronted Lawrence, who still had the hostage inside the vehicle, officials said. Deputies fired on Lawrence, who had been pointing a gun at his hostage during the pursuit as well as deputies, the Sheriff's Department said.


Lawrence was wounded  and taken to Banner-University Medical Center Tucson for treatment. He had been recovering and was officially arrested and booked Tuesday, officials said.


READ MORE:


Tucson officials hope airport video has clues about abandoned baby's mom


What we know: Wrong person killed in botched murder-for-hire plot


 
