


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Two Arizona inmates reportedly killed themselves in two days, officials said. The Arizona Department of Corrections is investigating.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Tiffany Everest
(Photo: Arizona Department of Corrections)

A female inmate died while incarcerated in the Arizona State Prison Complex Perryville, one of two inmate deaths in Arizona in two days.


Tiffany Everest, 30, died Saturday after a witness saw her in her cell engaging in "an apparent act of self-harm using clothing wrapped around her neck and tied to an air vent," Arizona Department of Corrections officials said.


Once prison staff realized what was happening, they attempted life-saving measures until paramedics could take over but were unsuccessful.


Everest was arrested on charges of aggravated assault in 2015 and sentenced for just under three years in prison in 2017, with a release date of March 2019, according to prison records. 


The Arizona Department of Corrections, along with the county Medical Examiner’s office, is investigating.  


RELATED: Sheriff: Convicted murderer dead after being found 'unresponsive' in cell


 A day after Everest's death, a Pima County inmate was found unresponsive in his jail cell and later died Sunday, the Pima County Sheriff's Department said.


Brian Ferry, 47, was found in his cell at the Pima County Adult Detention Complex at about 1:30 a.m. Jail staff administered aid until paramedics arrived, officials said.


Medical personnel declared Ferry dead at the scene. Detectives from the Sheriff’s Department determined the death was a suicide. 


A jury found Ferry guilty of the double homicide of a Phoenix couple in 2002. He was scheduled for sentencing July 23.


READ MORE:


 
