


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A 26-year-old woman was arrested Monday in connection with the fatal shooting of her 2-year-old son, who was found dead by Buckeye police on Friday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Alyssa Pettibone was arrested in connection with the fatal shooting of her 2-year-old son.
(Photo: Buckeye Police Department)

A 26-year-old woman was arrested Monday in connection with the fatal shooting of her son Friday, officials said.


Alyssa Pettibone, who had suffered multiple stab wounds, was taken into custody after being released from a hospital, according to Detective Tamela Skaggs of the Buckeye Police Department.


Buckeye police received a call around 4 p.m. Friday regarding a shooting at a residence near Pima Street and 230th Avenue.


When officers arrived, they found Pettibone with stab wounds and a 2-year-old boy with a fatal gunshot wound. The toddler was pronounced dead at the scene, Skaggs said.


She added the woman's stab wounds had been self-inflicted.


Pettibone was booked into the Maricopa County Fourth Avenue jail on second-degree murder charges Monday, Skaggs said.


No further details were immediately available including an explanation of the woman's stab wounds.


The investigation is ongoing.


READ MORE:


Phoenix police extend landfill search for missing mom by 3 weeks


2005 sex assault kit helps identify suspect in string of sex assaults


Scottsdale motorcycle officer injured in crash
