


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The methamphetamine trafficker posted bond before his trial. He was convicted even though he fled.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Antonio Quintero-Ayon
(Photo: Office of the Arizona Attorney General)

A convicted methamphetamine trafficker is on the run after he posted a $10,000 bond that got him out of jail before his trial, the Attorney General's Office said Thursday.


A jury convicted Antonio Quintero-Ayon last week even though he had fled, officials said.


He was found guilty of transporting 8½ pounds of methamphetamine, conspiracy and conducting a criminal enterprise, according to a news release from the Attorney General's Office.


On Nov. 28, 2016, Quintero-Ayon was pulled over for a traffic violation while driving a Ford Escape on Interstate 10 near Tangerine Road in Tucson, the Attorney General's Office said.


The officer that pulled him over, found more than $25,000 worth of drugs hidden inside his car, officials said.


After he was released on bail from the Pima County Jail he absconded before his trial, officials said. Authorities searched for him but were unable to locate the man. His trial was held anyway.


A warrant was issued for his arrest, the press release said.


Quintero-Ayon was driving a Ford Escape when he was first pulled over by an official from the Department of Public Safety on I-10.


Anyone that has seen Quintero-Ayon or knows of his whereabouts should contact their local police.


READ MORE:Officials: Tucson woman tried smuggling meth inside rectumSean Miller to be back 'on the sidelines' for Thursday game, UA president saysMurder or suicide? Jurors hear opening statements in Coronado hanging trial


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
