


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Tucson police say they've arrested a man who impersonated an undercover officer and stopped at least four people, one of which he handcuffed.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Tucson police say they've arrested a man who impersonated an undercover officer and stopped at least four people, one of which he handcuffed.
    Wochit

Police say this man stopped at least four people, handcuffing one of them, while impersonating an undercover police officer in Tucson.
(Photo: Tucson Police Department)

A man accused of impersonating an undercover police officer used a dash cam to film his exploits, according to a Tucson Police Department Facebook post.


Tucson police released excerpts of video, which they say shows the impersonator stopping at least four people, one of whom he handcuffed. 


The suspect, who hasn't been publicly identified, recorded the stops on a camera mounted to his vehicle's dashboard, police said. 


Police said when they arrested the man, they found a lot of gear similar to what an officer would carry, such as a baton, handheld scanner and a radio earpiece.


They also found the unmarked vehicle with red and blue flashing lights installed near the visor of the windshield, police said.


Sgt. Pete Dugan, a Tucson police spokesman, said detectives were still trying to determine a motive. But he added that it's possible the impersonator, who police arrested on Dec. 20, may have been approaching people to confiscate their drugs, he said. 


Dugan said detectives don't want victims' memory to be tainted by news coverage so they are withholding his name and the model of the vehicle that the impersonator drove. 


Police were able to identify the suspect after a person he handcuffed called 911 to report the incident, Dugan said.


The victim, who was with two other men, was in his vehicle and parked in a lot of a park when the impersonator approached him.


Edited video footage of the stop, which was released Tuesday by Tucson police, showed a man dressed in civilian clothes pulling up to another vehicle. 


He asked the occupants what they were doing and if they lived nearby. Moments later the video shows a man with his hands on the hood of the alleged impersonator's vehicle as the man pats him down. 


The video also shows him handcuffing one of the men. 


Dugan said the impersonator didn't or couldn't find the keys to the handcuffs and told the man to go to a police station so that he could get the handcuffs off. 


One of the victims called police after the impersonator left, Dugan said.


Officers arrived at the scene, uncuffed the man, and the victims were able to describe the impersonator and the vehicle he drove, Dugan said. 


The spokesman said police were able to locate the suspect the next day and served a warrant for the man's sedan. 


Dugan said police found the dashboard camera had been professionally mounted. 


"We don't know if he's done this multiple times, or this was a one-time thing," Dugan said. 


The video posted on the Tuscon Police Department's Facebook page showed that the man pulled over two vehicles and approached two others. In one instance, the man is heard asking a motorist if there are any drugs in the vehicle. 


Dugan said detectives want people to come forward if they believe they were stopped by the impersonator. 


"Really, we just want to know how many people this guy has victimized," Dugan said. "We don't want people to be discouraged if they think they did something wrong."


The man was booked into the Pima County Jail and faces charges of kidnapping and impersonating a police officer, Dugan said. 


READ MORE:


El Mirage family found dead near Flagstaff likely died days earlier, Sheriff's Office says


Monster-truck tours halted after rollover at ostrich farm


Phoenix sees uptick in homicides for 2nd straight year; most killings in a decade


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.