


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Homicide detectives ruled Norman Schrank III's death a suicide, though a cause of death was not immediately made available.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    What is a Silent Witness and how do you become one?
    Wochit

Mugshot of Norman Schrank III
(Photo: Pima County Sheriff’s Department)

A man charged with killing his mother-in-law and kidnapping his estranged wife was found dead in a Tucson jail cell early Thursday morning according to officials.


The Pima County Sheriff's Office said correctional officers at the Pima County Adult Detention Complex tried to resuscitate Norman Schrank III, 43, after finding him unresponsiveat around 4 a.m. Tucson fire personnel eventually arrived on scene and pronounced Schrank dead.


Homicide detectives called the death a suicide, though a cause of death was not immediately made available. 


Sachiko McClurg (Photo: Pima County Sheriff’s Department)

Sachiko McClurg, 65, of Tucson, and her daughter, Jeni McClurg, 40, were reported missing May 1. 


Two days later, deputies found Schrank and Jeni McClurg in Pine, a Gila County town north of Payson. They did not find McClurg's mother. 


Schrank was initially charged with kidnapping, aggravated assault and burglary. He was charged with first-degree murder about a week later even though deputies still haven't found McClurg's body.


Officials said they had enough evidence for probable cause to seek the murder charge at the time.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
