


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Convicted murderer Eva Dugan was the last inmate executed by hanging in Arizona after she was decapitated by accident.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


An archived Republic story about Eva Dugan, who would become the last condemned inmate executed by hanging in Arizona.
(Photo: The Republic)

Convicted murderer Eva Dugan may have “died with her boots on,” but not a head upon her shoulders.


She famously said those words at her conviction and would later become the last condemned inmate executed by hanging in the state.


The sordid grifter arrived in Arizona in the mid-1920s after years working as a cabaret singer and prostitute under the name “Claw Fingered Kitty” during the Alaska Klondike gold rush of the early 1900s. She connected with Pima County chicken farmer Andy Mathis in early 1927 but had been fired after just a few weeks.


Mathis soon disappeared, but his car turned up in Kansas City, sold by Dugan for $600, says Arizona's official state historian, Marshall Trimble. She initially blamed the disappearance and auto theft on a man named “Jack,” but he never materialized and was apparently fictitious.


“Pima County Sheriff Jimmy McDonald was able to trace Eva to her daughter’s home in White Plains, New York, where she was arrested and charged with auto theft,” Trimble says. “Eva was sentenced to nine months in jail.”


Meanwhile, a tourist camping on the Mathis ranch stumbled across Mathis' body buried in a shallow grave. He was axed to death. Authorities charged Dugan with murder, which was punishable with death by hanging.


Up until then, 28 convicted murders died by hanging, the preferred method at the time. A special trap door was even installed in the death chamber at the State Prison at Florence, which was built in 1908 to take the place of the old Yuma Territorial Prison. Prisoners were tied to a rafter in sight of the viewing area for witnesses.


“During her trial, it was learned that (Dugan) had been married five times and all of her hubbies died under mysterious circumstances,” Trimble says.


After her conviction, Dugan defiantly addressed the jury in broken English: “(Well), I’ll die with my boots on, (and) in full health. (And) that’s more (than) most of you old coots (will) be able to boast on.”


Standing at the gallows in Florence Feb. 21, 1930, she told the guards to not “hold my arms so tight, the people will think I'm afraid.” She did not say any last words as a noose was fixed around her neck and witnesses looked on.


Unfortunately, when the trap door sprung and Dugan fell to the end of the line, she was decapitated. The disconnected head rolled within feet of the screaming spectators. Three men and two women fainted.


“The sight was so ghastly that there was an immediate outcry for the state to switch to the gas chamber,” Trimble says. Arizona did so in 1934.


These days, the nooses of all of the state's condemned are on display at the Pinal County Historical Museum in Florence — including that of Eva Dugan.


Contact “Only in Arizona” columnist Mark Nothaft at marknothaft.onlyinaz@gmail.com. Send him the weird and fun facts and places found #OnlyInArizona.


READ MORE:


What does Arizona have to do with your Miranda rights?


The story of Gary Tison's fateful final escape — from those who were there


'Funky, weird and low-fi': Tucson's Valley of the Moon started by laid-back idealist
