Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

In addition to helping employees arrive at work on time, unlimited bus passes will allow them to take buses across the metro area — ​​​​​​​for free.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Rideshare.org measures things like vehicle price, loan term and fuel efficiency to let users know whether it's cheaper to own a car or use an app like Uber or Lyft.
    USA TODAY

A DART bus picks up passengers in the Des Moines area. DART hopes to expand their services but metro cities are concerned about the costs.
(Photo: DART/Special to the Register)

On a bicycle, the commute from Robert Mosby's central Des Moines home to his job on the city's north end can take as long as 45 minutes.


And the ride takes him through snow, rain and wind. 


Buses operated by the Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority can get him close to work. But the nearest stop is still a mile and a half away from Dee Zee Manufacturing's NE 58th Avenue plant, where he works on a line assembling auto accessories. 


Now, DART has agreed to extend its Local Route 4, making it easier for Dee Zee employees to get to and from work. A new stop near the plant is also expected to improve access to other employers in the area as well as to the nearby Polk County Jail.


The move was made possible by a $60,000-per-year commitment from Dee Zee, which, like other employers, cites transportation as a common barrier for job candidates and existing employees. With rock-bottom unemployment rates, employers across the state are struggling to fill tens of thousands of job openings. And Dee Zee leaders said it made economic sense to invest in public transportation.


"The cost of losing an employee after we have trained them is greater than trying to retain them with things like using the DART route," said Corbon Kinney, Dee Zee's talent acquisition consultant. 


PREVIOUSLY: Reynolds wants $18 million to address Iowa's workforce shortage


The company's main goal was to offer workers reliable transportation, which will ensure they can arrive at work on time.


"We have several people that have transportation issues, and the bus route provides stable transportation for all those individuals," he said. 


But workers will have an added benefit: unlimited bus rides on any DART route. Dee Zee joins organizations like Principal Financial Group, Des Moines Public Schools and Nationwide insurance to enroll in DART's unlimited access program, which requires only an employee ID to board a bus. 


"If they need to go grocery shopping or they need to go to a doctor's appointment, they can use a bus at any time on any route," Kinney said. 


RELATED: The DART bus dilemma: Who will pay to stay?


Kinney expects the move will help with hiring and employee retention. Dee Zee's 1,150 Des Moines employees make truck accessories like tool boxes, running boards and mats. 


DART has leaned on similar partnerships before to improve access, said spokeswoman Amanda Wanke: In 2016, the agency partnered with Broadlawns Medical Center to expand service in Pleasant Hill. 


"It’s a unique, newer partnership model," she said. "We have been trying to be creative with how we get transit service where we need it in the community."


Dee Zee will pay DART about $60,000 this year for the service, Wanke said. That amount will gradually increase in years two and three of the company's contract with the transit agency.  


A DART bus picks up passengers in the Des Moines area. DART hopes to expand their services but metro cities are concerned about the costs. (Photo: DART/Special to the Register)

Wanke said DART increasingly hears about the challenge local companies have in finding and retaining workers. Iowa's unemployment rate dipped to 2.8 percent in December, tying with Vermont for the nation's fifth-lowest rate. 


"Lots of times transportation is a key factor for people getting to work," said Wanke. "If you have a one-car household and two or three people in the household who are able to work, that is oftentimes the barrier to getting to work."


Mosby, who rides a bike because of a mix of financial need and a desire to exercise, said the partnership will improve his daily life. Aside from getting to work in inclement weather, the unlimited bus pass will help him keep more cash in his pocket. He estimated he spends about $10 a week on bus fare to get around town. 


"That’s great to have," said Mosby, 58. "For me, that’s going to help me do the things I need to do without having to worry. I'm not financially stable. I live by myself in an apartment. With the bills, sometimes you've got to rob Peter to pay Paul."


The four-year veteran of Dee Zee said the company's investment makes him more likely to stay on board. 


"It's going to help all of us," he said. "It definitely shows how much Dee Zee cares about their employees."
