Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Republicans promised they would bring about a "pro-growth, corporate-friendly" agenda in Iowa. Did they succeed?

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Which topics dominated this year's legislative session? Here are some of the top issues that defined a tumultuous season at the Iowa Capitol.
    Michael Zamora, mzamora@dmreg.com

The Iowa State Capitol building on Wednesday, May 2, 2018, in Des Moines.
(Photo: Brian Powers/The Register)Buy Photo

Republicans say the 2018 session of the Iowa Legislature was a successful complement to their corporate-friendly, pro-growth agenda. Democrats say the agenda has been  short-sighted and regressive.


This year's session, which adjourned Saturday, included significant changes in the tax system, as well as tax cuts, along with a initiative to fund water quality improvement programs by shifting dollars from other programs. In addition, Republican Gov. Kim Reynolds won approval of other priorities — the "Future Ready Iowa" program to expand the state's skilled workforce and a plan to increase access to mental health programs.


Bar and restaurant owners secured passage of legislation capping liability lawsuits involving drunken drivers; and the Iowa Farm Bureau and others gained approval of a bill to skirt Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, health plan requirements. But the grocery industry failed again in a bid to repeal the state's bottle deposit law.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Lawmakers passed a controversial bill to deny state funding to so-called sanctuary cities and counties that don't cooperate with federal immigration authorities. In addition, social conservatives were elated over the signing of a "fetal heartbeat" law that bans most abortions after about six weeks and is seen a potential test of Roe vs. Wade, the landmark 1973 U.S. Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion nationwide.


►More: Iowa Legislature adjourned: How will this year's session change Iowa?


Iowa Senate President Charles Schneider, R-West Des Moines, said Republican lawmakers have made Iowa a more taxpayer-friendly state.


"We have done a lot of things to help lower prices for consumers when it comes to things like their energy bills, and keeping more money in their take-home pay," Schneider said. These policies will put more money into Iowa's economy while making Iowa a better place for families to be successful, he added.



    Iowa House Majority Leader Chris Hagenow, R-Windsor Heights, and House Minority Leader Mark Smith, D-Marshalltown, share their thoughts, pro and con, about the 2018 session of the Iowa Legislature.
    William Petroski/The Register

House Minority Leader Mark Smith, D-Marshalltown, said the past two sessions have been the most contentious in his 18 years in the Legislature. He doesn't believe Republicans have anything to brag about.


"Wages have not increased for everyday Iowans," Smith said. "We haven’t seen relief for the education costs that everyday Iowans are paying to ensure that our children receive appropriate educations. We see more and more Iowans who are saddled with debt when they get out of college. We have not seen enough efforts to support our community colleges, which train workers that we need here in this state more than any other group ... Medicaid is still a mess, regardless of what has been proposed and stated by the governor."


►More: What ideas did the 2018 Iowa Legislature leave to die?


Here is a look at some key issues in this year's session, what happened and the key players:



    Senate Republicans passed a sweeping tax against Democratic opposition.
    Zach Boyden-Holmes/The Register

WHAT HAPPENED: Republicans approved what they described as the largest state tax relief package in Iowa history. They had no Democratic support. The plan will provide Iowa individuals and small business owners $398 million in state income tax cuts in 2019. The biggest percentage cuts will go to lower income Iowans but the largest savings will fall to richer folks. 


When fully implemented as soon as 2023, the plan will reduce the number of individual income brackets to four with a top rate of 6.5 percent. The top corporate rate will be lowered to 9.8 percent.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: A single person making $24,000 per year might see a $59 savings. A married person with two kids making far more will save several hundred dollars.That all averages out to about $300 per person, an analysis from the Department of Revenue shows.


AGAINST IT: Democrats and liberal activist groups who worry about possible cuts in government programs because of lost tax revenue, and who contend the bill is tilted toward helping the most wealthy Iowans.


FOR IT: Republican lawmakers and anti-tax groups.


WATCH FOR: The bill slashes state revenues by a total of $2.1 billion over the next six fiscal years. Republicans say they are confident the state's budget will have sufficient revenues. Democrats contend the state could face revenue shortfalls that would force deep cuts in education, public safety, health and other state programs. 


QUOTE: “This historic tax reform plan puts a focus on hard-working, middle-class Iowans, allowing them to keep more of their own money,” said House Speaker LInda Upmeyer, R-Clear Lake.



    Representative Guy Vander Linden, R-Oskaloosa, discusses proposed tax legislation that would cut income taxes by about $1.7 billion over six years.
    Kelsey Kremer, kkremer@dmreg.com

WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers approved a state general fund budget of nearly $7.5 billion for the state fiscal year that begins July 1, 2018. It represents about a 3.2 percent overall increase compared to the current fiscal year, although many state programs will receive much smaller budget increases. That's because about $110 million from the new budget will be used to replenish the state's reserve funds. One of the biggest items in the budget is a $3.2 billion funding package for K-12 schools for the 2018-2019 academic year. It represents a 1 percent increase in state aid to schools.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Don't look for many new state programs or initiatives to be unveiled, and students at Iowa's three state universities could see tuition increases. The tight budget may also make it harder for Iowans to find a job in state government or at state universities.


AGAINST IT: Some Democrats complain the Legislature is shortchanging state government while giving away hundreds of millions of dollars in tax breaks to businesses. They contend a lack of state funding is endangering public safety; hurting K-12 education and state universities; and is harming programs to protect the environment, public health and other services.


FOR IT: Republicans who said their spending plans represent fiscal responsibility and a prudent approach to operating state government.


WATCH FOR: Whether state revenues are sufficient to avoid mid-year budget cuts that have been experienced the past two fiscal years amid a slump in Iowa's farm sector and other factors.


QUOTE: "It’s easier to be responsible up front than having to come back halfway through the year and having to (make budget cuts)," said Rep. Pat Grassley, R-New Hartford, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. "We’re trying to avoid that situation."



    In early 2018 the Iowa Legislature took a step in addressing Iowa's water quality with a plan to reduce nitrogen and phosphorous levels by 45 percent.
    Kelsey Kremer/The Register

WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers approved a Republican-sponsored plan that will target an estimated $282 million for water quality initiatives over the next 12 years. The money will be generated from an existing tax on metered drinking water which has previously been directed into the state's general fund. Money will also come from state gambling tax revenue, which is now used to pay off bonds and flows into the state's building and infrastructure fund. Senate File 512 establishes a water quality infrastructure fund to support conservation infrastructure, such as wetlands, bioreactors, saturated buffers, terraces and waterways.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Republicans called the legislation a "monumental step forward" toward cleaning up Iowa's polluted waters. But some Democrats and others describe the impact as a tiny step that will divert badly needed revenuefrom other state programs, such as education and public safety.


FOR IT: Iowa Institute for Cooperatives, Iowa League of Cities, Iowa Drainage District Association, Iowa Association of Water Agencies, Iowa Association of Municipal Utilities. Iowa State Association of Counties and Iowa State Association of County Supervisors.


AGAINST IT: Iowa Chapter of Sierra Club, Izaak Walton League — Iowa Division, Center for Rural Affairs, Raccoon River Watershed Association, Iowa Environmental Council, Environmental Law and Policy Center, Iowa Farmers Union.


WATCH FOR: Whether the legislation has any impact on improving Iowa's water quality. Supporters promise the bill is just one step and more efforts will be undertaken to clean up Iowa's waters. But Des Moines Water Works Chief Executive Officer Bill Stowe predicted the legislation will do "nothing at all."


QUOTE: "With the science-backed Nutrient Reduction Strategy as our road map ... we’re going to continue to charge forward with our water quality efforts," said Reynolds. "Together we have the opportunity to modernize Iowa’s agricultural infrastructure, create jobs and entrepreneurship opportunities (and) promote collaboration between urban and rural communities."


A lawsuit filed by Des Moines Water Works against three Northwest Iowa counties has fueled the debate over water quality. (Photo: The Register)

WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers approved "Future Ready Iowa" workforce development legislation, which was a key Reynolds priority'.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: The goal of House File 2458 is to have 70 percent of Iowa workers obtain education or training beyond high school by the year 2025. The legislation calls for establishing a registered apprenticeship development program, a volunteer mentoring program, a summer youth intern program, summer post-secondary courses for high school students aligned with high-demand career pathways, an employer innovation fund and "Future Ready Iowa" skilled workforce scholarship and grant programs.


AGAINST IT: There was no registered opposition to the bill.


FOR IT: Iowa Association of Business and Industry, Iowa Chamber Alliance, Associated Builders and Contractors of Iowa, Master Builders of Iowa, Des Moines Area Community College, Greater Des Moines Partnership, Iowa Association of Community College Trustees and others.


WATCH FOR: Whether lawmakers provide sufficient state funding in the coming years to fulfill promises made to expand education and training. Meeting the governor’s educational attainment goal of 70 percent of Iowans completing some post-secondary education or training by 2025 will require an increase of 10 percentage points, or 150,000 people, based on 2014 statistics, according to state officials. 


QUOTE: “This act creates opportunities for Iowans of all ages and experiences,” Reynolds said. “It will have a real impact on real Iowans."



    The latest Iowa Poll found that mental health services are among the top concerns when it comes to state-supported issues.
    Michael Zamora / The Register

WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers approved House File 2456, a sweeping bill aimed at making comprehensive changes to Iowa's often-criticized mental health system.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Patient advocates have cheered the legislation, which is intended to improve a system many believe has fallen short of serving Iowans in need, sometimes with tragic consequences. The measure expands mental health services, including the addition of six regional “access centers.” The centers would help people who are having mental-health crises, but don’t need hospitalization. Proponents say the centers will be a humane, economical alternative to hospitalization and will free up scarce psychiatric hospital beds for patients in severe crisis.


The legislation also adds “assertive community treatment” teams to help people with serious mental illness stay on their medication and in treatment so they don’t spiral out of control and need hospitalization. It also makes changes to mental health commitment rules and encourages development of “sub acute” treatment facilities, which could take patients who are ready to be released from hospitals but still need oversight.


AGAINST IT: There was no registered opposition to the bill.


FOR IT: Iowa Medical Society, Child and Family Policy Center, United Ways of Iowa, Broadlawns Medical Center, Iowa State Association of Counties, Disability Rights Iowa, Iowa Hospital Association, National Alliance on Mental Illness - Iowa and many others


WATCH FOR: Whether the Legislature will provide sufficient state funding to fully implement the mental health plan.


QUOTE: "This is an issue where politics should not even be involved," said Sen. Jeff Edler, R-State Center. "When we are dealing with mental health, we need to lay politics aside and do what is right.”


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers approved a bill to cut off state funding to so-called "sanctuary" cities and counties that circumvent federal immigration laws.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Democratic legislators who opposed the bill contend Iowa doesn't have any sanctuary communities. Sen. Julian Garrett, R-Indianola, the bill's Senate floor manager, said a majority of Iowa sheriffs and law enforcement agencies will comply with the new law. But he also believes some sheriffs will have to change what they are doing.


One of Garrett's concerns was a joint statement issued in March 2017 by Johnson County Sheriff Lonny Pulkrabek and the five-member Johnson County Board of Supervisors. The statement said the sheriff will not honor voluntary detainer requests, nor will the sheriff's office assist U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents in immigration enforcement raids.


AGAINST IT: The Iowa State Bar Association, Iowa attorney general's office, League of United Latin American Citizens, Iowa State Association of County Supervisors, Iowa Federation of Labor, AFL-CIO; Child and Family Policy Center, American Civil Liberties Union of Iowa, a host of faith-based groups and many others.


FOR IT: Iowa Faith and Freedom Coalition and the Iowa Minuteman Civil Defense Corps.


WATCH FOR: Democrats contend the law will force legal and undocumented immigrants into the "shadows," and it will breed distrust of law enforcement. 


QUOTE: "There is a place for compassion. But there is also a place for identifying criminal elements who represent a threat to the safety and security of this country," said Sen. Jim Carlin, R-Sioux City.



    Of the 54 drivers involved in fatal alcohol-related crashes in Iowa in 2016, 43 percent of them were repeat drunk driving offenders. Since 2005, more than 134,000 people have been charged with drunken driving. A Des Moines Register investigation.
    Wochit

WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers agreed to legislation that limits lawsuits against Iowa businesses serving alcoholic beverages to drunken drivers. 


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Senate File 2169 is intended to ease liability insurance costs for owners of bars and restaurants. The bill says non-economic damages awarded to a third party who is not the intoxicated person at fault will be capped at $250,000 for any injury or death. An exception could be made to the limit if a jury determines there is a substantial or permanent loss or impairment of a bodily function, substantial disfigurement, or death, and a plaintiff would be deprived of just compensation for injuries. The bill leaves economic damages uncapped.


FOR IT: Iowa Restaurant Association, Iowa Association of Business and Industry, Iowa Wine Growers Association, Iowa Wholesale Beer Distributors Association, Iowa Insurance Institute and others.


AGAINST IT: Iowa Defense Counsel Association, Iowa Association for Justice, Iowa State Bar Association, Mothers Against Drunk Driving, Iowa Academy of Trial Lawyers.


WATCH FOR: Whether the legislation has any impact on liability insurance rates for Iowa businesses serving alcoholic beverages, and whether victims of drunken driving crashes are affected in efforts to pursue damages in Iowa's courts.


QUOTE: "This just drips with the trial lawyers," said Sen. Rick Bertrand, R-Sioux City, referring to heavy lobbying of legislators by groups representing attorneys in an effort to weaken the legislation. He caustically added, "This is just like a grease trap in the back of a tavern. This bill stinks.”



    Kans-R-Us in Perry is one of about 100 remaining redemption centers in Iowa. There has been renewed debate about Iowa's "bottle bill" that in 1978 established 5-cent deposit for cans and bottles.
    Michael Zamora and Kyle Munson/The Register

WHAT HAPPENED: Iowa business lobbyists pushed to make 2018 the year the Legislature repealed or rewrote the state's so-called bottle bill, a 5-cent beverage container deposit law that many Iowans applaud but grocers despise. More than 40 House members responded to the business lobbyists by proposing House File 2155, a competing bill which would have expanded the 40-year-old law to include the redemption of containers for water, juice and sports drinks. The session ended with neither bill passing.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: The existing law will remain intact and will continue to require nickel deposits on containers of carbonated drinks and alcoholic beverages.


AGAINST IT: Opponents of repealing the bottle bill included the Iowa Environmental Council, Iowa Chapter of Sierra Club, Iowa Recycling Association, Iowa Wholesale Beer Distributors Association, Iowa Annual Conference of United Methodist Church and others


FOR IT: Supporters of repealing the bottle bill and replacing it with a recycling and litter control program included the Iowa Grocery Industry Association, Petroleum Marketers and Convenience Stores of Iowa, Hy-Vee, Kum &amp; Go, Casey's General Stores, Wal-Mart and others.


WATCH FOR: Further debate in the 2019 Legislature's session. Grocers are determined to quit redeeming smelly, unsanitary cans and bottles. In addition, even some strong supporters of the current law say they are willing to consider ways to modernize the four-decade-old legislation. However, most bottle bill supporters want to expand recycling, not reduce it.


QUOTE: "This is not a Republican bill. This is not a Democratic bill. This is an Iowa bill," said Rep. Andy McKean, R-Anamosa. He led an initiative to expand the bottle bill and increase the number of redemption centers that accept beverage containers.



    Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds signed Senate File 359, the fetal heartbeat bill, into law.
    The Des Moines Register

WHAT HAPPENED: With middle-of-the-night votes that followed hours of heated debate, Republican lawmakers approved a bill intended to ban most abortions in the state and gives Iowa the strictest abortion law in the nation. 


IMPACT ON IOWANS:Senate File 359, which takes effect July 1, will prohibit nearly all abortions after a fetal heartbeat is detected. That can occur about six weeks into a pregnancy and often before a woman realizes she’s pregnant. Iowa law currently bars most abortions after 20 weeks, which already is among the strictest abortion bans in the country. 


AGAINST IT: Iowa Medical Society, Iowa Coalition Against Sexual Assault, Iowa Annual Conference of United Methodist Church, American Civil Liberties Union of Iowa and others.


FOR IT: Iowa Faith and Freedom Coalition, Concerned Women of America for Iowa, The Family Leader and others.


WATCH FOR: Activists promised tochallenge the law. They  view it  as an unconstitutionalviolation of a woman's right to choose an abortion. For opponents of abortion, the legislation is seen as a potential test of the U.S. Supreme Court's 1973 Roe vs. Wade decision that said women have a constitutional right to an abortion.


QUOTE: “I believe that all innocent life is precious and sacred. ... And as governor, I have pledged to do everything in my power to protect it," Reynolds said as she signed the bill into law.


A stead stream of traffic passes below speed cameras on Interstate 235 just a head of the Polk Boulevard overpass on Wednesday, Jan. 17, 2018, in Des Moines.  (Photo: Kelsey Kremer/The Register)

WHAT HAPPENED: The Iowa Senate passed a bill banning automated traffic cameras used to issue tickets for speeding and running red lights. The Iowa House approved a separate bill that would allow local governments to keep their automated traffic cameras, but would establish a new system of regulation. In the end, both bills died because of a lack of consensus.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Motorists will still be mailed tickets after being nabbed in some communities by automated traffic enforcement equipment. As of January, there were eight cities in Iowa operating a total of 78 speeding and red light automated traffic enforcement devices.


AGAINST THE BAN: Iowa State Bar Association, City of Des Moines, City of Cedar Rapids, Iowa State Police Association, Iowa League of Cities and others.


FOR THE BAN: American Civil Liberties Union of Iowa, ABATE of Iowa, Iowa Minuteman Civil Defense Corps, Iowa Association for Justice and others.


WATCH FOR: The issue is likely to be pursued again in future years. Courts may also decide the legality and constitutionality of traffic cameras' use later this year. The Iowa Supreme Court issued a ruling in late April that frees cities to resume using cameras on interstates and other primary highways if they choose to. The Iowa Department of Transportation had ordered some — but not all — of those cameras turned off in 2015, which sparked a lawsuit.  


QUOTE: "Making sure people know that they have to stop at that light, I think, is critical," said Rep. Bob Kressig, D-Cedar Falls, a supporter of traffic enforcement cameras. He recalled a driver who ran a red light, striking a van carrying his wife and daughter to the polls on Election Day several years ago. "I think the camera would have made a difference for me and for my family," he said.



    Sen. Charles Schneider, a Republican, and Sen. Janet Petersen, a Democrat, talk about their views on what happened in the 2018 session of the Iowa Legislature.
    William Petroski/The Register

WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers approved controversial legislation to exempt certain health plans from Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, mandates. Senate File 2349 combines two proposals backers say would reduce health insurance costs, but critics worry could undermine consumer protections.


The legislation gives small employers freedom to band together to buy health insurance for their workers through "association health plans." It effectivelyallows insurance carriers to resume selling small-employer policies that don’t meet the rules of the Affordable Care Act, which require coverage for maternity care or addiction treatment.


The bill was merged with a proposal to allow the Iowa Farm Bureau Federation to work with Wellmark Blue Cross &amp; Blue Shield to sell health insurance plans that don't comply with the Affordable Care Act to its members. The legislation says the plans are not health insurance and can't be regulated like health insurance.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: The new coverage could offer relatively low premiums for young and healthy consumers, but people with pre-existing health problems could be charged more or denied coverage. The law aims to help people who buy individual health policies, because they aren't offered coverage via an employer or a government program, such as Medicare or Medicaid.


AGAINST IT: Some Democrats and Minnesota-based Medica, a competitor of Wellmark, that contends the law would unfairly let Wellmark “cherry pick” healthy customers, leaving Medica with a more expensive pool of customers to insure. 


FOR IT: Republicans who want to dismantle as much of Obamacare as possible, plus some Democrats who want to provide a new alternative for affordable health care.


WATCH FOR: Whether Medica attempts to challenge the legislation in court and whether Iowans want to buy the new insurance. 


QUOTE: "We have a serious issue here in the state with the availability of commercial insurance," said Rep. John Forbes, D-Urbandale. "Although this isn’t a perfect bill, it does give Iowans another option."


WHAT HAPPENED: Lawmakers passed and Reynolds signed Senate File 2311, which will slash energy efficiency programs financed by utility customers while making other changes in the the state's regulation of energy utilities.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Republicans said the bill will specifically reduce charges that rate-regulated utilities levy on customers for energy efficiency projects by $100 million while retaining more than $120 million for energy efficiency projects. The legislation also requires utilities to distribute savings to consumers because of changes in the federal tax code. Other provisions in the bill are intended to help extend natural gas service to under-served communities and provide more transparency for consumers,


FOR IT: Republicans said Iowans will still make energy efficiency improvements, but they will have lower utility rates and consumers will have more money in their pockets. They said that since 1990, Iowa utilities have collected $3 billion dollars for energy efficiency programs and utilities have kept $600 million in administrative costs.


AGAINST IT: Democrats and environmental groups claimed the changes will result in higher utility bills for Iowa consumers and that a reduction in energy efficiency initiatives will require the construction of costly electrical-generating plants. They also warned 20,000 Iowa jobs linked to energy efficiency programs will be in jeopardized. Iowa Consumer Advocate Mark Schuling, whose staff investigates the legality of rates and practices of Iowa utilities, said the bill is good for utilities but will lead to increased rates for customers.


WATCH FOR: Whether the legislation has an impact, positive or negative, on energy rates for Iowa consumers.


QUOTE: "Maybe it doesn’t show up on your bill, but these people don’t give you these programs for nothing," said Sen. Michael Breitbach, R-Strawberry Point. He said many customers aren't aware they have been paying for energy efficiency programs offered through public utilities because of a lack of transparency on their bills. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

WHAT HAPPENED: Senate and House members proposed legislation to provide state grants for alternatives to Iowa's public schools. Senate Study Bill 3206 promised about $4,000 annually to students enrolling in private schools. A separate House proposal would have given students about $5,000 each to put into education savings accounts and would have expanded the ability of charter schools to operate in Iowa. Neither bill passed, and one key reason is that the state's tight budget provided little room to pay for the initiatives.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Supporters said the legislation would provide more choice for parents and improve children's academic achievement. Opponents contended the plans would siphon money from public schools and divert it to private schools. They also said many private schools have policies that either explicitly discriminate or reserve the right to discriminate against the LGBTQ community.


FOR IT: The Iowa Catholic Conference, Iowa Association of Christian Schools, Americans for Prosperity and others.


AGAINST IT: Iowa State Education Association, Iowa Association of School Boards, Des Moines Public Schools, American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees' Council 61, American Civil Liberties Union of Iowa, One Iowa and others.


WATCH FOR: Look for similar legislation  in the future, especially if Republicans retain control of the House, Senate and governor's office in November's elections.


QUOTE: We already have choice in this state," said Rep. Mary Mascher, D-Iowa City. "Parents can choose to send their kids to a public school, a private school or a home school. But the state shouldn’t have to foot the bill if parents choose to send their child to a private school."



    Iowa's last execution was on March 15, 1963, at the Iowa State Penitentiary in Fort Madison.
    Bill Petroski/The Register

WHAT HAPPENED: House and Senate members proposed bills to reinstate the death penalty, but the measures stalled because of a lack of support.


IMPACT ON IOWANS: Iowa abolished the death penalty in 1965. Except for a debate in the 1990s and more recent committee discussions, lawmakers have since generally accepted the idea that Iowa will not execute inmates. Opponents of reinstating capital punishment say Iowa already has a de facto death sentence because a life sentence in Iowa's correctional system truly means life in prison with only rare possibilities of parole.


FOR IT: No groups were formally listed in support, but lawmakers received testimony from clergy members and law enforcement officials who support the death penalty.


AGAINST IT: American Civil Liberties Union of Iowa, Iowa Catholic Conference, Iowa Annual Conference of the United Methodist Church, Iowans Against the Death Penalty and others.


WATCH FOR: The issue could resurface in emotional debates in future legislative sessions, but there does not currently appear to be enough support to reinstate the death penalty.


QUOTE: "My concern is that now he will probably be incarcerated for the rest of his life. I hate to see him injure or kill anybody else in prison or jail. He has no remorse. That is the way he thinks. When an opportunity comes up, he will kill again," said Pottawattamie County Sheriff Jeff Danker. He recalled a tragic day last year when an inmate got loose and killed one deputy and seriously injured another deputy before fleeing and committing additional serious crimes.
