Partly cloudy. High 91F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low near 70F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:54 pm

A perjury trial involving three people with connections to the highly publicized Heather Ciccone murder case in Spotsylvania County has been put on hold indefinitely.


Joshua C. Williams, Danielle S. Long and Clinton E. Williams are all charged with three counts of conspiracy to commit perjury. The charges stem from taped phone calls Joshua Williams made to Clinton Williams, his brother, and Long, the mother of his children, on Dec. 6 from the Rappahannock Regional Jail.


A joint jury trial was supposed to be held Wednesday in Spotsylvania Circuit Court and about 100 potential jurors had been summoned to court. But the trial was put on hold Tuesday afternoon, when Judge Ricardo Rigual agreed to not preside over it.


Attorneys Jason Pelt and Rebecca Favret, who represent Long and Clinton Williams, had both filed motions asking Rigual to recuse himself in part because of his familiarity with the Ciccone case. Rigual presided over the first-degree murder trials of Joshua Williams and Jonathan Vejarano murder trials, both of which resulted in convictions.


Rigual agreed to turn the case over to Judge Gordon Willis, who will hear motions on June 29 and perhaps set a new trial date.


The Dec. 6 phone calls at issue came while Joshua Williams was in the middle of his murder trial. He is currently serving a 38-year prison sentence.


The prosecution has claimed in both murder trials that Williams had Ciccone killed at the request of Long, who was angry after finding out about a sexual relationship between Williams and Ciccone. There was testimony that Long convinced Williams that Ciccone was working for the police as a drug informant, a claim that apparently had no merit.


Vejarano shot Ciccone in the back of the head on Dec. 6, 2015, in a driveway on Piney Branch Road. Prosecutors claimed that Williams lured Ciccone there to complete a large marijuana deal and promised Vejarano $5,000 worth of marijuana and admission into his street gang, the G-Shyne Blood, in exchange for carrying out the execution. A jury earlier this month recommended a life sentence for Vejarano.


In the phone calls that resulted in the perjury charges, Joshua Williams outlined a story to both his brother and Long that he wanted Clinton Williams to testify to during his trial. Clinton Williams never returned to court following the phone calls.


The story appeared to be an attempt to establish an alibi for Joshua Williams’ whereabouts on the night Ciccone was killed and shift blame to another drug dealer. Long’s role, according to Clinton Williams’ taped statements, was to help Clinton Williams memorize what he was supposed to say.


Long responded to Joshua Williams’ request for her to read back what she had supposedly written down was simply, “I got it. I got it.” Clinton Williams ended one of his calls by claiming he was in a bad service area.


Phone records show that Long and Clinton Williams spoke after the phone calls with Joshua Williams, but there is no record of what they said to each other.


Clinton Williams remains free on bond. Long is being held without bond.


———


©2018 The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.)


Visit The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.) at www.fredericksburg.com/flshome


Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


—————


Topics: t000002458,t000027866,t000149877,t000027879,t000002487,t000002493


Copyright 2018 Tribune Content Agency.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
