Sunny skies. High 94F. Winds light and variable..

A mostly clear sky. Low around 70F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:54 pm

Long

Long

A woman who faces charges in connection with the December 2015 slaying of Spotsylvania County resident Heather Ciccone is now in the Rappahannock Regional Jail.

Jail records show Danielle Sheree Long, 24, was booked Friday afternoon. She had been arrested Dec. 13 in New Jersey.

Long is charged with being an accessory after the fact of murder and conspiring to commit perjury. The two charges carry a combined maximum penalty of 15 years in prison.

The father of Long’s two children, 29-year-old Joshua Christopher Williams, was convicted Dec. 11 of first-degree murder and other charges in connection with the Ciccone slaying. A jury recommended that he serve 38 years in prison.

Ciccone was shot in the back of the head late Dec. 6, 2015, in a driveway on Piney Branch Road in Spotsylvania. The evidence showed Ciccone had left her house that night to broker a large marijuana deal and had spoken with Williams just before she left.

During the six-day trial, prosecutors put on evidence showing that Long had become incensed a couple of months earlier after learning that Williams and Ciccone were in a physical relationship. She called Ciccone numerous times, including 137 times in one day, and went to her home to confront her on Oct. 10, 2015, according to testimony.

Long was also accused during the trial of creating fake Instagram pages to disparage Ciccone, claiming among other things that Ciccone was passing a sexually transmitted disease. There was no evidence that Ciccone actually had such a disease.

She also sent videos to friends of Ciccone in which she threatened her and said she deserved to be “popped,” according to the evidence.

Prosecutor Ryan Mehaffey said during the trial that Long was “murderously jealous” of Ciccone and influenced Williams to arrange her killing in part by convincing him that Ciccone was working for the police against Williams, who was a drug dealer.

Jonathan Vejarano is the person authorities believe actually shot Ciccone. During Williams trial, inmates testified that Vejarano told them he carried out the slaying to work off a marijuana debt, get more marijuana and to gain admittance into Williams’ gang, the G-Shyne Bloods.

Vejarano is also charged with first-degree murder, conspiracy to commit murder and using a firearm in the commission of a felony. His trial is scheduled to start May 29.

Long is facing the same charges as Williams’ brother, Clinton Edward Williams, 27. At least one witness testified during Joshua Williams’ trial that Clinton Williams and Long were with Joshua Williams and Vejarano when the slaying occurred.

The conspiracy to commit perjury charges stem from phone calls Joshua Williams made in early December to his brother and Long. During the recorded calls from the Rappahannock Regional Jail, Williams appeared to be concocting an alibi for his brother to testify about.

In the call to Long, Williams recited a script and said he wanted Long to make sure Clinton Williams learned it verbatim. The rehearsed story would have placed Joshua Williams away from the murder scene and implicated another man in the murder.

Williams several times asked Long to read back what she wrote down, but Long would not, saying only, “I got it.”

Long


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




