Clear skies. Low 64F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear skies. Low 64F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 5:54 pm

A King George man was arrested early Saturday after being accused of breaking into a county residence and robbing a 13-year-old boy at gunpoint.


Joshua Matthew Tolliver, 32, is charged with offenses that include burglary, abduction, using a firearm in the commission of a felony, grand larceny and distributing marijuana to a minor.


According to Sheriff’s spokeswoman Kecia Wharton, deputies went to a home in the Oakland Park subdivision about 6:38 p.m. Friday after receiving a call from the victim’s grandmother. The woman called police after receiving a call from her grandson about the incident, Wharton said.


The victim reported that a man entered the home and held a gun on him before leaving with items that included a game system. It was not immediately clear how the intruder got into the home, Wharton said.


Deputies began searching the area and eventually found Tolliver walking not far from the victim’s home, Wharton said. A handgun was found in his possession.


Wharton said the distributing marijuana charge stems from the victim’s claim that the robber threw a bag of marijuana at him as he was leaving. The marijuana was recovered by police.


Tolliver was already free on bond on charges that include grand larceny, credit card theft and conspiracy, court records show. He has a trial on those charges scheduled for next month in King George Circuit Court.


He is now being held in the Rappahannock Regional Jail under no bond.


While looking for Tolliver, Wharton said, deputies stopped a vehicle that turned out to be unrelated to the robbery. The vehicle was searched and about five pounds of marijuana was found in the trunk and other drugs were found in the vehicle.


The driver, 27-year-old Ronald Lee-Eric Long of King George, was charged with possession of at least five pounds of marijuana with the intent to distribute, possession of illegal drugs and driving on a suspended license. Long was also placed in the regional jail under no bond.


Get the Breaking News and Alerts newsletter


in your inbox several times each day.


———


©2018 The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.)


Visit The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.) at www.fredericksburg.com/flshome


Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


—————


Topics: t000002458,t000027866,t000027890,t000180398,t000027880


Copyright 2018 Tribune Content Agency.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
