Sunny skies. High 93F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low around 70F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:54 pm

A man with a California address and multiple aliases has been charged in connection with a robbery last month that occurred after the victim was lured away from his job in Fredericksburg, court records state.


Terrell Murphy, 52, whose listed address is in Beverly Hills, Calif., is charged with offenses that include abduction with the intent to extort money, robbery and conspiracy. Murphy, also known as Scottie Sport Klein and Leroy Lewis, has a preliminary hearing scheduled for July 10 in Fredericksburg General District Court.


According to an affidavit for a search warrant filed in Fredericksburg Circuit Court, the victim was at his job at the Pizza Hut on Powhatan Street when a man came in shortly after 9 p.m. and asked to speak with him.


The victim told police he’d known Murphy for about a year, so he went outside at Murphy’s request, city Detective Patrick Lamb wrote.


The suspect told the victim, who used to work as a mechanic, that his car had broken down and he needed help getting it running. Lamb wrote that the victim was lured into a white SUV, possibly a Jeep Cherokee, and driven off.


An unidentified man was in the backseat as the SUV got off U.S. 1 and headed west on Plank Road, according to the affidavit. The victim reported that he asked to be taken back to his job, but instead was driven onto Interstate 95, headed north.


At that point, the victim said, the man in the back seat put him in a choke hold and placed a gun to his head. He said Murphy then reached into his pocket and took $46, a cellphone and screwdrivers belonging to the Pizza Hut.


The victim said Murphy accused him of stealing from him, which he denied, and several times threatened to kill him. The victim told Lamb that he feared for his life and “thought he would likely die,” Lamb wrote.


The victim told police he fought back against his attackers and, after the SUV pulled abruptly to the shoulder of I–95 in Stafford County, managed to get out and run into the woods. He said the two men were yelling at him as he fled.


He then called from a building in Stafford to the Pizza Hut and got someone to come pick him up. Police were notified about the incident that night.


The affidavit states that Murphy has a criminal record that includes convictions in Virginia, Arizona and California. He was arrested in Maryland on May 31 and placed in the Rappahannock Regional Jail earlier this month.


Murphy’s alleged accomplice had not been identified as of Tuesday, city police said. The search warrant obtained last week allowed police to search Murphy’s phone in hopes of identifying the second robber.


Get the Breaking News and Alerts newsletter


in your inbox several times each day.


———


©2018 The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.)


Visit The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.) at www.fredericksburg.com/flshome


Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


—————


Topics: g000065558,g000362661,g000066164


Copyright 2018 Tribune Content Agency.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
