Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.

A subscription is required to continue reading.

Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Sunny. High 92F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 1:55 pm

Tate

Tate

A Spotsylvania woman who is already facing charges in connection with the alleged sexual exploitation of a 4-year-old girl has been indicted on 20 new offenses.

Teresa Ann Tate, 53, was indicted by a Stafford County grand jury last week on 20 counts of possessing child pornography. Each charge carries a maximum penalty of five years in prison.

Tate was arrested in August by the Spotsylvania Sheriff’s Office on charges of using a communications device to facilitate an offense against a child and conspiracy.

According to court records, Spotsylvania authorities began investigating Tate after being contacted by the Tarrant County Sheriff’s Office in Fort Worth, Texas. A 37-year-old man has been charged in Texas for the alleged molestation of children, one of whom was identified as a relative of Tate’s.

Texas investigators found pictures of the child naked and a video of her dancing and removing her clothes, court records state. They also found online chats between the Texas suspect, Joey Mooso, and a woman listed as Teresa Edwards. Edwards was found to be another name for Teresa Tate.

The online chats included lengthy conversations about prior molestation of the child and plans to rape and molest her in the future. Court records did not state where the alleged molestation took place.

Spotsylvania authorities searched Tate’s home on Hardee Street and found a letter Mooso had written to Tate from the Tarrant County Jail, where he remains. In the letter, Tate was asked to sign onto Mooso’s social media accounts, delete evidence and change his passwords.

The new Stafford charges involve images Tate had on her cellphone when she was brought to the Rappahannock Regional Jail on the Spotsylvania charges on Aug. 2. The images depicted the same 4-year-old child in sexually explicit poses, records state.

A preliminary hearing for Tate is scheduled for next month in Spotsylvania Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court. No court hearing has been scheduled for the Stafford charges.

Keith Epps: 540/374-5404


kepps@freelancestar.com

Tate


                                    
                                        Whenever Keith Epps posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Featured event listings have been paid for.