Sunny skies. High 93F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low around 70F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:54 pm

Those involved with the judicial system, from probation officers to public defenders, were seeing the same trend: Young men who had never been in trouble before suddenly were appearing in court.


Ricardo Rigual, a Spotsylvania County Circuit judge who was in General District Court at the time, was mystified.


“I went, ‘Wow, what happened here?’ This guy lived the first 25 years of his life with no problems whatsoever. What’s changed?” he wondered.


Then, he looked at the defendant’s report, which spelled out the problem in all caps. It listed service in Iraq or Afghanistan, and that the young veteran had PTSD, Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, or TBI, Traumatic Brain Injury.


“That’s what changed,” the judge realized.


Rigual and Wendy Harris, Spotsylvania’s deputy public defender, weren’t necessarily seeing the same soldiers and sailors, Marines and Coast Guard members over and over.


But they were seeing a lot of them, starting about 2013. Each morning, when Rigual reviewed video arraignments for the day, at least one of the five to 15 men and women in trouble had once been in uniform.


“It was enough to get my attention, let me put it that way,” he said.


“Everyone who was involved in the system started to notice it,” Harris added.


A NEW PROGRAM


The two, along with commonwealth’s attorneys and police officers who saw the same pattern in Spotsylvania and beyond, put their heads together for solutions. They created the Rappahannock Veterans Docket.


It’s not a separate court, such as the Rappahannock Regional Drug Treatment Court. Known as drug court, its participants undergo an intensive program that offers them the chance to have their charges dismissed or reduced, if they get the required services and treatment to overcome their addiction.


The new veterans program, or RVD, is called a docket instead, but it’s clearly patterned after the drug-court model. Veterans who have been charged with domestic abuse or driving under the influence, assault and battery or eluding arrest, will enter a plea agreement before Rigual.


If they complete the program’s five phases, expected to take about 18 months, and meet the treatment and behavioral requirements of their contract, they may have their charges reduced, as specified in the agreement.


But like drug court, if the participants don’t toe the line, they face the full punishment of their crime.


State Sen. Bryce Reeves, R–Spotsylvania County, who serves on Virginia’s Board of Veterans Services and Military Advisory Council, started talking with Rigual more than three years ago about the program. Both share a military background—Reeves was in the Army, Rigual in the Marines—and coach their sons’ lacrosse team.


The senator knew Rigual “would be the guy to get it done.” Reeves said he considers the program a safety net for veterans, not a break for people who have committed crimes.


“We create Marines, we design them to go overseas, break things, blow up things and kill people, and then we bring them home and we say, ‘Play well while you’re at home,’?” Reeves said. “And so we don’t always fix them or they haven’t gotten the help they need … and that’s where these crimes start.”


A MILITARY HUB


Almost 50,000 veterans live in the Fredericksburg region, according to the Virginia Department of Veterans Service. Reeves said it the fastest growing service area in the commonwealth for those who’ve worn “the cloth of our country.”


Installations include Marine Corps Base Quantico north of Fredericksburg, Fort A.P. Hill to the south and Naval Support Facility Dahlgren to the east.


“This is kind of a hub for a lot of military and ex-military people,” said Capt. Kevin Hudson, program director at the Rappahannock Regional Jail. He will coordinate the new veterans’ docket, which currently is open to Spotsylvania residents only.


The organizers have formed the program on a shoestring budget, Rigual said, using current manpower. They hope to get grants and local funding to eventually include veterans in Fredericksburg, Caroline, King George and Stafford.


It’s difficult to determine how many local crimes involve veterans because they haven’t always been identified as former military members, Harris said. That will change with the new program; those charged with crimes will be asked about military service early in the process, and the word VETERAN will be stamped in big red letters on their case files.


Nationwide, 181,500 veterans are in jail, according to Justice for Vets, a national group based in Alexandria that works to provide veterans with the support they need. In 2015, there were 335 veteran treatment courts in the country, serving 15,000 veterans.


The Rappahannock court is the fourth in Virginia, after Fairfax, Norfolk and Prince William.


The court treatment programs are just scratching the surface of those who need help. A 2008 report called “Invisible Wounds of War” estimated that 460,000 veterans who served in Iraq and Afghanistan suffer from depression or PTSD, a disorder triggered after a life-threatening event such as combat.


Another 345,000 veterans involved in the global war on terror have self-medicated to get through the problems and suffer from substance abuse, the report stated.


In addition, troops face multiple deployments, suicide bombers and lethal explosive devices that damage mind and body.


“If we don’t interject and get them the services they need, then they continue to spiral down,” Reeves said, adding that veterans may need help returning to life outside the military. “That’s a reprogramming, from being warriors to being civilians.”


MENTORS NEEDED


Treatment will be a big component of the program, and Rappahannock Area Community Services Board clinicians will provide counseling for mental-health problems or substance-abuse issues—both which seem to be prevalent in the area, organizers said.


The veterans court board also includes an outreach specialist with the McGuire VA Medical Center. Those who’ve been honorably discharged and qualify for free services can get them at VA clinics; those who haven’t can get treatment on a sliding scale through RACSB.


Each participant also will be assigned a mentor, a fellow veteran who’s been trained and will act as a sponsor throughout the five-phase program.


“They need someone who will stand with them,” Harris said.


“Or just talk to them,” Rigual added. “When they’re in court, people don’t exactly pour their hearts out. It can be a little intimidating.”


The program needs more mentors, Harris said. Those who’d like to volunteer as mentors, as well as offer veterans jobs or housing, can contact her at 540/899-4814 or wharris@fre.idc.virginia.gov. Mention “Veterans Docket” in the call or subject line.


Reeves said people often ask him what makes veterans so special when lots of people have drug problems. He believes they’re more likely to have success because the military gave them the structure and foundation for it.


“They just need to be reminded of it again,” Reeves said.


“I think we owe it to them,” Harris said, “to give them some help if they need it.”


Get the headlines newsletter in your inbox each day with the top stories.


———


©2018 The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.)


Visit The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.) at www.fredericksburg.com/flshome


Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.


—————


Topics: t000200081,t000002827,t000412858,t000200086,t000164057,g000065627,g000362661,g000066164,g000366003,g000065617


Copyright 2018 Tribune Content Agency.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
