McALLEN -- Doctors who have traveled to the Rio Grande Valley to check on the condition of immigrant children separated from their parents say children leaving Border Patrol processing centers are coming out ill and may not be getting the care they need while in federal custody.

"I saw children malnourished, with respiratory infections and fevers. None of them received any antibiotics to treat bacterial infections," said Dr. Aaron Bodansky, a senior resident in Pediatrics at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston. "Others had severe diaper rashes as it appears many hadn't have the diapers changed for a long time."


His views and those of other medical professionals were buttressed this week by an announcement that the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services would conduct a review of health and safety conditions at shelters for immigrant children. Minors, traveling alone or separated from family, are usually sent to about 100 shelters in the U.S. after leaving border processing centers. 


Bodansky made it clear that he didn't do complete diagnoses of children who have been through the McAllen Border Patrol processing and detention center, where hundreds are held for several days. Nicknamed "Ursula" after its street location, others know the Border Patrol center in Spanish by more pejorative terms: the "icebox" for its cold temperatures, or the "dog pound" for the wire fencing barriers that section off people. 


Bodansky represents more than a hundred Texas pediatricians who this week start asking that doctors be allowed to examine the children. "That way we avoid, for instance, respiratory infections that turn into pneumonia or meningitis," Bodansky said. 

U.S. Customs and Border Protection spokeswoman Yolanda Choates said in a written statement that its agency, the U.S. Border Patrol in the Rio Grande Valley, contracts health care personnel that include "physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, emergency medical technicians, certified nurse assistants and certified medical assistants" for "acute, chronic and basic first aid services to those in our custody." 


Choates said that Border Patrol has had an $8 million five-year contract with Loyal Source Government Services since December 2015 for medical evaluations and screenings. It provides staff in the immigrant processing facility opened four years ago to detain undocumented immigrants "seven days a week, 24 hours per day." 

But she said she wouldn't be able to provide specific numbers about the medical personnel. Orlando-based Loyal Source didn't respond to a request for comment. 


Children often arrive at the center sick from days or weeks of travel to the border. But Bodansky and others are concerned that they may not be getting the care they need when they are being detained by federal authorities. 


Sen. Cory Booker, D-New Jersey, visited the Border Patrol center this past Monday and said there were only a few nurses inside and no pediatrician "for over 1,000 persons." 


Booker said many of the children looked tired or in need of sleep. He said he is worried about outbreaks of viruses or diseases because the immigrants need more adequate health care. And that could become a larger public health issue, the senator said. 


"We can't let this happen in our custody," Booker said. "These are human beings who have been on a brutal path, suffering from sexual and physical assaults." 


This week, Dr. Colleen Kraft, the head of the Academy of American Pediatrics, made her second trip to McAllen to investigate health conditions. She wasn't allowed into the Border Patrol facility in McAllen, although a few visits have been given to media and members of the U.S. Congress. 

"These detention centers are not good places for children," Kraft said. "They are cold. They sleep on concrete floors. There isn't adequate food and the lights are on 24 hours and that is not a humane place for these children." 


She's written five letters to Kirstjen Nielsen, the head of the Department of Homeland Security since last year about the government's detention centers. The message: Detention centers are no place for children and cause "toxic stress" that hurts a child's development. 


"We need to get [the immigrant children] to a place where they can heal from the trauma we have inflicted on them," Kraft said. 


Bodansky, who also belongs to the pediatrician group, brought a letter signed by 122 pediatricians in Texas with him to present to border officials. In it, the medical professionals offer "their volunteer services" to help the children. 


"A brief tour of the facilities at this time to get a baseline assessment of what these medical needs may be will be invaluable to our ability to assist in the welfare of these children," the letter says.

@realDonaldTrump I'm a pediatrician in McAllen at this moment with the signatures of 122 other pediatricians. Our message is simple: we would like information regarding what access to medical care the detained children have. I am making no progress. Can you help? Pg 1/9 signature pic.twitter.com/wNNxwpmxyH

But charity workers and medical volunteers often work with people who have been in the processing center after they leave, primarily at the Humanitarian Respite Center run by Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley in downtown McAllen.


Most families there appear to have escaped criminal prosecution for the misdemeanor of improper entry, the essential component of the government's zero-tolerance policies that had led to the separation of more than 2,500 children from a parent until outrage at the policy prompted President Donald Trump to call for an end to family separations on June 20.


Norma Bowe, who has a Ph.D. in community health policy and came to volunteer from her New Jersey home, saw about 90 children last Saturday at the Respite Center as they arrived from the Border Patrol center on Ursula Avenue. 


"They were severely dehydrated with fevers of 102, 103," Bowe said. "We were handing Pedialyte as if it was water. Many children had cough, sore throat, tummy pain, ear pain. It was overwhelming and devastating." 


Bowe said that some mothers aren't staying sufficiently hydrated, either. 


"They are not getting the amount of water they need," she said. "The families said they didn't have any medical assessment and the conditions in which we are seeing these children definitely support that is the case." 

University of Texas-Dallas pre-med student Ashtyn Tayler applies some ointment to Andy Silva's cut lip as they waited for transportation at the Central Station bus terminal in downtown McAllen, Texas, Sunday, June 24, 2018.  His mother Sadiel Silva was processed by the U.S. Border Patrol in McAllen. Tayler came to assist in the effort to help immigrants seeking refuge at the Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley. After arriving on government buses the families are gathered up and walked a few blocks away to the Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley. There they can get cleaned up, fed and receive help getting transportation to their future destinations. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News)




The McAllen processing center is now the nation's busiest. It's not unusual for immigrants to arrive in the U.S. exhausted and hungry. But when held for long periods in detention without adequate attention, health problems can worsen, the medical advocates said. 


Processing centers, in general, are short-term facilities equipped to hold minors up to three days or less, a CBP spokesperson said. But some immigrants say they have been at the processing center for as long as five to six days. 


That leaves advocates wondering, for example, why some people who leave the center are still dehydrated or may not show signs of having been treated for other illnesses.


Bowe helped a kid with a "blown abscess in his head after being bitten by a bug" and a woman with a "wound caused by her ankle monitor."


"If someone has a contagious illness, keeping the kids in cages that are overcrowded, easily will help to spread the virus," she added.


"I have been to a lot of disaster zones, I went to Houston to help after the hurricane and I've never seen something as bad as this is," she said.


Ashtyn Tayler, a 24-year-old pre-med student at the University of Texas at Dallas, drove with a classmate from the Dallas area to McAllen "to offer my help in whatever capacity," she said. She spent the last week at the respite center. 


Tayler said it was disturbing to see the condition of Latin American immigrants who left the Border Patrol facility. One woman had an eight-inch scar allegedly inflicted by gang members. Children had diarrhea and were vomiting, or were dehydrated and had fevers. One baby had chicken pox. A mother had an abscess in her arm. 


"We have limited over-the-counter medication" Tayler said while smearing anti-infection ointment on a baby's cut lip at the bus station. "We can give them electrolytes, remedies for cough and flu symptoms but not actual antibiotics." Tayler carries a thermometer that just reads degrees in Celsius so she is frequently doing the math in her head. 

Although immigrant families get basic care at the Catholic Charities shelter, Dr. Amy Cohen, a psychiatrist volunteer from Los Angeles, said she is worried about the mental health of the children who continue in detention or in shelters away from their families. "The outcome for them is even more uncertain," Dr. Cohen said. 


Dr. Cohen has been treating children released by the Border Patrol and arriving at the respite center. Many are unable to eat or sleep, the psychiatrist said. Some jolt up from nightmares, she said. Other children cling tightly to their mothers. 


"The loss of a parent will produce more panic and anxiety than anything else because from infancy we are programmed to bond to a parent as we are incapable of taking care of ourselves in dangerous situations," Dr. Cohen said.

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.