A mix of clouds and sun during the morning will give way to cloudy skies this afternoon. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 10:21 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


McAllen nine-month-old Mattie Casey is a finalist in the “Live with Kelly and Ryan” cute photo competition, “Live’s Oh Baby Photo Contest.” 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Amy Cummins holds a sign opposing the building of a potential border wall through the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge during a protest at the nature site Saturday, Jan. 27, 2018, in Alamo.

U.S. Rep. Filemon Vela, D-Brownsville, speaks to attendees as protestors voice their objection to the building of a potential border wall through the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge on Saturday, Jan. 27, 2018, in Alamo.

Laiken Jordahl wears a wild ocelot costume as protestors voice their objection to the building of a border wall through the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge om Saturday, Jan. 27, 2018, in Alamo.

Anti-border wall signs are displayed as protestors voice their objection to the potential construction through the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge on Saturday, Jan. 27, 2018, in Alamo.

ALAMO — More than 600 people gathered to celebrate the legacy of an historic refuge and simultaneously protest what environmentalists say is the federal government’s bid to irreparably damage it.


With the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge as their backdrop, opponents of a border wall and legislation that would pit Dreamers against other undocumented immigrants urged attendees to pressure lawmakers to reject any deal that would include funding for construction that they say would all but destroy the refuge. Environmentalists established the refuge about 75 years ago as a sanctuary to protect migratory bird species, plants and other endangered animals.


While guest speakers took turns singing music and reading poetry, several in attendance held signs and chanted messages of protests to convey their dissatisfaction with an administration committed to building a physical barrier at what is considered by environmentalists worldwide as “the crown jewel of the national wildlife system.”

Recently, the president proposed to protect nearly 2 million Dreamers from deportation in exchange for $25 billion in border wall construction funds.


Veronica Fernandez-Diaz, 22, a Dreamer herself who came to the rally with a group of fellow students from Colorado College as part of a borders and borderlands class, said it was important for her to visit the region and support DACA recipients and immigration advocates.


“I feel very emotionally invested in the process and it’s hard to take a class where you’re emotionally invested just because it’s draining,” she said. “I’m in it all the time, but it’s also very empowering to learn how people feel about border issues. We talk about issues pertaining to the border, to communities around the border, about how they’ve experience life on the border, the issues they face right now, or things they’ve seen.”


The latest deal proposed by the president would essentially pit her future against that of her own family, Fernandez-Diaz said. She has a younger sister who is a U.S. citizen but both of her parents are undocumented.


“I refuse to criminalize my family for my own sake — and so many (Dreamers) know that it’s not worth it if (they obtain) citizenship if (our) parents are going to be deported or criminalized,” Fernandez-Diaz said. “I’m not going to let my 9-year-old sister be left alone in this country, or be sent to a country she doesn’t know — for me there is no compromise, because you’re talking about my family and I’m not going to give that up for (a deal) that might protect me.”


Scott Nicol, an executive member of the Lower Rio Grande Valley Sierra Club who helped organize Saturday’s event, said it’s a call to action for those who oppose any federal interference and destruction of the natural resources and communities along the U.S.-Mexico border.


“The second Trump gets any money for border walls, he’ll start tearing apart Santa Ana,” Nicol said. “We want to point out that this could happen very quickly if we’re not able to exert enough pressure on Sen. (John) Cornyn (and) members of Congress. But this is also part of a much larger militarization, anti-border, anti-immigrant project that’s coming out of this administration.”


Amy Cummins holds a sign opposing the building of a potential border wall through the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge during a protest at the nature site Saturday, Jan. 27, 2018, in Alamo.

Opponents of border wall construction have said it would have a negative economic impact across the region.


Less than 10 years ago, researchers with Texas A&amp;M University estimated that more than $460 million pours into the Rio Grande Valley from ecotourism, the majority of which comes from birders who travel to the world-renowned refuge. Specific estimates suggest more than 165,000 people visit per year, according to the study.


“That’s a huge blow to our ecotourism economy,” Nicol said. “The people that come down here to see birds, if you destroy places where they want to go see birds — same thing with the (National) Butterfly Center (and) people that are coming down to see those resources — ... they’re going to go somewhere else.”


He also said the constant politicization of Dreamers’ lives speaks to a lack of humanity in those who oppose the youth brought here through no fault of their own.


“It adds a tremendous sense of urgency to what we’re doing,” Nicol said. “It means that it’s really critical for people in border communities and throughout the country who care to reach out now and speak up very loudly. I think part of the problem in all these discussions is what’s political, what’s the political deal that’s going to come out of all this, and what the discussion really should be is, what is the right thing to do, what is the moral thing to do.”


Nicol said too many times lawmakers pit constituents against each other — like pieces in a political game of chess.


“I think the moral argument is pretty obvious, and the political argument is pretty offensive,” he added.


U.S. Rep. Filemon Vela, D-Brownsville, who earlier in the week chastised fellow Democratic lawmakers for their negotiations with relation to Dreamers and border wall concessions, said he would continue to fight for the recipients of the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program.


U.S. Rep. Filemon Vela, D-Brownsville, speaks to attendees as protestors voice their objection to the building of a potential border wall through the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge on Saturday, Jan. 27, 2018, in Alamo.

The congressman said the close relationship with Mexico and the overall cost of constructing barriers along the border are the basis for why he’s opposed to the idea.


“My fundamental objection to physical barriers along the border are really pretty simple — the country of Mexico is an ally, not an enemy, and the idea that we would construct physical barriers between our two countries has ever made any sense to me,” Vela said just outside the refuge Saturday morning. “… In the 2017 budget congress appropriated $400 million for replacement fencing in California and Arizona; what does that tell you if we’re — 15, 20 years later — spending $400 million to fix what we built 20 years ago, it just doesn’t make sense from a cost standpoint.”


Vela has been steadfast in his opposition to a DACA deal that includes concessions for border wall construction.


He refused to support a continuing resolution on the eve of a government shutdown last week and then again on Monday when a short-term, three-week stopgap deal was reached, ending a shutdown that lasted less than three days


Following the agreement to briefly end the shutdown, Vela issued a statement in which he said he was confounded by the negotiating tactics of his fellow Democrats.


“Beyond the stupidity of offering unmatched concessions and negotiating against themselves, my colleagues have begun to refer to the border wall in the same way Trump’s base speak about Dreamers and undocumented people,” his statement read.


Advocates for Dreamers weren’t as kind in their assessment of the negotiations, calling out U.S. Reps. Henry Cuellar, D-Laredo, and Vicente Gonzalez, D-McAllen, as “part of the deportation caucus” who voted yes for the short-term deal Monday.


Allies and other immigrant advocacy groups who support Dreamers want a “clean Dream Act,” one not tied to border wall concessions in exchange for protection of the undocumented youth.


Abraham Diaz, a Valley native and Dreamer who spent time in Washington lobbying for a clean Dream Act during the week of the government shutdown vote, urged opponents of the wall to pressure their lawmakers into a deal for not only a large contingency of Dreamers in the state, but those around the country whose lives remain in limbo as the early March deadline approaches.


Diaz, who is also a member of La Union del Pueblo Entero, a local immigrant advocacy group, said the clock continues to wind down for him, and more than 700,000 other DACA recipients.


“The lives of immigrant youth are on the line,” Diaz said. “It is shameful that President Trump and aid Stephen Miller are playing with our lives and pitting children against children and immigrants against immigrants. President Trump created this crisis when he ended the DACA program. Now, 122 immigrant youth lose protection from arrest, detention, and deportation every day. The way out of this Trump-made crisis is the passage of a Dream Act now.”


"It is shameful that President Trump and aid Stephen Miller are playing with our lives and pitting children against children and immigrants against immigrants. President Trump created this crisis when he ended the DACA program."

— Abraham Diaz, a member of La Union del Pueblo Entero

Fresh from denouncing a new set of waivers issued by Department of Homeland Security officials in its continued effort to push forward with border wall construction along the U.S.-Mexico border, Paulo Lopes, a public lands specialist with the Center for Biological Diversity, said he wanted to show continued support for Dreamers, and those fighting the destruction of protected lands.

“It’s really sad with the 75th anniversary that… we can’t just recognize the 75th anniversary and the greatness of the refuge,” Lopes said. “It’s sad that this has to be (the) undertone — that the Trump administration destroying (Santa Ana) is a possibility.”


Earlier in the week, legal counsel for the center issued a news release in which they condemned DHS officials’ newest set of waivers attempting to bypass environmental laws to build physical barriers on the border, this time in eastern New Mexico.


DHS officials announced Tuesday it had issued more than 30 waivers to bypass environmental laws in eastern New Mexico, stating it was “an area of high illegal entry,” according to the agency’s website.


The waiver would allow for construction in a 20-mile area of New Mexico’s border with Mexico, beginning at the Santa Teresa port of entry and extending westward, DHS said.


“(DHS) announced that it has issued a waiver to ensure the expeditious construction of barriers and roads in the vicinity of the international border in the state of New Mexico, near the Santa Teresa, New Mexico port of entry,” according to a news release on the agency’s website.


In response, Brian Segee, a senior attorney for the center said the president’s plans for wall construction in these environmentally sensitive areas would do irreversible damage to the area, plant and wildlife, as well as fail to keep illicit drugs from pouring over the borders. This is a point the Trump administration has used to justify a physical wall between the two countries.


Laiken Jordahl wears a wild ocelot costume as protestors voice their objection to the building of a border wall through the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge om Saturday, Jan. 27, 2018, in Alamo.

“The Trump administration is stopping at nothing to ram through this destructive border wall,” Segee said. “Trump’s divisive border wall is a humanitarian and environmental disaster, and it won’t do anything to stop illegal drug or human smuggling.”


The waivers issued by DHS this week are the same waivers issued last year in another border region — San Diego — but those waivers are being challenged in a lawsuit filed by the center, which claims the federal government has overreached in its use of waivers for the construction of a wall. A hearing for that challenge is scheduled for early February.


“The lawsuit states that waiver authority expired years ago,” according to a statement from the center. “It’s an unconstitutional delegation of power to the Department of Homeland Security, and the wall violates the Endangered Species Act.”


Nicol said a U.S. Border Patrol agent escorted him out of the walking trails at the Old Hidalgo Pumphouse just last week.


The pumphouse in Hidalgo, which was developed in 2006 for hiking and recreation as part of the World Birding Center, is all but abandoned and devoid of visitors 10 years after the federal government erected a levee fence on the land. Neglected, the walking trails became overgrown and eventually people stopped visiting the once-scenic destination.


Nicol said the situation with the Hidalgo pumphouse is analogous to what he believes may eventually happen in Santa Ana.


He’s afraid history will repeat itself a decade later as preliminary plans show a wall would be built just before the refuge land begins, and would separate the visitors center from the rest of the Santa Ana refuge. This would leave the plants and wildlife between the wall and the Rio Grande River.


“The idea that they would just say, ‘We’re going to put up this giant wall and we’re going to create this (150-foot) enforcement zone, but (the refuge) will be the same and everybody will be free to go back and forth,’ I would be amazed if that were the case,” Nicol said. “I think walling-off Santa Ana is basically a death sentence for Santa Ana. We don’t want it to be 75 (years) and over. We want it to be 75 and there’ll be 75 more years, and then 75 more after that.


lzazueta@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Lorenzo Zazueta posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.