Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN LEON, Texas (AP) — Crews are putting millions of pounds of Kentucky limestone on the floor of a Texas bay for a 21-acre oyster reef on a private lease. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

An undated photo of the former 3,000-bed Willacy County Correctional Center, which will now be used as an ICE detainees.

Bishop Daniel E. Flores, Archbishop José H. Gomez, Cardinal Daniel N. DiNardo, Bishop Joseph C. Bambera and Bishop Robert J. Brennan sit for a press conference on Monday, July 2, 2018, at the National Shrine at the Eugene De Mazenod Renewal Center in San Juan.

Roel "Roy" Rodriguez

An undated photo of the former 3,000-bed Willacy County Correctional Center, which will now be used as an ICE detainees.

ICE to hold inmates in new Willacy detention center


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement is coming back to town.


Bishop Daniel E. Flores, Archbishop José H. Gomez, Cardinal Daniel N. DiNardo, Bishop Joseph C. Bambera and Bishop Robert J. Brennan sit for a press conference on Monday, July 2, 2018, at the National Shrine at the Eugene De Mazenod Renewal Center in San Juan.

Bishops get closer look at immigration


Bishops from across the country — including the president and vice president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops — gathered in the Rio Grande Valley on Sunday and Monday to see firsthand the experience of children and parents who have recently migrated to the United States.


Roel "Roy" Rodriguez

McAllen city manager receives raise


Roel "Roy" Rodriguez, who has served as city manager since 2014, received a $25,000 raise last week from city commissioners on the grounds that he remove his name from the finalist list for the Brownsville city manager job.

Sentence handed down in meth case


A Mission man was sentenced for his role in the sale of meth last April.

