A nonprofit has created a database that could help more than 2,000 immigrant children be swiftly reconnected with their parents even as lawyers and advocates become increasingly frustrated about not knowing where many of the children are.

The database will allow parents and legal representatives who are trying to locate separated children to submit inquires by phone and email. From there, the Vera Institute of Justice, a New York-based nonprofit, and its partners hope to connect the families with attorneys to work on the immigrants' legal cases.


Vera has a federal legal services contract and distributes funds to other agencies around the nation to perform legal orientation in shelters for unaccompanied immigrant children, including those taken from their parents as part of Trump's immigration enforcement effort.


"Reuniting the families fractured by these policies is a critical first step - but it is not enough," Nick Turner, the president of Vera, said in a news release. "The solution to the humanitarian crisis this administration created can't be indefinite family detention, and it certainly can't be to force families to desperately accept deportation in order to stay together. That's not what justice looks like, and these families deserve more. "


The government has responded slowly to plans to reunite families after President Trump signed an executive order June 20 declaring that no more immigrant children crossing the border should be separated from their parents.  Vera has created a database tool with the names of immigrant children who recently were placed in about 100 shelters across the nation under the zero-tolerance immigration policies of President Donald Trump. Vera's partners provide services at the shelters.

Staff at the institute realized they collect data on those children who get the services, and their detective work may prove crucial to lawyers working to reunite broken families because U.S. government agencies have fumbled in efforts to reconnect frantic parents with children taken from them. Vera and the D.C.-based nonprofit New America, along with other legal services groups, call the database tool the Immigrant Connection Project, or ICON.


"While we can't begin to undo the trauma these families have experienced, we must continue our work to ensure that they are served, rather than harmed, by our justice system," Turner said.

When a parent is criminally charged, his or her children are separated from them because minors cannot be jailed. Gut-wrenching separations were detailed by lawyers or unveiled through secretly recorded audio of crying children screaming for parents or begging officials to be reunited with a relative. In McAllen and Brownsville, fathers could be heard in open court asking magistrate judges for their children if they were deported.


Trump's executive order halting the separations was signed days after he said only Congressional legislation could do that. But of at least 2,500 children taken from parents, as of last week, only about 500 children had been reunited with their parents, the federal government said.


After Homeland Security insisted it had a plan to reunite the children last Saturday night, it quickly became apparent from attorneys and others that families were increasingly frantic. Government hotlines set up to reunite parents weren't working, or provided callers with very little information. Some children had been scattered around the nation, while parents were still in the Rio Grande Valley.


In some cases, parents who were separated from their children when they were criminally prosecuted with misdemeanors for crossing the border unlawfully ended up getting light sentences or are released on time served only to learn that they were being deported without the child they arrived with.

This past week in McAllen, an attorney for the Texas Civil Rights Project detailed the deportation of a father to Guatemala, whose son is still believed to be in the U.S. somewhere in a shelter. Other, similar cases have been reported.


"It is absolutely our concern that this has happened on a wider scale and it will continue to happen," said Natalia Cornelio of the civil rights firm on Tuesday morning.

Attorneys and advocates have become increasingly frustrated by the fact that more of the children have not been reunited with their parents. At the Port Isabel detention facility in Los Fresnos, where the government said many would be reunited, little actual activity has been reported.


On Tuesday night, federal judge Dana M. Sabraw in California ordered the federal government to reunite parents with their children within 30 days. If the children were under 5 years of age, the judge ordered reunification in 14 days. Sabraw, an appointee of Republican President George W. Bush, took aim at the government for not having a reunification plan to "address a chaotic circumstance of the government's own making."


Sabraw also noted that some of the border-crossers criminally charged with unlawful entry were actually asylum-seekers, who are legally allowed to seek shelter in the U.S. 


"We are country of laws, and of compassion," Sabraw wrote. "We have plainly stated our intent to treat refugees with an ordered process..."


On Friday, the Vera institute, which has held the legal services contract through the Office of Refugee Resettlement of the Health and Human Services Department for 13 years, announced that it had collected data on the identities of many of the children. That data should allow them to be rematched with their parents.


Vera's contract lets it manage services for legal help for children in the federal shelters who are entitled to legal representation once they are considered unaccompanied minors.


Organizations receiving the funds managed by Vera, such as San Antonio-based Refugee and Immigrant Center for Education and Legal Services, or RAICES, fan out into the shelters to educate minors on their rights. More than 30 organizations have Vera Institute subcontracts.

RAICES, which has a Dallas office, posted this week on social media that it had built a database of about 450 parents so that legal service providers could link them to separated kids. "The youngest: 2 months old," read the RAICES post.


It was followed by the hashtags #AbolishICE and #FamilesBelongTogether. ICE handles a portion of the nation's deportations.


More than $20 million has been raised for RAICES, through a social media campaign that began when family separations began to take place with force.


Information can be found on the ICON project can be found on the Vera's website. Attorneys or parents seeking children should email familyconnect@vera.org or call 800-845-8372.


"Beyond the deep psychological trauma suffered by children who are separated from their families, we know that contact with parents is critical to conducting a proper assessment of the legal options for separated children," said Anne Marie Mulcahy, director of Vera's program for unaccompanied children. 

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.