


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

These Texas shelters have long taken in unaccompanied children. Now they also take in immigrant children separated from their parents. Here's why.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Once in the custody of Customs and Border Protection, adults who will be prosecuted for the misdemeanor charge of illegal entry into the U.S. are handed a flier that details the "next steps for families."
    Beatriz Alvarado/Caller-Times

A look inside a shelter for unaccompanied migrant children in Brownsville, Texas.
(Photo: Courtesy of the Administration for Children and Families at HHS.)

Unaccompanied children in the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement have long been placed within a nationwide network of child-oriented shelter programs.


For years now, the shelters have taken in children who have entered the country unaccompanied. But now the licensed facilities are also taking in children who were separated from their parents as part of the new “zero tolerance” policy that has gained global attention.


Shelters are funded by ORR and operated by non-governmental organizations, as well local governments that contract with the federal government.


Shelter programs range from large institutional shelters housing hundreds of children, to mid-size facilities, to small group home-like settings.


More: Trump signs executive order to end immigrant family separations: What we know


In addition to shelters, ORR contracts with a number of foster care programs around the United States which provide care for toddlers and teens, as well as secure juvenile detention facilities and with residential or therapeutic treatment centers for children with behavioral health needs.


More: How to help children separated from parents through 'zero tolerance' immigration policy


The custody of these children is under the Health and Human Service Department’s division of the Administration for Children and Families.


In Texas, at least 33 licensed shelters for unaccompanied minors are contracted by the Office of Refugee Resettlement for temporary residence. 


Beatriz Alvarado (@CallerBetty) | Twitter


More: Immigrant children separated from parents: What's the Christian thing to do?


More: More and more Texas GOP leaders are saying no to Trump's family separation tactic


More: Separation of immigrant families draws lawmakers, advocates to the border on Father's Day


 
