


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Department of Homeland Security is trying to identify new facilities along the U.S.-Mexico border to house immigrant families, at least 15K beds.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The roughly 77,000 square-foot warehouse-like processing center in McAllen, Texas is the first stop for those detained by agents in the Rio Grande Valley Sector. On Sunday, June 17, 2018, more than 500 families and 197 unaccompanied minors were being housed there.
    Beatriz Alvarado/Caller-Times

Border Patrol agents take a group of migrant families to a safer place to be transported after intercepting them near McAllen.
(Photo: Courtney Sacco, Caller-Times-USA TODAY NETWORK)

The Department of Homeland Security is trying to identify new facilities along the U.S.-Mexico border to house families in the custody of Immigration and Customs Enforcement.


A request for information was posted Friday on the federal contracting website to accommodate at least 15,000 people in the custody of ICE in California, New Mexico, Arizona and/or Texas.


"We are requesting information from industry partners (commercial and/or governmental entities) to determine their interest and ability to provide residential-based care and other related services to families in ICE custody," the request for information posted Friday states. 


Responses, even if partial or preliminary, will be accepted immediately and will continue to be accepted through June 29. 


More: Trump signs executive order to end immigrant family separations: What we know


The request for information comes on the heels of President Donald Trump's announcement that the government will continue to enforce its "zero tolerance" policy of prosecuting adults for illegal entry but will keep families together. 


Trump, facing a national outcry, signed an executive order Wednesday designed to keep migrant families together at the U.S.-Mexico border, according to reports.


The Karnes County Residential Center in Karnes City, Texas, is housing migrant families. It is a Immigration and Customs Enforcement facility. (Photo: Natalia Contreras/Caller-Times)

ICE currently operates three family detention centers in the U.S.


The Dilley facility has the largest capacity, with space for 2,400 detainees, according to a recent report by Politico. Karnes can hold 830 detainees, and Berks has space for 96 detainees.


But Karnes — the largest of the facilities — currently holds 2,000 detainees, according to figures provided to Politico by ICE. The other two facilities are more than half full.


Beatriz Alvarado (@CallerBetty) | Twitter


More: Here's the military bases where thousands of immigrant children may end up in Texas


More: John Cornyn, Ted Cruz say visit to immigrant children's detention center was emotional


More: Asylum in the U.S.: How it works and who is eligible for protection


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 