Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 76F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


SAN LEON, Texas (AP) — Crews are putting millions of pounds of Kentucky limestone on the floor of a Texas bay for a 21-acre oyster reef on a private lease. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen is rejecting criticism accusing her department of inhuman and immoral actions when it comes to separating immigrant children from their parents when they cross the U.S. border illegally.

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen is rejecting criticism accusing her department of inhuman and immoral actions when it comes to separating immigrant children from their parents when they cross the U.S. border illegally.

BROWNSVILLE - Ashley Casale and her 7-year-old son, Gabriel, drove nearly 2,000 miles after the school year ended last Friday in New York to the Rio Grande Valley to see for herself the impact of President Donald Trump’s zero-tolerance policy and how family separations are playing out on the border.


She said she’s been camped out in front of Casa Presidente, a facility operated by the nonprofit Southwest Key Programs, that houses children who are younger than 10 years old since Tuesday.


After a tour of Casa Presidente and Casa Padre on June 18, Rep. Filemon Vela told reporters that Casa Presidente at that time housed 80 boys and girls, about half of whom had been separated from their parents or parent.

“It’s not just bad for the child, but for the parents, too,” Casale said, as Gabriel ran too far toward Casa Presidente’s property and a security guard interrupted the interview to remind Casale of the line her son couldn’t cross.


Casale, who stood outside an orange tent just off Casa Presidente’s property while her son — who donned a red St. Louis Cardinals cap — threw a baseball in the air and caught it as it came down, said she hoped the nonprofit agency would allow her to tour the facility.


“It’s outrageous,” Casale said of family separations and what she sees as a troubled reunification process. “And I wanted to see for myself, but it’s been tough. I felt the citizen presence was important.”


However, Casale noticed something different Friday afternoon. She noticed a heavy police presence, and said Southwest Key Programs security and Brownsville police turned away some vehicles looking to enter the facility and directed people who may have been employees where to park.


That might be because it’s believed that Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen was in Cameron County on Friday afternoon to visit Casa Presidente and the Port Isabel Detention Center.

Nielsen’s staff did not respond to multiple requests made by The Brownsville Herald to either confirm or deny the visit.


A more complete version of this story is available on www.myBrownsvilleHerald.com


mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

