


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Here's what you need to know about the Trump administration's policy on separating migrant families.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    US Attorney General Jeff Sessions says he's placed a "zero tolerance policy" for anyone who enters the country illegally on the Mexican border. (May 7)
    AP

Genin Rodas, 29, and son Edison, 5, from Sabá, Honduras, embrace each other as they wait for a family member to buy them a bus ticket after being released by U.S. Immigration officials at the Catholic Charities Rio Grande Valley refugee center in McAllen, Texas. (Photo: Casey Jackson, Corpus Christi Caller-Times) (Photo: Casey Jackson/Caller-Times)
(Photo: Casey Jackson/Caller-Times)Buy Photo

About 2,000 migrant children have been separated from their parents since the Trump administration announced its "zero tolerance" policy in April. 


The practice of separating children from their parents has been touted by the administration as an amplified effort to deter migrants from entering the U.S. illegally and has gained global attention, including a plea from the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to "immediately halt" the practice. 


In April, the Trump administration directed U.S. Attorney’s Offices along the southwest border to criminally prosecute adult migrants for entering the country illegally. 


IMMIGRANT CHILDREN: Here's what's happening with kids at the border, policywise


In the past illegal entry has been handled as a civil matter. 


Criminally prosecuting adults with their children has resulted in the separation of families, mostly because children cannot be held in a detention facility with their parents.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The practice of separating children from their parents has been touted by the Trump administration as an amplified effort to deter migrants from entering the country illegally. 


"If you are smuggling a child, then we will prosecute you, and that child will be separated from you as required by law," Attorney General Jeff Sessions said in March. "If you don't like that, then don't smuggle children over our border."


Since the "zero tolerance" policy was announced at least 1,995 children have been separated from 1,940 adults.


DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY: Nearly 2,000 children have been separated from adults at the U.S. border



    The White House press briefing got heated when reporters asked Sanders about a policy allowing children to be separated from undocumented parents.
    USA TODAY

Despite children being accompanied by their parents when they entered the country, children who are separated from their parents are being housed at shelters for unaccompanied children. 


Unaccompanied immigrant children have been held in detention facilities across the U.S. before the 1990s. 


TX OFFICIALS, ADVOCATES: Placing immigrant children in tent cities 'abhorrent'


The Office of Refugee Resettlement, or ORR, is the agency under the umbrella of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that is responsible for the children. They award contracts to licensed child care providers to house them. 


RELATED: Senator blocked from entering detention center housing migrants' kids


Southwest Key Programs, a company that recently made headlines after an Oregon Senator was denied entry at one of its facilities in Brownsville, Texas, is one of the largest operators in Texas. The company operates running 16 of the 35 shelters that contract with the ORR. 


Beatriz Alvarado (@CallerBetty) | Twitter


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
