Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


MISSOULA, Mont. — A man told investigators he left a 5-month-old baby boy in the woods after a weekend car crash because the baby was very heavy, court records said. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

U. S. Sen. John Cornyn, R-TX, talks with the media, along with, left to right, U.S. Sen. Thom Tillis, R-NC, U.S. Representative John Carter, R-TX, U.S. Representative Mike Conaway, R-TX, and U.S Representative David Rouzer, R-NC, before touring the Rio Grande at Anzalduas Park February 20, 2017 in Mission. Sen. John Cornyn on Thursday revealed a $15 billion border-security bill that could enhance technology and staffing along the border and at ports of entry.

U. S. Sen. John Cornyn, R-TX, talks with the media, along with, left to right, U.S. Sen. Thom Tillis, R-NC, U.S. Representative John Carter, R-TX, U.S. Representative Mike Conaway, R-TX, and U.S Representative David Rouzer, R-NC, before touring the Rio Grande at Anzalduas Park February 20, 2017 in Mission. Sen. John Cornyn on Thursday revealed a $15 billion border-security bill that could enhance technology and staffing along the border and at ports of entry.

U.S. Sen. John Cornyn will deliver a State of the Congress address on Dec. 1 at the Knapp Medical Center Conference Center in Weslaco.


Sergio Contreras, president of the Rio Grande Valley Partnership, said the Republican Majority Whip's speech will likely cover international trade, health care, the current state of the economy — specifically the tax reform legislation in Congress — and the continuing education of the Rio Grande Valley workforce.


Contreras also cautioned that speech topics are still in motion, especially as important legislation could emerge in Congress over the next two weeks.

The RGV Partnership, an organization that tries to spur business growth in the Valley, is hosting the address. The Texas senator's event is scheduled to last an hour and a half, Contreras said.


He did not know if Cornyn had any other plans while in South Texas.


This will mark Cornyn’s third trip to the Valley in 2017. In February, Cornyn brought Sens. Dean Heller, R-Nev., and Thom Tillis, R-N.C.; along with Reps. David Rouzer, R-N.C., John Carter, R-Round Rock, and Mike Conaway, R-Midland. The group toured a detention facility and the Pharr-Reynosa International Bridge, as well as a U.S. Customs and Border Protection boat tour.

In April, Cornyn visited the Anzalduas International Bridge and was awarded a plaque for his work on the bridge system over the years.


mferman@themonitor.com




                                    
                                        Whenever Mitchell Ferman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.