Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Business
					

By Kevin Dugan


		
		
		
		
	


									May 29, 2018 | 12:37pm
											| Updated May 29, 2018 | 4:28pm
												

The stock market had its worst day in more than a month on Tuesday after political turmoil in Italy threatened to derail the euro. 

The Dow Jones industrial average lost as much as 505 points, almost 2 percent, to 24,247.84, in early afternoon trading — the biggest intraday drop-off since April 6. By the end of the day, the blue chip index had recovered somewhat, to 24,361.45, down 391.64.

Italian Prime Minister Sergio Mattarella on Tuesday hinted that there could be a special election as early as September after he blocked the formation of a nationalist coalition. Investors fear the unusual move could end up strengthening parties that want to pull out of the eurozone. 

The prospect that Italy, which is Europe’s third-largest economy, pulling out of the shared continental economy immediately prompted comparisons to Brexit, when England pulled out of the European markets. 

“There was uncertainty around Brexit. With Italy, the damage would be far greater” to the euro, Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist at Prudential Financial, told The Post.

The selloff threatened to put a hard stop to two months of relatively calm markets, and sent stocks tumbling to three-week lows. 

The S&amp;P 500, a broader measure of stocks, was down 1.36 percent to 2,687.16. Big banks led the decline, with JPMorgan off 3.6 percent to 106.52. 

The prospect of another European debt crisis — following multiple blowups in Greece, Italy, and Spain this decade — sent investors rushing to the relative safety of US debt. 

“The recent Italian revelation not only exposes the vulnerability of the eurozone economy, but the flawed construction of the eurozone itself,” Jack Ablin, CFO at Cresset Weatlh Advisers, said in a statement.


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump moving ahead with plan to slap tariffs on Chinese go...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump moving ahead with plan to slap tariffs on Chinese go...			
		

Share Selection

26,780

4,904

3,303

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters