President Trump kicked off 2018 by bashing Pakistan and backing the Iranian people, whom he once accused of supporting terrorists.

"The United States has foolishly given Pakistan more than 33 billion dollars in aid over the last 15 years, and they have given us nothing but lies &amp; deceit, thinking of our leaders as fools. They give safe haven to the terrorists we hunt in Afghanistan, with little help. No more!" he tweeted Monday morning from his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida.

Pakistan has long been accused of offering safe haven to militants engaging with U.S. forces in Afghanistan.

While the government in Islamabad didn't respond, Foreign Minister Khawaja Asif tweeted that Pakistan "Will let the world know the truth..difference between facts &amp; fiction.."

He was later quoted on an Urdu-language news network slamming the President's rhetoric.

"We have already said 'no more' to America, so Trump's 'no more' has no importance," he said. "We are ready to give all account for every single penny to America in public."

He accused Trump of making the remark out of a frustrated inability to gain ground against militants in Afghanistan.

"America should take the path of dialogue instead of using military might in Afghanistan," he reportedly said.

The tweet went over well with Afghanistan, however, whose ambassador to the U.S. praised Trump's verbal barb.

"A promising message to Afghans who have suffered at the hands of terrorists based in Pakistan for far too long," the ambassador, Hamdullah Mohib, tweeted.

The Trump administration has mulled withholding $255 million in aid earmarked for Pakistan to send a message over continued frustration over allegedly harboring terror groups, the New York Times reported Friday.

President Trump last summer called on Pakistan to do more about groups like the Taliban, who have flowed into Afghanistan.

Things seemed to look up in October when Pakistan security forces rescued American hostage Caitlan Coleman, her Canadian husband and the three children they had over five years in captivity by the Taliban-tied Haqqani network.

Trump labeled the effort "a positive moment for our country's relationship with Pakistan."

But things seemed to sour when Pakistan didn't let U.S. officials interview a Haqqani militant captured in the raid, according to the Times report last week.

Trump named Pakistan as one of the threats to the U.S. last month during a speech on his new security plan.

Monday is the last day the President plans to spend at Mar-a-Lago, where he spent the Christmas holiday and rang in the new year on Sunday night.

"Will be leaving Florida for Washington (D.C.) today at 4:00 P.M. Much work to be done, but it will be a great New Year!" he tweeted Monday morning.

But not before taking one more trip to the golf course, which the commander-in-chief has frequented during his EIGHT-day stay in the Sunshine State.

The President hit the links at one of his courses with pro golfer Fred Funk and son Taylor Funk, the White House said.

Trump and Vice President Pence also continued encouraging Iranian protesters fed up with Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's iron-fisted regime.

He's regularly condemned the Obama-era nuclear deal with Iran, which lifted some economic sanctions against the nation.

"Iran is failing at every level despite the terrible deal made with them by the Obama Administration. The great Iranian people have been repressed for many years. They are hungry for food &amp; for freedom. Along with human rights, the wealth of Iran is being looted. TIME FOR CHANGE!" Trump tweeted.

The remark came as the demonstrations entered their fifth day throughout Iran.

At least 12 people were killed between Saturday and Sunday, according to state-run TV reports.

Average Iranians have been frustrated over an economic boost from the sanctions lift not being passed down to them.

Trump has accused the Iranian government of backing terrorism groups, and named it as one of six Muslim-majority countries in his controversial travel ban.

He's tweeted several times in support of the demonstrators, prompting Iran President Hassan Rouhani to dismiss his remarks Sunday.

Vice President Pence on Monday joined the chorus backing the protesters, taking a shot at past administrations for not taking a firm enough stance against the Islamic Republic.

(2/2)...The bold and growing resistance of the Iranian people today gives hope and faith to all who struggle for freedom and against tyranny. We must not and we will not let them down. #IranProtests

"As long as @RealDonaldTrump is POTUS and I am VP, the United States of America will not repeat the shameful mistake of our past when others stood by and ignored the heroic resistance of the Iranian people as they fought against their brutal regime..." Pence wrote in a pair of tweets.

"The bold and growing resistance of the Iranian people today gives hope and faith to all who struggle for freedom and against tyranny. We must not and we will not let them down. #IranProtests"

With News Wire Services