Advertisement

Supported by

The Walking Dead


By Charles Bramesco

A show as determinedly dismal as “The Walking Dead” can’t allow for outright comic relief, but the series has recently found a more broadly leavening influence in Ezekiel, who begins and ends this week’s episode. The actor Khary Payton has done a marvelous job of extending the character beyond his colorful accouterment — the elaborate wig, the slinking pet tiger — to create a cohesive, winning personality.


Payton plays Ezekiel as a kind king with a magnanimous spirit that endears him to his many subjects. In the opening sequence, His Majesty delivers a rousing oration to his warriors as they ready for a battle we glimpse in snatches of crosscuts. He energizes his soldiers with grandiloquence bordering on the Shakespearean, warning of “bloodthirsty rogues and unrepentant cutthroats bent on nothing short of our pitiless destruction.”


The writers couldn’t have chosen a more ill-suited character for the show’s latest hot seat of red herring non-death. This week’s episode grants Ezekiel another stirring speech in the last scene to mirror his speech in the first, ultimately cuing up a chaotic assassination attempt. The episode cuts to black with his fate still hanging in the balance, the latest in a long series of manipulative cliffhangers designed to goose easy, short-term suspense. But when three of his loyal compatriots leap on him the moment bullets start flying, seasoned viewers see the writers leaving themselves a way out. It’s the same old trick, gone from enraging to merely tiring.

For its constant death fixation, this series has handled the topic carelessly and clumsily in its new season. Gabriel vanished without a trace, and after sustaining a mortal gunshot wound last week, Eric joins the ranks of the departed this week in another tearful goodbye that comes off as perfunctory. Set aside the inevitable pushback from the same fans who cried foul the last time this show tore a gay relationship asunder; Aaron’s guilt-stricken farewell to his lover gets an almost insultingly small amount of screen time, a clear indicator that the show isn’t all that committed to its own emotional stakes. The show speeds through their teary farewell as if it’s an obligation that must be completed before it’s time for the good stuff.

New movies and TV shows are added to streaming platforms each month. Here are the titles we think are most interesting in December.


Regrettably, the A Plot isn’t particularly worth rushing back to. The coalition of survivors continues to have a debate over dignity and danger. Negan’s militia loses ground this week, with many low-level flunkies landing themselves in custody while their leader remains at large. Their makeshift imprisonment in flimsy rope restraints poses yet another ethical quandary to our collected heroes, who must again reconcile their basic decency with practical concerns of resources and security.


After betraying Maggie and the denizens of the Hilltop, Gregory slithers back to their stronghold and pleads for a safe haven, claiming he only worked with Negan under duress — a dystopian take on the “good German” argument. The larger caravan of prisoners follows soon after, and both requests for sanctuary leave those in power with a Hobson’s choice: Use their precious food and water on people who were trying to kill them just hours earlier, or abandon the civility they’ve spent years working to establish. This same push-pull between respect for human rights and the imperative to punish feels meaty in the real world, but when the writers briefly brush up against this wider significance, it’s incidental.


Last week’s discord amid the Hilltop-Alexandria-Kingdom alliance has grown even stronger, as Morgan and Paul come to blows over strategy planning while Maggie bickers with Gregory over their course of action for the disarmed enemy forces. The arrival of the infant Gracie adds a complicating emotional component to the moral puzzle, linking the fate of a true innocent to those already marred by sin. Whether that additional wrinkle can truly refresh the show’s go-to engine for drama has yet to be seen.


At present, though, this all amounts to the same kind of pessimism the show has always known. Rick and Daryl’s side quest is a reminder that cold hearts stand a better chance of survival. Rick’s standoff gets cut short when Daryl guns Morales down, a brutal but necessary measure. Daryl is rough-edged but defensible in this episode, until he passively murders a defenseless Savior once he’s provided information and outlived his usefulness. Even judging by Daryl’s grittier standards, the violence feels unwarranted. And maybe it is, but the show would rather we believe he’s being diligent and tying up loose ends that could spell trouble later on.

As ever, the writers side with the shrewd and dispassionate, punishing those characters foolish enough to exude a little warmth. The line “I’m not right, but that doesn’t make me wrong” stands out during the extended squabble over how best to deal with the prisoners. This bit of dialogue doubles as a mission statement for a show guided by moral compromise. The characters have accepted that they cannot emerge from this bloody crucible completely unscathed; their only solace is the knowledge that they’re not “wrong,” and that they’re victims of circumstance.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS