Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Kevin Fasick and Lia Eustachewich


		
		
		
		
	


									March 6, 2018 | 11:28am
											| Updated March 6, 2018 | 12:16pm
												

Mayor de Blasio faced a throng of angry protesters Tuesday as he arrived for his morning workout at the YMCA in Park Slope — less than one block from where two tots were fatally run over the day before.

At least 100 protesters crowded the sidewalk outside the Y on Ninth Street near Sixth Avenue and chanted “Safe streets now!” at the mayor, who paused to speak to them before heading in.

“We’re all feeling this. This has been an intersection that I’ve been going through for a quarter-century of my life with my own kids,” de Blasio said.

One-year-old Joshua Lew and 4-year-old Abigail Blumenstein were killed when an out-of-control driver plowed into them and their moms Lauren Lew and Ruthie Ann Blumenstein — a Tony-winning actress whose stage name is Ruthie Ann Miles — in the busy intersection on Ninth Street near Fifth Avenue.

The driver was identified as Dorothy Bruns, 44, of Staten Island.

“I am fed up with waiting for Vision Zero to turn into real change on the streets that people can see,” Park Slope resident Seth Pollack, 28, said about the mayor’s traffic-safety program that was launched in 2014. “There’ve been crashes and deaths at this very intersection before and throughout the neighborhood before.”

Pollack suggested that authorities consider overhauling Ninth Street — a pedestrian-heavy thoroughfare and a haven for speeding and double-parked cars in cycle lanes.

“The buck stops with him,” Pollack said. “We have wide streets here, highway driving. This is not a typical residential street … this street could accommodate a redesign to make it a little harder to go as fast as people routinely do.”

After his workout, the mayor joined his wife Chirlane McCray to lay two bouquets of white flowers at a memorial set up for the victims near the scene of the crash.

They both bowed their heads in prayer before placing lit candles on the pavement, which was lined with flowers and teddy bears.


			Read Next
		


			
				Woman brutally raped and assaulted in parking lot: cops			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Woman brutally raped and assaulted in parking lot: cops			
		

Share Selection

143,317

65,626

53,006

37,853

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters