Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Melissa Klein


		
		
		
		
	


									May 27, 2018 | 10:16am
												

A moment of silence at the Beacon School for those killed in Gaza continues to reverberate.

William Stroud, the assistant principal of the public high school in Hell’s Kitchen, told a parents meeting last week that he had received a death threat after news broke about the silent tribute.




Stroud also told parents that the school had approved the moment of silence, which a student asked for on May 15 over Beacon’s public address system. It came a day after some 60 Palestinians were killed by Israeli soldiers.

The Gaza violence also roiled the private Riverdale Country School in The Bronx, where history teacher Shawn Redden was suspended with pay last week over his interactions with students about the conflict, according to a source.

Redden, an activist who participated in the Occupy Wall Street movement, went on a diatribe against Israel, according to a parent.

Redden denied verbally attacking anyone, saying that he “served as a safe haven for all Riverdale students, especially those of minority backgrounds or with minority viewpoints.”

Asked about his alleged suspension, he said that was “not an accurate description of the status of what I have been told is an ongoing investigation.”


			Read Next
		


			
				NYPD rescues kayakers stranded in Jamaica Bay			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				NYPD rescues kayakers stranded in Jamaica Bay			
		

Share Selection

143,317

65,626

53,006

37,853

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters