Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Gabrielle Fonrouge


		
		
		
		
	


									January 25, 2018 | 1:00pm
											| Updated January 25, 2018 | 4:34pm
												

Five years holed up in an Ecuadorian embassy in London are taking a toll on the mental and physical health of the WikiLeaks publisher, according to a report.

Doctors who performed the most recent assessment on the hacktivist said Julian Assange hasn’t been outside for five-and-a-half years and has “had no access to sunlight” or “appropriate ventilation” during his stay at the embassy, the Guardian reported.

They said the prolonged stay indoors “has taken a considerable physical as well as psychological toll.”

“While the results of the evaluation are protected by doctor-patient confidentiality, it is our professional opinion that his continued confinement is dangerous physically and mentally to him and a clear infringement of his human right to healthcare,” doctors Sondra Crosby and Brock Chisholm wrote in an article for the outlet after they examined Assange for 20 hours over three days in October last year.

The assessment is the first clue on Assange’s condition since WikiLeaks published documents in 2016 that revealed the impact that confinement in an embassy has had on Assange’s mental and physical health.

He sought refuge there in 2012 when he was extradited from Sweden over sexual assault allegations but has been suffering from ailments related to his shoulder, which would require an MRI, and a condition with his lungs.

The British government refused to allow Assange safe passage to a London hospital for treatment and his supporters are concerned he’d be arrested if he leaves the embassy and could face extradition to the US, where he could face lengthy jail sentences for publishing classified material like the Iraq war logs and State Department cables.

Doctors could technically get around the government and essentially bring the hospital to Assange, but the necessary medical equipment is too large to get inside the embassy.

Crosby, who’s done extensive work on human rights and refugees, said what’s happening to Assange is “unconscionable.”

“Mr. Assange is in the position of having to decide between avoiding arrest and potentially suffering the health consequences, including death, and the need to call an ambulance if a life-threatening crisis such as a heart attack were to occur,” the doctor wrote in the article.

The Ecuadorian government is in negotiations with the UK government in an attempt to end the standoff.


			Read Next
		


			
				Gymnast: 'Abusive' ex-coach threatened me after Nassar tes...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Gymnast: 'Abusive' ex-coach threatened me after Nassar tes...			
		

Share Selection

126,233

62,149

58,780

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters