Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Metro
					

By Susan Edelman and Sara Dorn


		
		
		
		
	


									October 8, 2017 | 2:22am
											| Updated October 10, 2017 | 10:31am
												

At least 13 city schools are rated as dangerous and disorderly as the Bronx school where an 18-year-old student stabbed a classmate to death, according to Department of Education surveys of students and staff.

The schools — nine in The Bronx, three in Queens and one in Brooklyn — scored as badly or worse on one or more safety and discipline questions than the ­Urban Assembly School for Wildlife Preservation.

At that Tremont school, senior Abel Cedeno allegedly killed Matthew McCree, 15, and wounded Ariane Laboy, 16, with a switchblade on Sept. 27. Cedeno claims he was relentlessly bullied and “snapped” when the boys pelted him with pencil pieces.

An alarming 81 percent of Wildlife teachers surveyed in 2016-17 said order and discipline were not maintained. But 98 percent of teachers at the Bronx Design and Construction Academy in Mott Haven gave the same thumbs down.

At 65 high schools citywide, more than half the teachers said discipline was deficient, the surveys show. At 67 high schools, 25 percent of students said they didn’t feel safe in halls, restrooms, locker rooms and cafeterias.

Advocates are calling on the DOE to act on the red flags.

“The surveys should not be taken if they’re going to ignore them,” said Gregory Floyd, president of the safety-agents union, Teamsters Local 237. “It’s evidence that students in these schools feel unsafe.”

The Bronx Design and Construction Academy scored as bad or worse on seven safety questions. For instance, while 92 percent of Wildlife teachers said students harass, bully or intimidate classmates, 95 percent at the Bronx academy called bullying a major problem.

At Wildlife, 24 percent of students said they felt unsafe in classrooms, while 36 percent of the Academy kids felt unsafe in class. Principal Joyce Pulphus did not return messages.

The Mott Haven school, 87 percent boys, is one of three schools in a building with metal detectors. The Wildlife school did not use scanners, until a day after the killing.

In January, a teacher at the academy, David Kent, filed a lawsuit charging he was fired for refusing to clam up about chronic student misbehavior. When Kent filed write-ups on rowdy students, he says, an assistant principal warned him “it could come back to hurt the school.”


At Rockaway Collegiate HS in Queens, 85 percent of teachers found order and discipline sorely lacking, more than the 81 percent at Wildlife.

One insider described the building as a “free-for-all” where administrators and security guards do little to stop unruly behavior.

“They let the kids climb on tables and throw food. If you tell the kids something, they will turn around and say f–k you,” the staffer said. “I look at the deans, and they say, ‘What do you want me to do?’ ”

Marijuana smoking is “out of control,” the insider added. “Nobody does anything. They look the other way and hope for the best.”

Chaos heightened this fall after the DOE let a seventh school, a charter, squeeze into the complex, creating “ a juggling act” for lunch times, auditorium space, and other resources.

Principal Carol Ying, who was replaced this year, could not be reached for comment.

The building once housed Beach Channel HS, which closed in 2015 for poor performance.


			Read Next
		


			
				Low-carb diet company under fire for fudging nutrition dat...			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Low-carb diet company under fire for fudging nutrition dat...			
		

Share Selection

138,399

64,638

54,823

38,079

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters