ALBANY — More than 16,000 Salvadorans living in New York could be facing deportation under President Trump's latest "disgraceful and unjust" immigration order, Gov. Cuomo said Tuesday.

Cuomo on Tuesday said he directed entities within the state Department of State to increase outreach and communication to residents and communities impacted by the order to ensure they're aware of their rights and legal options.

Currently, he said, there are 114,127 Salvadorans living in New York, including 16,200 who received federal Temporary Protected Status.

Trump on Monday ordered the end of the protected status for more than 200,000 Salvadoran immigrants nationally who came to America in 2001 after a major earthquake hit their country.

Under the order, Salvadorans face deportation unless they voluntarily leave the country by Sept. 9, 2019 or Congress steps in to allow them stay.

"After fleeing a horrific natural disaster, Salvadorans found safe haven on our shores and have called the U.S. home for more than a decade," Cuomo said. "They have worked hard, paid taxes, bought homes, and had families — all in an effort to achieve the American Dream."

U.S. Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said Monday that damage inflicted by a 2001 earthquake in the Central American country didn't justify another temporary extension. The 18-month delay gives congress time to address the issue, she said.

El Salvador Foreign Minister Hugo Martinez said Monday he is confident that the U.S. Congress will develop a permanent fix by September 2019, when Salvadorans will be required to leave the country or face deportation.

The Trump administration had previously moved to end temporary protected status for those from Haiti and Nicaragua.

"This federal administration's decision to tear families apart, disrupt small businesses, and lead those who have become part of the American fabric to an uncertain future, is disgraceful and unjust," Cuomo said.

He directed the state Office for New Americans and the Liberty Defense Project, a public-private partnership that offers legal assistance to legal and undocumented immigrants, to engage those impacted by Trump's order.

Hispanic Federation Jose Calderon in a statement that accompanied Cuomo's announcement accused the Trump administration of turning its back on "America's promise to be a haven for those unable to safely return to their home country."

Instead of making America richer or safer, he warned that ending the TPS program "will damage our economy irreparably, heartlessly break up families, and destabilize established communities."

Cuomo announced anyone impacted by the Trump action can contact the New Americans hotline between 9 a.m. and 8 p.m. Monday through Friday at 1-800-566-7636. With News Wire Services