A massive drug ring linked to two overdose deaths was smashed in Brooklyn, prosecutors said Wednesday.

The narcotics mill was run out of a cluttered Brooklyn apartment nicknamed the "Palace", authorities said.

Business was so profitable that one of the ringleaders lived in a real palace — a two-bedroom luxury apartment in Long Island City, with a Lambroghini parked in a garage next door.

Cops raided the supplier's swank digs Tuesday night, arresting him and three accomplices on charges they sold dealers deadly, fentanyl-laced heroin, the city's Special Narcotics Prosecutor said Wednesday.

Police found nearly $600,000 cash stashed in a safe, backpacks and drawers, in the Long Island City apartment of Dionne (Slay) Sharrow, 35.

They impounded the bright red sports car, and seized a loaded gun.

When police searched the "Palace"— the stash house, located in the Shore Haven Apartments on 20th Lane in Bath Beach, they found drugs and money strewn everywhere — inside an oven, in hidden compartments in a couch, and on a counter next to a money-counting machine.

Police busted accomplice Pablo (Cito) Vallecillo, 39, after he walked into the stash house with a backpack full of cash.

Two more men, Antonio Lopez, 40, and Jason Keating, 41, were arrested after detectives found drugs, cash and guns in their Queens homes, prosecutors said.

The escalating toll of overdoses and addiction has become unbearable to all but the drug dealers and traffickers who peddle death in $10 bags," said Special Narcotics Prosecutor Bridget Brennan, whose office is running the case against the suppliers.

The bust was "phase two" of a probe that started in September 2016, when a 22-year-old man in Bay Ridge overdosed on fentanyl-laced heroin, according to Brennan's office.

Investigators linked the fatal overdose of a 42-year-old man in Kew Gardens last May, to the operation.

In December, cops busted Eduardo (Polly) Ansorena and eight others, accusing them of running a drug-dealing ring out of the JFK Inn in Jamaica.

Investigators learned that Ansorena got his drugs from Vallecilo, authorities said.

The suppliers also sold fentanyl, heroin and cocaine to buyers in Williamsburg, Middletown and Ulster County, prosecutors allege.

All four face felony drug-dealing and conspiracy charges.