Historically, Alabama has never been labeled a safe haven for black people.

The majority of the violent acts that occurred during the Civil Rights Movement happened there. From Bloody Sunday on the Edmund Pettus Bridge to the four little girls that were killed in a church bombing in Birmingham, Black America has a reason to be wary of the Yellowhammer State.

Alabama is also the home of Roy Moore and the place where Donald Trump referred to black players who protested during the national anthem as "sons of bitches."

I guess Presidents tend to speak freely when they're amongst like-minded people.

But last week, Alabama also became the place in which Allen Greene was given the opportunity of a lifetime. The 40-year-old was introduced as the new athletic director at the Auburn University, becoming the school's first African-American to hold the position, and just the third black person to ever be an AD in the Southeastern Conference.

Yes, in 2018, black people are still, rather sadly, making history by being the first of their race to do something.

During the 2016-17 season, according to data from the NCAA, black athletes accounted for 64.5 percent and 57.6 percent, respectively, of the men's basketball and football athletic scholarships in the SEC.

However, the racial disparity between the athletes on the field who play the sports that bring in all the money for universities, and the athletic directors who make all the important decisions isn't just an issue in the Deep South. During the 2016-2017 academic year, there were only 14 black athletic directors among the 131 NCAA Football Bowl Subdivision schools.

Back in October, Carla Williams became the first African-American woman to be an AD among the 64 schools that make up the Power Five conferences, and the fifth active female athletics director at that level in the country when she took over at the University of Virginia.

"Yes, I am an African-American female," Williams said at her introductory press conference last year. "I see that every morning when I wake up and look in the mirror."

"I do understand and appreciate the historic nature of me being named athletics director at the University of Virginia. I will continue to be a role model to help others reach their goals."

And like Williams, Greene understands the importance of his position.

"I would be naïve to sit here and think it doesn't mean something significant," said Greene last Friday. "I'm sure there are people out there watching. I'm sure of the 400 texts that I have, people are very happy for me and for the bigger picture of our country."

Williams was hired a few months after Charlottesville, just as Greene has come into power a year into the Trump administration.

The topic of race can't be ignored here, especially when a black woman and a black man have been given the keys to run the athletic programs at two Power Five conference schools in the South.

"Here at Auburn now they'll see somebody who is black in an administrative role that they could pursue after graduation," said Quentin Riggins, a former Auburn football player and member of the search committee that tabbed Greene. "Now there's a role model that exists throughout this school and throughout the conference. He's young enough that these guys could see themselves in these roles."

The similarities between Williams and Greene on paper are fascinating. Williams is 49 and Greene is 40. They're both outsiders as Williams played and worked at the University of Georgia before taking the UVA job, while Greene is a Seattle native with no ties to Auburn, and was previously the AD at the University of Buffalo.

Not only did the two schools make historic hires in terms of race and gender, but they also brought in people who will truly look at situations from a different point of view.

During his introductory press conference, Greene did and said all the right things, as he believes that his will to serve will be able to transcend race, gender, and sexual orientation.

"There are a number of people in this world, and we don't all look alike, we don't all act alike, and we don't all talk alike, we don't all believe in the same thing, but that doesn't mean that we can't be teammates," he said. "It doesn't mean we can't be partners, or brothers, or sisters. So, we will embrace cultural diversity. We will embrace different beliefs. We will challenge one another to think differently, to be different, all to make Auburn a better university."

Most athletic directors are judged on two things: the wins and loss records of the coaches they hire, and how much money they can raise for the school.

Williams and Greene will be judged by those same two standards, but their impact on the school may be something that is impossible to calculate.

Auburn and UVA should be applauded for making these hires.

But at the same time, they need to understand that impression that Williams and Greene will leave on their student-athletes is something that can't be quantified on a spreadsheet.