Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						Business
					

By Carleton English


		
		
		
		
	


									May 2, 2018 | 5:37pm
											| Updated May 2, 2018 | 5:44pm
												

Nouriel Roubini just crapped on the cryptocurrency party.

The famously bearish NYU economist — who earned the nickname “Dr. Doom” for predicting the financial crisis — blasted bitcoin fanatics as “suckers” and said repeatedly that its underlying technology was “ bulls–t.”

Bitcoin radicals say the cryptocurrency’s “blockchain,” or decentralized ledger for recording transactions, could eventually replace centralized banking systems worldwide.

But at a Wednesday panel at the Milken Institute Global Conference here, Roubini called the blockchain a “glorified Excel spreadsheet,” noting that cryptocurrency holders still go through centralized exchanges to clear their transactions.

“There is no decentralization, it’s just bulls–t,” Roubini said, using the potty-mouthed epithet no less than four times as he bad-mouthed bitcoin.

“This was a bubble … the ones who arrived late to the party are the suckers, Roubini said, referring to investors who bought Bitcoin last year when it traded at $20,000. It now trades around $9,000.

Roubini traded barbs with Alex Mashinsky, chief executive of crypto-lending space Celsius Network and Bill Barhydt, chief executive of cryptocurrency app Abra.

“Why don’t you buy one coin and then tell us how it works,” Mashinsky fired back at Roubini after the latter said he hasn’t bought any bitcoins.

It’s “like a horse salesman saying we don’t need combustion engines,” Barhydt said of Roubini.

The crypto-craze — coupled with the flood of bad actors trying to get their piece — has captured the attention of regulators who are grappling with how to treat the space.

“Crypto is not a synonym for immune from the rule of law. We don’t want it to be a safe haven for bad things. We don’t think that mom and pop who invest in it should be ripped off,” Brent McIntosh, General Counsel of the Treasury Department, told The Post in a sidelines interview following the panel.

But McIntosh stopped short of saying what regulation would look like.

“I’ve long since stopped trying to predict what happens on The Hill,” McIntosh said.


			Read Next
		


			
				Cambridge Analytica shutting down in wake of data scandal			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Cambridge Analytica shutting down in wake of data scandal			
		

Share Selection

28,689

4,602

3,381

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters