Advertisement

Supported by

the look


Unity is a queer skateboarding collective in California, designed as a haven from the sometimes-hostile environment the sport has fostered.


Photographs by Ryan Shorosky


Text by Nicola Fumo


Produced by Eve Lyons

OAKLAND, Calif. — Trevor Straub first stepped onto a skateboard at age 7, and by 13 was making the rounds on California’s competitive skateboarding circuit, even taking home prizes. A series of ankle injuries got in the way of a skate career, but Straub’s healing time coincided with the early stages of exploring identity, an evolving “otherness” that was not met warmly by the skate scene.


“I lost all my friends,” said Straub, now 25, who identifies as gender nonconforming. “I didn’t skate for 10 years. I just quit — I didn’t own a skateboard, I didn’t look at skateboarding magazines. I hated it.”

Today, Straub rides with Unity, a queer skate collective in Oakland, Calif., that brings together L.G.B.T.Q. and gender-nonconforming people who want to reclaim skateboarding. Unity is the brainchild of Jeffrey Cheung, 28, a multidisciplinary artist from the East Bay. 

“I wasn’t out in high school,” Mr. Cheung said at a recent Unity skate meet-up in Oakland. “When I was skateboarding, I heard homophobic slurs all the time, like ‘faggot,’ or ‘that’s so gay.’ It’s not a very safe environment for a queer person to come out.” 

The idea for a skaters’ safe space came to Mr. Cheung at the end of 2016, when he was simultaneously reeling from the election results and grieving the death of a close friend. “I had a really dark end of the year,” he said. “It made me want to do something positive.” Unity was founded on Jan. 1, 2017, and now hosts monthly skate gatherings in the Bay Area that draw as many as 50 people per session.

The collective has attracted individuals both familiar with and new to skateboarding, like Gabriel Ramirez, who described skating as “a very empowering thing to do.” He was encouraged to pick it up by Unity and by Mr. Cheung, who is his boyfriend. 


“Skateboarding is a part of Jeff’s life, and it was bound to become a part of mine at some point,” Mr. Ramirez, 29, said. Skate scenes, he said, “always felt like a space that I didn’t feel welcome in, even though I was definitely interested in it growing up. I was afraid of being picked on. I was figuring out my queer identity, and I felt like an outcast.” His experience is echoed by many who attend Unity events.

“Growing up, I skated with your typical skate crew — dudes’ dudes,” said Victor Valdez, 31, who says he regularly heard homophobic slurs in the scene. “That’s what skateboarding was, and kind of still is. It’s this super-open, diverse community that’s super-jock-ish. They have these really heteronormative standards, it’s almost like football.”


“When you’re skateboarding, you’re hanging out with dudes all day,” he said. “You’re not getting any other perspective.”


Rob Ferguson, 30, who identifies as straight and as an ally to the queer community, was invited to the meet-up by a friend. Mr. Ferguson runs a skateboard academy in Oakland, offering introduction and intensive skateboarding camp programs for youth. His view of the skating community is optimistic and untainted by the discrimination felt by some members of Unity. 


Skateboarding, Mr. Ferguson said, is one sport in which it does not matter where you come from: “You can come from all walks of life and you are pretty much always accepted.” The scene has traditionally been made up of mostly young men, but skateboarding “has never forcibly excluded anyone else, not like other sports.”

“Just because you’re invited doesn’t mean you’re welcome,” said Mare Young, 25, known as “Turb0,” who has been skating since the age of 7. Like many others who have since found Unity, Young mostly skated solo as a way to enjoy the sport but avoid the typical skate scene. 


Mae Ross, a 20 year old transgender woman, skated alone post-transition. “Skating was really hard for me for a second there, adjusting to my newly developing body and trying to skate and maintain relationships with people I skated with before,” said Ross, who relocated from Bakersfield, Calif., to the San Francisco area a year ago, in part to find like-minded people in a city long known for its L.G.B.T.Q. population, but struggled to find skating companions before Unity. 


“I thought I would meet more girl skaters or something, but even if I did, they wouldn’t really talk to me,” Ross said. “None of those hesher bro skaters liked me anyway, even before I transitioned.” 

Mr. Valdez also opted to skate alone after growing tired of the macho skate scene he’d grown up in. When he moved to the Bay Area, he skated by himself, he said, as he was trying to come out. “I wasn’t trying to meet a bunch of, like, skater bros and have to deal with that,” he said.

Mr. Valdez discovered the Unity community through Instagram (@unityskateboarding). He messaged Mr. Cheung on Instagram and told him, “you’re doing cool things.” Mr. Cheung’s response, Mr.  Valdez said, “was, like, ‘come out and skate.’” 


Arriving at his first Unity meet-up in June, he was floored. “It was insane,” he said. “I’ve never had a feeling like that before. It was insanely diverse in terms of sexuality, gender, race. Everyone dresses different, everyone has different style. It was a really amazing feeling, because that’s exactly what I was kind of looking for: that queer community that’s getting into skating.”


Immediately, he said, “everyone was superfriendly, like you’ve known them together.” That was something he had never felt in a skate community.



An earlier version of a picture caption with this article misstated the age of Diane Vo. Vo is 32, not 25.

Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS