Cecil the Lion was allegedly lured out of a protected national park with an elephant carcass before he was killed by a Minnesota dentist hidden in the branches of a nearby tree.

Dr. Walter Palmer, who allegedly paid $50,000 for the hunt, loosed an arrow from his perch just outside Hwange National Park, injuring the 12-year-old lion before he fired off the fatal shot in July 2015.

In a new book titled "Lion Hearted: The Life and Death of Cecil &amp; the Future of Africa's Iconic Cats," author and biologist Andrew Loveridge contends Palmer's companions — hunting guide Theo Bronkhorst and wildlife tracker Cornelius Ncube — dragged an elephant killed earlier in the week roughly 300 meters outside the animal safe haven in Zimbabwe.

Wildlife Watch, an investigative series from National Geographic, published excerpts from Loveridge's book, offering a new perspective on the final hours leading up to Cecil's death.

"The scent of a dead elephant drew the lion forward, enticing him to what long experience had taught him was another free meal," one section reads.

"He had often fed on elephants. But there was something different about this carcass, something beyond this cat's experience of things to avoid."

Cecil had been used to human visitors snapping photos of him in the park, so he was not alarmed by the presence of the nearby hunters, Loveridge alleged.

"He settled down to feed, tearing at the tough dry meat with scissor-like teeth," another excerpt reads.

"He fed for a few minutes, oblivious to the hunter taking up the tension on his bow."

Ncube said he recalled hearing the wounded lion "struggling to breathe" in the hours after he was shot. And Palmer finished off him off nearly half-day later with a second arrow.

Loveridge, who studied Cecil for eight years on behalf of Oxford University, said the creature's circumstances and familiarity with people made him "an easy lion for (Palmer) to hunt — a park lion, well-fed and habituated to people."

Palmer was never charged with a crime and has previously said no one in his hunting party knew the lion he shot was the famed Cecil.

A high court later dropped charges against Bronkhorst, ruling the guide did nothing wrong as the lion was killed outside the protected animal facility.

Cecil's death sparked international outrage, with many railing against big-game hunting. Palmer was forced to close his dental practice for several weeks amid backlash and protests.

Loveridge's book is slated for release on April 10.