A Pennsylvania teenager reported missing in Queens nearly two months ago had filed an assault complaint against a Harlem man before she vanished — and cops believe the attacker could be her pimp.

On Aug. 25, the 32-year-old assailant, who has multiple arrests for promoting prostitution, had stolen $300 from 19-year-old Corinna Slusser while she was in the shower. When she demanded the money back, he allegedly grabbed her by the neck and pushed her against the wall, according to court papers.

Slusser, who relatives believe is a victim of sex trafficking, reported the brutality to police, and cops arrested her suspected pimp on Aug. 28, charging him with strangulation and criminal obstruction of breathing.

The Daily News is withholding the man's name since he may play an integral role in solving Slusser's disappearance.

Relatives in Pennsylvania reported Slusser missing on Sept. 12, after she didn't go to her grandfather's funeral in Florida.

The avid social media user hasn't posted anything online since Sept. 10, when she put up a photo of herself tagged in the Bronx.

Relatives said Slusser met her pimp in March — who she called "her daddy" — and moved out to New York to live with him.

She remained in contact with her family for several months but began acting strangely in early September, around the time her grandfather died.

Slusser first told relatives that someone had stolen her ID and she couldn't travel to Florida to go to the funeral. She also seemed terrified and said she had wanted to come home but had no money for a bus ticket.

No one in the family has heard from Slusser since that point, said one relative, who wished not to be named.

The NYPD quickly confirmed the family's suspicions — Slusser had been roped into the sex trade.

Cops warned the family against putting too much out about her disappearance on social media.

"Make no mistake, one move and she will be disposed of in one of two ways," police told relatives. "Either she'll be killed or moved."

Relatives are desperate for news about the teenager's whereabouts.

"She's so sweet and so naive. She didn't know what she was getting herself into," Slusser's relative said. "She just needs to know that everybody wants her home. I can't imagine what she's gone through or what she's going through. I just want her to have an out."

Police said Slusser was last seen in the early morning hours of Sept. 20 at the Haven Motel, on Woodhaven Blvd. by 68th Ave. in Rego Park.

She may no longer be taking orders from the man who brought her to New York and later attacked her, police sources said.

Cops describe her as white, with blonde hair and blue eyes, about 5-foot-6 and 140 pounds, with a large black flower tattoo on her chest.

Cops are asking anyone with information about her whereabouts to call Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS.