The Trump administration has made it clear: Refugees are no longer welcome in the United States. Earlier this month, Attorney General Sessions announced the U.S. government will not only continue separating children from their parents as they cross the border, but will prosecute adult asylum seekers as criminals rather than let them prove they fear persecution in their home countries. This is but the latest in a series of polices with which the extremists in charge are taking this country back to the shameful history of the 1930s.

In 1939, the U.S. President — a Democrat — denied landing to more than 900 Jewish refugees who sailed from Germany on the St. Louis. These asylum seekers were forced to return to Europe. Despite four European nations providing safe haven to many of those excluded from America's shores, at least 254 of these Jews perished at the hands of their persecutors. Unfortunately, the United States is now once again returning the persecuted back to life-threatening circumstances as a matter of policy.

Who are today's refugees coming to the U.S.? Most are Central American women and children fleeing from serious violence, including femicide, rape and gang killings of innocent civilians in countries where the rule of law does not exist. Some find safety in neighboring countries; others seek haven in America.

There is evidence that some deported home from the U.S. have been killed. Why not give such people a chance to show they deserve our protection? Can Americans, 327 million strong, really feel threatened by the relatively small number of displaced women and children who make it here?

In 1939, 83% of Americans opposed admitting refugees. Economic and ethnic fears motivated this opposition. Influential antisemites like Father Charles Coughlin and Henry Ford propagated hatred towards Jews. We are not there yet. But Trump and Sessions — and their media megaphones — are doing everything they can to take us in that direction.

The propagandists who run the White House, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security want to scare Americans into believing that rapists and criminal gangs are surging at our borders. Trump calls MS-13 "animals" and is more than happy if people take that to mean asylum-seekers are, too

If they succeed, they will have created a security crisis where none exists. This false narrative has already taken root among officials with the power to prevent the arrival of refugees.

Some Customs and Border Protection inspectors at land ports of entry have told mothers, fathers and children seeking safety that the United States is no longer giving asylum. "Trump says we don't have to let you in," some of the uprooted were informed.

Homeland Security agents have already separated families, like a 6-year-old girl from her mother they detained 2,000 miles apart as they sought asylum from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In late March, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement issued a new directive to keep pregnant women who are seeking safety locked up while they pursue asylum. Sessions then ordered immigration judges to issue asylum and other immigration decisions more quickly.

Starting October 1, the performance of every immigration judge will be evaluated based on the number of cases completed. Sessions wants to deter asylum seekers from having their claims of persecution heard by these judges.

Finally, this administration has demolished America's legal refugee admissions program. Until Trump, the United States led the world in rescuing refugees abroad. In FY 2016, our State Department rescued 84,994 refugees and brought them to the U.S. with the aid of the great faith-based and secular agencies (like the one a refugee from Germany named Einstein helped found) that this country should be proud of.

In the first half of this fiscal year, this administration has let in only 10,548 refugees.

The message is clear. Refugees, don't come to America. We will treat you like criminals. We will do everything we can to deter you from coming and deport you if you make it here.

Trump and Sessions are breaching our own laws that reflect the international right to seek asylum. They are abandoning our moral commitment to protect those fleeing for their lives. They are pushing America backwards, cruelly, and not to anything that made us great.

Schoenholtz is professor from practice at Georgetown Law. He serves as faculty director of the law school's Human Rights Institute and co-director of its Center for Applied Legal Studies, which represents refugees seeking political asylum in the United States.