Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Yaron Steinbuch


		
		
		
		
	


									January 1, 2018 | 11:51am
											| Updated January 1, 2018 | 1:14pm
												

President Trump ushered in the new year by blasting Pakistan for giving the US “nothing but lies &amp; deceit” while harboring terrorists — and calling for change in Iran, where 10 people were killed in protests.

“The United States has foolishly given Pakistan more than 33 billion dollars in aid over the last 15 years, and they have given us nothing but lies &amp; deceit, thinking of our leaders as fools,” Trump said in his inaugural tweet of 2018.

“They give safe haven to the terrorists we hunt in Afghanistan, with little help. No more!”

The Pakistani Defense Ministry responded to Trump’s broadside with its own tweet.

“Pak as anti-terror ally has given free to US: land &amp; air communication, military bases &amp; intel cooperation that decimated Al-Qaeda over last 16yrs, but they have given us nothing but invective &amp; mistrust. They overlook cross-border safe havens of terrorists who murder Pakistanis,” it wrote.

The uneasy relationship between the US and Pakistan has been on a precipitous slide since the 2011 American operation that located and killed Osama bin Laden in the military garrison town of Abbottabad, about 65 miles from the capital, Islamabad.

Trump ramped up the pressure last year when he announced his Afghan strategy that called out Pakistan for harboring Afghan Taliban insurgents — warning it would have to end.

The US has long accused Islamabad of allowing extremists to operate relatively freely in Pakistan’s border regions to carry out operations in neighboring Afghanistan.

Last week, the New York Times reported that the White House was considering whether to withhold $255 million in already delayed aid to Pakistan because of its failure to target terror groups.

Last month, Trump hinted that he may cut off the aid for good, according to Agence France-Presse.

“We make massive payments every year to Pakistan. They have to help,” he said in unveiling his national security strategy.

Vice President Mike Pence told US troops during a visit to Afghanistan late last month: “President Trump has put Pakistan on notice.”

In August, the president declared that “Pakistan often gives safe haven to agents of chaos, violence and terror.”

That month, he also unveiled a new US strategy for the war in Afghanistan aimed at defeating the Afghan Taliban and the Haqqani Network, an affiliated group operating in Pakistan, The Hill reported.

In July, the Pentagon withheld $50 million in funding for Pakistan after Defense Secretary James Mattis told Congress he would not certify that the country had done enough to fight the Haqqani group.

Islamabad has repeatedly denied the accusations of turning a blind eye to militancy, assailing the US for ignoring the thousands who have been killed on its soil and the billions spent fighting extremists.

The president also tweeted early Monday that Iran “is failing at every level” amid a wave of protests over the government’s weak economy.

“Iran is failing at every level despite the terrible deal made with them by the Obama Administration,” he tweeted. “The great Iranian people have been repressed for many year. They are hungry for food &amp; for freedom. Along with human rights, the wealth of Iran is being looted. TIME FOR CHANGE!”

State television said Monday that 10 people were killed in street protests in Iran, according to Reuters.

On Sunday, Trump tweeted: “The people are finally getting wise as to how their money and wealth is being stolen and squandered on terrorism.”

“Looks like they will not take it any longer,” he added. “The USA is watching very closely for human rights violations!”

The protests began Thursday in Mashhad over economic issues and have since spread to several cities, where hundreds of people have been arrested.

While some have shared Trump’s tweets, many distrust him in Iran because he has refused to recertify the nuclear deal and because his travel bans have blocked Iranians from getting US visas.

Trump, who celebrated Christmas and New Year’s Eve at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida, hit the links Monday with pro golfers Fred Funk and his son Taylor, according to the White House.

“Will be leaving Florida for Washington (D.C.) today at 4:00 P.M. Much work to be done, but it will be a great New Year!” Trump said in another tweet.

With Post wires


			Read Next
		


			
				Pope's advice for 2018: Get rid of 'useless baggage'			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Pope's advice for 2018: Get rid of 'useless baggage'			
		

Share Selection

150,047

66,678

49,844

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters