Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Mark Moore


		
		
		
		
	


									October 23, 2017 | 10:17am
											| Updated October 23, 2017 | 2:42pm
												

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson on Monday said there’s room for moderate members of the Taliban in Afghanistan’s government if they reject violence and terrorism and commit to stability.

”Clearly, we have to continue to fight against the Taliban, against others, in order for them to understand they will never win a military victory,” Tillerson said during an unannounced visit to Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan. “And there are, we believe, moderate voices among the Taliban, voices that do not want to continue to fight forever. They don’t want their children to fight forever. So we are looking to engage with those voices and have them engage in a reconciliation process leading to a peace process and their full involvement and participation in the government.”

There’s a place for those voices “if they are ready to come, renouncing terrorism, renouncing violence and being committed to a stable prosperous Afghanistan,” Tillerson said during his visit with Afghan President Ashraf Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah and other senior officials from the war-torn country.

Tillerson also delivered a warning to neighboring Pakistan, where he will travel on Tuesday, saying the country must fight terrorists and drive out militants who find safe haven inside its borders to maintain a relationship with the United States.

“It will be based upon whether they take action that we feel is necessary to move the process forward for both creating opportunity for reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan but also ensuring a stable future Pakistan,” Tillerson said. “Pakistan needs to, I think, take a clear-eyed view of the situation that they are confronted with in terms of the number of terrorist organizations that find safe haven inside of Pakistan.”

After his unscheduled trip to Afghanistan, Tillerson stopped in Iraq where he met with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi – their second meeting in as many days.
On Sunday, at a sit-down in Riyadh with Abadi and Saudi Arabia’s King Salman, Tillerson warned Iranian militants and other foreign fighters to clear out of Iraq now that Islamic State terrorists had been defeated.

His visit to Baghdad came just hours after Abadi’s office warned him not to butt in on Iraq’s affairs.

“No party has the right to interfere in Iraqi matters,” his office said in a statement.

During his two-hour stop at Bagram Air Base, Tillerson also talked with Ghani and other Afgan officials about the Trump administration’s new South Asia policy and America’s longest war.

“The U.S. has made it clear in terms of our support for Afghanistan, support a sovereign unified Afghanistan, a democratic Afghanistan, of charting a path to peace, prosperity and self-reliance,” Tillerson told reporters after his plane landed. “It is imperative in the end that we are denying safe haven to any terrorist organizations or any extremists to any part of this world.”

​Trump laid out his South Asia policy in a speech in August.

It calls on Afghanistan, India and Pakistan to cooperate in the battle to defeat the Taliban and other militant groups in the region.

The policy also removes any timeline for the US military to pull out of Afghanistan​, where American troops have been fighting since 2001.​

Tillerson slipped out of Qatar in the pre-dawn hours under heavy security and flew by military plane to Bagram Air Base, where about 20,000 US military personnel are stationed.

With Post Wires


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump says he won't change your 401(k) retirement plans			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Trump says he won't change your 401(k) retirement plans			
		

Share Selection

141,199

64,977

52,800

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters