Advertisement

Supported by

By Andrew E. Kramer

KIEV, Ukraine — The charges against Paul J. Manafort and an associate involve allegations of tax fraud in the United States, but anticorruption groups in Kiev say that Mr. Manafort profited from financial wrongdoing in their country and that it cost the Ukrainian people dearly.


“The arrest of Manafort is very positive, and a long-awaited event,’’ said Yaroslav Yurchyshyn, director in Kiev of Transparency International, which has been tracking money laundering in Ukraine for years.


The indictment, unsealed in Washington, on Monday accused Mr. Manafort of laundering $18 million and his associate, Rick W. Gates, an additional $3 million, taking advantage of a tangled skein of offshore companies and American real estate and home improvement deals.


Mr. Manafort and Mr. Gates pleaded not guilty to the charges.


Ukrainian prosecutors and courts have not pursued charges against Mr. Manafort. Unless they do that, Mr. Yurchyshyn said, it will not be possible for Ukraine’s government to claim assets in the United States possibly related to money laundered from Ukraine.

Money laundering charges require that the financial transactions be designed to conceal that funds came from an unlawful activity, like drug trafficking or official corruption in the country of origin. But no such charges have been filed in Ukraine.


Instead, Special Counsel Robert S. Mueller III accused Mr. Manafort and Mr. Gates of disguising the origins of the money to conceal that they had violated another United States law, one requiring Americans to register while lobbying for a foreign government.


Mr. Manafort advised President Viktor F. Yanukovych of Ukraine, who was deposed nearly four years ago. Many anticorruption activists in Ukraine greeted Mr. Manafort’s indictment as welcome news, a vindication of their efforts to publicize what they saw as his flouting of Ukrainian election finance laws.


The federal indictment did not allege that Mr. Manafort had violated Ukrainian law.


“Wow! That is great,” Andrii Kruglashov, a political consultant who had worked with candidates opposed to Mr. Yanukovych, said of the indictment.


“I’m happy that he has been caught, and I’m happy the profile of this case is so high,” said Daria Kaleniuk, director of the Anticorruption Action Center, a nongovernmental group in Kiev that has investigated offshore companies linked to Mr. Manafort.

Mr. Manafort’s payments in Ukraine have been a focus of keen interest. He began working in the country in 2004 for one of Ukraine’s richest men, Rinat Akhmetov, a coal and steel tycoon, and then for the political party Mr. Akhmetov had supported financially, the Party of Regions and its leader, Mr. Yanukovych. He later worked directly for the party.


According to State Department cables written at the American Embassy in Kiev and later released by WikiLeaks, the Party of Regions, with Mr. Manafort’s help, had been “working to change its image from that of a haven for mobsters into that of a legitimate political party,” the American ambassador at the time, John E. Herbst, wrote. Mr. Yanukovych was elected president in 2010, but driven from office amid widespread protests early in 2014.


Handwritten payment records discovered after that revolution suggest that Mr. Manafort was compensated, at least in part, from a party slush fund of off-the-books political contributions, pointing to one possible origin of the money described in the federal indictment.


The record book became known as the Black Ledger, and the Ukrainian authorities say all payments described in the book were illegal, but not all have been verified. Two groups of Ukrainian prosecutors have examined the ledger but neither has opened a criminal case in Ukraine against Mr. Manafort, saying there is no proof he actually received the money.


Mr. Manafort last visited Ukraine in October or November 2015, his former office manager in Kiev, Konstantin Kilimnik, said in an interview earlier this year. On that trip, he was trying to collect debts from Ukrainian clients, Mr. Kilimnik said.


The $18 million Mr. Manafort is accused of laundering comes in sharp contrast to the post-Soviet economic woes afflicting Ukraine, where the average monthly salary is $224, at the current exchange rate.


Even if Ukraine cannot recover the money, the indictment sends a message to those still benefiting from corruption in Ukraine, Oksana I. Syroyid, the deputy speaker of Ukraine’s Parliament, said in a telephone interview. “This is such a vivid case,” she said. “The money that they gained through corruption can never be safe in any country.”


Mr. Yurchyshyn of Transparency International said the American indictment could spur prosecutors in Ukraine to unravel the origin of Mr. Manafort’s money. “There’s a lot of hope this case will shine light on this side, too,” he said.







video


Advertisement







Collapse

SEE MY OPTIONS