ALBANY — State lawmakers and consumer advocates on Tuesday urged the makers of Tide Detergent to make their pods harder and less enticing to eat.

In an effort to stop what's become known as "Tide Pod Challenge" and other cases of accidental ingestion, the lawmakers and advocates sent a letter to Procter &amp; Gamble urging the company to redesign Tide Pods' packaging to include clear warning labels, child-resistant wrappers and less appealing colors.

Rep. Aravella Simotas (D-Queens) and Sen. Brad Hoylman (D-Manhattan) also called for the adoption of legislation they've sponsored that would implement stricter packaging standards for detergents in New York, including a requirement that detergent packets be "not easily permeated by a child's bite."

"Toxic substances like these laundry pods should not be packaged to look like candy or toys which lure children to put them in their mouths," Simotas said.

The letter and legislation comes amid a flurry of incidents stemming from viral internet videos dubbed the "Tide Pod Challenge," in which people are encouraged to bite into Tide Pods.

The videos appeared to pick up steam late last year and have led to dozens of cases of teenagers being exposed to detergent, according to the American Association of Poison Control Centers.

In addition to the Tide Pod Challenge, there are also thousands of cases a year where children mistakenly eat the colorful pods, the lawmakers and advocates said.

"Children and adults with cognitive impairments are at risk of death and serious injury from these items that are attractive to kids and can look like food," said Russ Haven of the New York Public Interest Research Group.

Procter &amp; Gamble spokeswoman Petra Renck said "nothing is more important to us than the safety of the people who use our products" and stressed that the company has already taken a number of steps to deter people from biting into the pods, including the addition of a bitter taste to the packet's outer layer and enlisting New England Patriot's tight end Rob Gronkowski for a safe use social media campaign.

"There are major things that have already been done to prevent unintended exposure," added Brian Sansoni of the American Cleaning Institute, a trade association for the detergent and cleaning products industry.

Sansoni argued that additional legislation was unnecessary and would likely be ineffective against the pod challenge.

"This is blatant intentional misuse," Sansoni said. "It's tough to legislate against that kind of decision making."

Assemblyman Joseph Errigo, a Republican from upstate Livingston County, also slammed the legislation for adding burdens on manufacturers.

"There's no easy way to spin it other than to say the people who are participating in this trend are old enough to know laundry detergent is not safe for consumption, and the people behind this legislation should know that it's not the manufacturers who are to blame when people make stupid decisions with their products," Errigo said.