Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.


						News
					

By Linda Massarella and Tori Richards


		
		
		
		
	


									December 5, 2017 | 6:06pm
											| Updated December 6, 2017 | 11:53am
												

About 70 patients from an emergency Ventura County psych ward were jostled awake early Tuesday by California rescue workers battling a California wildfire and taken to a Red Cross shelter at a nearby fairgrounds.




“Everybody was calm, nobody really freaked out,” said the source.

The patients — who include suicidal youth placed in the facility by law enforcement — were evacuated at about 2:30 a.m. along with those who lived in buildings and houses nearby, authorities said.

“All of the patients are OK,” the hospital’s executive assistant Karina Diaz told The Post. They spent about 12 hours in the Red Cross shelter before being transported to other hospitals in the area.

Vista del Mar Hospital, along with about 10 other structures in the area, later burned to the ground.

The ravenous fire began in the brush and scrubs outside the city of Ventura on Monday around 6:30 p.m., Within hours, hot embers whipped up by dry, powerful Santa Ana winds began raining down into the enclave of 100,000 residents.

The fire is still raging out of control and has scourged over 70 square miles along the coast north of Los Angeles, leading Gov. Jerry Brown to declare a state of emergency.

Former patient Roselyn Romero, 17, said she was upset over the loss of the safe-haven hospital.

“I was taken there by police when I was 14 and having a suicide attempt, I was cutting myself and had depression and severe anxiety,” she told The Post.

“They were some of the most understanding people I had ever met, they worked a lot with youth and we didn’t feel alone. All of the doctors and nurses treated me like I was a valid individual.”

Romero said she plans to attend university in the fall and in the meantime is volunteering for the Red Cross.


			Read Next
		


			
				Massage Envy 'shaken' by reported sex misconduct at spas			
		


			Read Next
		


			
				Massage Envy 'shaken' by reported sex misconduct at spas			
		

Share Selection

126,233

62,149

58,780

Post Digital Network


			© 2018 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy | Your Ad Choices | Sitemap
		


							News Corp. is a network of leading companies in the world of diversified media, news, and information services.						

Get our top stories delivered to your inbox


																	By clicking above you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
															

Don't miss out on our other great newsletters