President Trump plans to give preferential treatment to refugees deemed more capable of "successful assimilation" into American society.

The administration plans to cap the number of refugees allowed into the U.S. at 45,000, the lowest level since the resettlement program began in 1980.

But amid Trump's plans to make "America First" he is also letting certain refugees move to the front of the line if they fit a certain mold, according to documents seen by the Daily News.

Current priorities stress the need of refugees to escape persecution or reunify with family in the U.S., though an as of yet unpublished report to Congress also includes a major change from years, talk of assimilation.

"In addition to referrals of refugees with compelling protection needs, referrals may also take into account certain criteria that enhance a refugee's likelihood of successful assimilation and contribution to the United States," the report said.

Trump has previously said that those coming to the U.S. must embrace American history and traditions rather than those from the countries they fled.

"You now share the obligation to teach our values to others, to help newcomers assimilate to our way of life, and uplift America by living according to its highest ideals of self-governance and its highest standards," he said in a video to new U.S. citizens last week.

The Congress report does not say that assimilation is a main factor, though the idea of using it in consideration has similarities to a Republican bill put forward in the Senate this summer, which assigns a point system to refugee admissions that benefits skilled workers who speak English.

Trump's decision to cut the refugee program has drawn opposition from politicians as well as organizations designed to ease the suffering of those forced from their homes by war or persecution.

"Today's decision turns our back on the world at a time when there are more refugees, asylum-seekers, and internally displaced persons than at any time since World War II. It is an abdication of our moral authority, and an abandonment of the very values that make America great," House Judiciary Committee Democrats Rep. John Conyers and Rep. Zoe Lofgren said in a statement.

The International Rescue Committee called the language an "assimilation test" and said that the strength of the U.S. has been that it "offers safe haven to the world's most vulnerable people out of compassion, not out of self-interest."