John Oliver's parody book about Vice President Mike Pence's rabbit is coming to Indiana.

Max Mutchnick, the creator of "Will &amp; Grace," will donate a copy of "A Day in the Life of Marlon Bundo" to every elementary school in Indiana, Pence's home state.

"After hearing about the book, I brought it home and read it to my twin daughters. It's a poignant story about how love and community can rise above intolerance," Mutchnick wrote on Twitter.

"My grammar school library was something I always remembered as a safe haven. Books allow children to dream and hope, but you know that already. Thanks to libraries and librarians like you, storytelling not only became my passion — it also became my profession. I hope your students enjoy this book as much as my family and I did."

In Oliver's book, Marlon, the Pence family rabbit, falls in love with another male rabbit, Wesley, and the two decide to get married. But the book's villain, the Stink Bug, who features a haircut suspiciously similar to the Vice President's, tries to stop the same-sex marriage.

"Mike Pence is a man who I think has few qualities to his name," Oliver told Ellen DeGeneres on her show when he announced the book last month. "However, one thing I love about him is his rabbit."

Charlotte Pence, the Vice President's daughter, revealed that she supported the talk show's parody of her own "Marlon Bundo's Day in the Life of the Vice President."

"I mean, I think you know, imitation is the most sincere form of flattery in a way," she said on Fox Business Network last month.

"But also, in all seriousness, his book is contributing to charities that I think we can all get behind. We have two books giving to charities that are about bunnies, so I'm all for it really."

Proceeds from the book go to AIDS United and The Trevor Project, a charity trying to end suicides among LGBTQ youth.

As of late Sunday afternoon, "A Day in the Life of Marlon Bundo" is the No. 2 best seller on Amazon in 2018, behind Michael Wolff's "Fire and Fury."