Nearly 100 defense attorneys staged an impromptu protest ouside a Brooklyn courthouse Tuesday after a lawyer's client was arrested by federal authorities on an immigration charge.

When Rebecca Kavanagh walled into Judge Rosemarie Montalbano's courtroom, she was warned to speak to her client immediately because U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents were present and prepared to detain him.

Moments later, ICE agents detained Genaro Rojas-Hernandez, 30, who was in court for a misdemeanor domestic violence charge.

It was not immediately clear what the immigration issue was or what country Rojas-Hernandez was from.

But what was clear is that many defense attorneys view the courthouse as a safe haven that is off limits on issues involving immigration, and were banding together to voice their displeasure.

"Stay out ICE," and "Shame on you," the lawyers shouted, while others held makeshift signs that read "F--k ICE," and "Go away."

"They arrested him and put him into a restricted area. The courtroom' s sergeant pushed me and the court officers kept me away," said Kavanagh, who asked the judge to set bail for her client to keep him out of ICE custody.

The judge declined to set bail but instructed the court officers to allow Kavanagh to speak to her client.

"The sergeant ignored the judge's directive," Kavanagh said. "It was totally inappropriate."

When Kavanagh finally caught up with her client, who doesn't speak English, he told her the men who detained him didn't identify themselves.

A statement from the Office of Court Administration said several legal aid attorneys escalated the situation by "purposely interfering in an arrest situation."

"Only for the professionalism and restraint of the court officers involved, there were no injuries and the attorneys were not arrested for obstructing governmental administration," the statement said.

According to OCA, ICE agents "made the proper notifications upon arrival, and the presiding judge not only was notified but the defense attorney made her record when the case was called."

"We do not facilitate or impede ICE agents when they effect an arrest inside New York State Courthouses, the OCA statement said.

Brooklyn DA Eric Gonzalez was also unhappy with the ICE intervention.

"Today's ICE arrest during a hearing on a serious domestic violence case denied due process for both victim and defendant," Gonzalez said in a statement. "Such actions deter victims from reporting abuse and threaten public safety. I join our public defenders in calling on ICE to reconsider their misguided policy and stop conducting enforcement raids in courthouses."