Crowds flocked to St. Patrick's in Midtown on Sunday night for a seasonal experience like no other: Christmas Eve at the city's storied cathedral.

The faithful amid wet snow flurries and lined up along 50th St. for at least five hours ahead of Midnight Mass, while tourists gaped at the surrounding Christmas lights.

"We are just so grateful to be here. Our Christmas wish is just to be here with loved ones and family and for everyone to be happy and healthy and to have peace," Laura Hanley, 60, beamed alongside her husband Keith.

Inside, the cathedral was decorated with simple green wreaths and red bows. White-gloved ushers seated parishioners who listened to the choir sing "Carol of the Bells" and "Away in a Manger."

Auxiliary Bishop John O'Hara led the mass and told the crowd that Timothy Cardinal Dolan was home with the flu — but still wished everyone a merry Christmas.

For many parishoners, Dolan was the one they came to see.

"It's Cardinal Dolan that keeps me coming back year after year," said 54-year-old retiree Greg Packer, who hoofed it from Huntington, Long Island, to attend his fifth time Midnight Mass.

Anita Concepcion, 60, arrived with her daughter to cross the late-night service off her bucket list.

"For me, I just really wanted to see Cardinal Dolan. So many people like him because he is like the everyman," Concepcion said.

Dolan's fill-in, Bishop O'Hara, told parishioners his holiday message was simple: Be good to each other in such negative times.

“Picking up the broken branches of our lives and joining them to himself...Jesus imparts to us his Divine Life so that we can be that Light Shining in the darkness.” ~Bishop O’Hara, Midnight Mass #Christmas #NewYork Photo:Tony Correa pic.twitter.com/dOd8MUBIgb

"This morning we celebrate the love of the father, the father of us all. All of us are here for various reasons, from all over the world ... he looks on all of us with love," Bishop O'Hara said.

"Our times need that love and light so badly. And you and I are the ones that can make that happen," he added.

The faithful in Manhattan trickled out of communion to a quiet, cold and rainy Christmas day on 5th Ave, as a soprano serenaded those still inside the house of worship with "O Holy Night."

"It was lovely, really lovely," said 23-year-old Aurelie Robert, who was visiting from France. "It was as nice as I imagined it would be."

At the Vatican, Pope Francis delivered a St. Peter's Mass that likened the journey of Mary and Joseph to Bethlehem to refugees looking for safe haven in Europe and the U.S.

"So many other footsteps are hidden in the footsteps of Joseph and Mary," he said

"We see the tracks of millions of persons who do not choose to go away but, driven from their land, leave behind their dear ones."

In Bethlehem, Mayor Anton Salman said celebrations were minimal because of recent violence around President Trump's Dec. 6 recognition of Jerusalem as Israel's capital.

"We decided to limit the Christmas celebrations to the religious rituals as an expression of rejection and anger and sympathy with the victims who fell in the recent protests," Salman said.

With News Wire Services