


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

For several years, Southwest Key Programs has operated shelters that house unaccompanied minors who crossed the U.S.-Mexico border.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    In a sudden reversal, President Trump on Wednesday signed an executive order that he says will keep together immigrant families who have been detained at the U.S. border
    Time

The Southwest Key Casa Padre Facility in Brownsville, Texas, is seen on June 18, 2018. The federal contractor housing immigrant children in Arizona, California and Texas issued a statement Wednesday denouncing family separations.
(Photo: Courtney Sacco/Caller-Times)

 A federal contractor housing immigrant children in Arizona, California and Texas issued a statement Wednesday denouncing family separations.


Southwest Key Programs said it "does not support separating families at the border."


"We believe keeping families together is better for the children, parents and our communities, and we remain committed to providing compassionate care and reunification," the statement said.


IMMIGRANT CHILDREN:  Here's what AZ politicos say about family separations


For several years, Southwest Key Programs has housed unaccompanied minors who have crossed the U.S.-Mexico border as part of a contract with the Office of Refugee Resettlement.


The company has come under fire amid the uproar over the Trump administration's "zero tolerance" border enforcement policy of separating children from their parents after they cross the border illegally. The company reportedly houses 5,000 migrant children in the three states where it operates, receiving about $500 billion from the federal government.


Southwest Key Programs does not support separating families at the border. pic.twitter.com/eh4Hp4DEMA

The company operates at least 13 facilities in Arizona — 12 in metro Phoenix, one in Tucson — that have been licensed and inspected by the state Department of Health Services. It is unclear how many of those locations house migrant children separated from their parents under the Trump administration policy.


Trump signed an executive order Wednesday intended to keep together migrant families that have crossed the border illegally. 


“We are going to keep the families together. I didn’t like the sight or the feeling of families being separated," Trump said. "This will solve that problem." 


READ MORE ABOUT FAMILY SEPARATION:


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 