


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

People shared Antar Davidson's story as an example of the harm caused by Trump's zero tolerance policy that led to separating children from parents.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Antar Davidson, of Tucson, was a former employee of Southwest Key, a non-profit shelter for immigrant children.
(Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

It's been a busy week for Antar Davidson. 


He's appeared in news outlets across the world, from Israel to the United Kingdom to Brazil. He's done interviews in English, Spanish, Portuguese and Hebrew. 


He tells about the few months he spent working in a Tucson detention facility for unaccompanied minors, run by a company called Southwest Key.


He watched kids get scolded for hugging each other, he says. He heard them cry at night, wondering where their mothers were. 


People shared his story as an example of the harm caused by a policy instituted by the Trump administration at the U.S.-Mexico border that called for separating parents from their children. 


And, in Davidson's mind, he helped overturn that policy. 


President Donald Trump signed an executive order Wednesday that authorizes the Department of Homeland Security to keep families together instead of separating parents and children at the border. It also lets the Department of Defense set up housing for families.


Davidson doesn't want to sound narcissistic, he said, but it was a historic moment, to have such a stubborn president change his mind. 


"Unfortunately, the president didn’t send me the pen or anything, I didn’t even get a mention," Davidson said. "I’m sure they knew about me, the administration, but if they talked to me, they would have to acknowledge what I was saying."


Davidson's experience as a Southwest Key employee offered journalists something they couldn't otherwise get: authentic access to a place that won't allow reporters or lawmakers through the doors. 


Closed-off detention centers, so secretive that neighbors often don't know what's next door, leave the public with a knowledge gap. It's hard to discern what's going on inside. Davidson helped fill that gap.


Davidson worked at the facility, called Estrella del Norte, from February until June 12. He said he joined the company because he believed it was a humanitarian organization where he could give back to the community. They also wanted him to teach capoeira, an Afro-Brazilian martial art, he said.


But he quickly found the company clashed with his morals. 


As he's described, he was ordered to translate for three Brazilian siblings, all under age 16. They were hugging each other tightly after being separated from their mother the night before. 


Davidson said he was told by a supervisor to translate in Portuguese that the children couldn't hug each other. He refused. 


ALSO: Shelter operator Southwest Key denounces 'separating families at the border'


Southwest Key has disputed the existence of a no-hugging policy. A spokesperson did not return requests for comment, but the company told CNN "hugging is absolutely allowed." 


Oh, and those cries captured by audio published by ProPublica? Crying was an every night occurrence, Davidson said. 


"At nighttime, when you’re putting kids to bed, you hear it in every single room," he said.


"Dónde está mi mamá?"


Davidson wasn't simply an objective observer of the facility. He was also upset by clashes with management. He got written up for wearing sandals to a staff meeting and taking a day off without proper documentation, despite approval from supervisors. 


And he's incensed by the salary of the nonprofit Southwest Key CEO Juan Sanchez, reported at nearly $1.5 million. 


"The organization doesn’t see these kids as human, they see them as dollar bills," Davidson said. 


Exterior of Southwest Key in Tucson, on June 20, 2018. Southwest Key, a non-profit, runs shelters for immigrant children. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

He started telling the story of the Brazilian kids and ban on hugging last week, and he basically hasn't stopped. 


He's been tweeting regularly about the policy and at Trump and other administration officials, but hasn't received any response yet. He has 245 followers. 


Davidson emphasizes that he wasn't even really watching the news before he decided to speak out about his experiences. He wasn't aware of the so-called "zero tolerance" policy. He had enough stress from the job. He didn't want to add to it by reading news.


"I basically spoke out because I saw what was happening there and I saw that they were basically turning this place into a prison," he said.


The facilities housing detained minors have been opaque. When access is allowed, it's typically manufactured, with the companies or government providing only the optics they see fit. 


U.S. Sen. Jeff Merkley, D-Oregon, tried to enter a facility in an old Wal-Mart in Brownsville, Texas, but was denied. 


Davidson said he recognized just how much he could add to the conversation because he had access others lacked. He was easily going in and out of the Estrella del Norte daily, while non-employees were stopped at the door. 


"The reason I was so popular with having shared my story was because I gave out access to information even a senator couldn’t get," he said. 


Estrella del Norte can house up to 300 children. The facility had 287 children housed there as of June 14, 70 of whom were age 13 or younger, according to the Los Angeles Times. 


The shelters holding the more than 2,000 children separated from their parents since the policy went into effect also hold other unaccompanied minors who came to the United States on their own. It's unknown how many of the children at Estrella del Norte, if any, were recently separated from their parents as part of Trump's policy. 


The company's CEO, Juan Sanchez, estimated 10 percent of the children housed at its shelters across the southwest were younger kids separated from their parents, according to the Washington Post. 


MORE: Former border-security chiefs split over family separations


A security guard at the Tucson site would not allow The Arizona Republic inside, instead directing the paper to contact its corporate spokesperson. The company has not responded to requests for comment or access. 


But Davidson said he noticed an uptick in "tender age" children, those under age 13, while he worked at Estrella del Norte. Before the policy went into effect in April, there were about 5 children under 13. It grew to 70, he claimed.


The younger kids, confused and scared, often acted out, he said. They fought, they cried, they threw things. 


They needed much more than "three hots and a cot," he said. 



    In a sudden reversal, President Trump on Wednesday signed an executive order that he says will keep together immigrant families who have been detained at the U.S. border
    Time

Davidson is a Democrat, but he said he would have spoken out regardless of which administration pushed the zero tolerance policy. 


Still, he's active in the Democratic Party in Arizona. He's a precinct committeeman. He's a field director for Arizona Rep. Pam Powers Hannley, a Democrat from Tucson. 


He wants to keep the conversation around the detention centers and private prison contractors going. He wants to work with Hannley to push for transparency, at the very least. 


He gave kudos to Trump for changing the policy and admitting he was wrong. It takes a big man to do that, Davidson said.


He's still wearing a bracelet, woven in red, green and yellow, given to him by a child on the child's last day at Estrella del Norte. It's been kind of like a talisman for him. 


The past week has taught Davidson that democracy can work. People can get outraged and pursue justice. Sometimes, the people in power listen. 


"I, along with the rest of the world, was able to stand down the president through peaceful means," he said. 


MORE ON FAMILY SEPARATION:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 