


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

From minimalist to 'rusty' to hair-raising, here are 10 of the coolest modern homes that have been featured on azcentral.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Brian and Melissa Farling, both architects, built their dream home using recycled materials.
(Photo: Bill Timmerman/Special to The Republic)

Each week, we take you inside a cool home from different parts of the Phoenix metro area. We've found homes with huge backyard pools, stunning mountain views, amenities focused on accessibility and some really cool art. 


We're always looking for suggestions for the next cool home to profile, be it a multi-million dollar mansion or a tiny home, the coolest backyard garden you've ever seen or the most creatively-decorated dorm room. 


Send your cool home profile ideas to editor alia.rau@arizonarepublic.com.


And as you wait for the next installment, here are some of the more unique modern homes we've featured: 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Brandon Lee, TV anchor


Home history: Built in 1951, the ranch home was designed by noted midcentury architect Ralph Haver. His designs are classically known for open living areas and dainty bedrooms — something Lee has embraced.


Features: 1,700-square-feet with art throughout, including a Marilyn Monroe piece featuring 20,000 hand-placed Swarovski crystals. Outside, a custom block wall by Modern Environments as well as 75 ficus trees. 


Design flourish: The first thing you'll notice is the candy-apple front door. It's covered with a pop-art mural of a pistol-wielding '60s-era temptress.


Quotable: “I wanted people to enjoy it, like a piece of art,” Lee said of his goal with the restoration. “I wanted it to feel like a time capsule for people who grew up in the '50s.” See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Jess Yescalis, Republican political consultant


Home history: The house underwent a two-year renovation in its historic neighborhood, Yaple Park. It was built in the '80s, an era known for its excess. Based on this fact alone, it might not seem like a good fit for a world-traveling minimalist like Yescalis, but he is in love with the house's distinctive design.


Features: The home’s exterior, a curvaceous shell of vertical redwood planks, is eye-catching and novel, and its interior layout matches that intriguing preview. In the master bedroom, a fully-retractable wall of glass allows for open-air sleeping when the weather is right.


Design flourish: In the office, red push pins, 139 to be exact, dot a map of the world, reminding Yescalis where he’s been and where he still needs to go.


Quotable: "I knew immediately it was the space I was looking for. I just knew,” Yescalis said of the moment he discovered the home online while visiting Africa. “It was a big deal for me to have a house. It had to be architecturally interesting and that’s kind of a hard thing to find.” See the full story.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Michael Szerbaty, architect, and his wife Janet Twyman


Home history: Designed by Szerbaty himself, the home draws on ancient Arizona communities including the Sinagua, Anasazi and Hohokam people for design inspiration. He also took some inspiration from Frank Lloyd Wright.


Features: Comprised of a 2,800-square-foot main home on two levels and a separate guest house, stable and studio of 750 square feet, with three horse stalls and tack room on the lower level. The studio element floats on piers above a landscape of scrub oak, cactus, juniper, cottonwoods and a wash that flows in winter and the summer monsoon.


Design flourish: The design focuses on solar angles and orientation, with the main view toward the San Francisco Peaks to the north, sacred to the Hopi, Navajo and Yavapai people. Szerbaty placed the center of the house directly on axis with San Francisco Peaks


Quotable: Morning Sky House, then, is “a studied translation of how ancient cultures, exhibited in countless ruins throughout the Southwest, planned, oriented and constructed their homes and communal spaces,” Szerbaty said. See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Jeff and Laura Beraznik 


Home history: Built in 1957, the ranch house is an example of midcentury architecture and design. Since the Berazniks purchased it in 2004, they have remained passionate about preserving its original character while including their love of modern, minimalist architecture.


Features: The couple expanded the house for their family of four, adding a master suite, a den with a modernist reading nook, a guest room and more. Today, the five-bedroom, 4.5-bath home is light-filled and airy but retains important 1950s details. 


Design flourish: With a palette of mostly white, walnut and gray, details are key in this home. Everywhere, special touches like textured tile, flush baseboards, custom bookshelves and cabinetry give the home a museum-quality feel.


Quotable: "Every room is used to the fullest — it is a home to live in and enjoy, not only to look at. It is not a high-maintenance home," said Brent Kendle, the Scottsdale architect hired to renovate the home.  See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Steve and Ramona Hamline


Home history: Built in 1961, it is one of the oldest houses in Carefree. When the Hamlines purchased it in 2009, the home was halfway through extensive renovations. 


Features: The backyard is a terraced retreat featuring an outdoor kitchen — with steel cabinets, a fire pit tucked underneath existing boulders, and a rectangular swimming pool set perpendicular to the line of the house. A narrow steel water trough juts out from the hillside above one corner of the pool, creating a slender waterfall.


Design flourish: The home features steel interior doors mounted on industrial-style rails. The ceilings are covered in California redwood and trussed with steel cables and the walls are gallery white. Simultaneously rustic and modern, the house makes Steve think of "a contemporary mine."


Quotable: "At the end, we looked at each other and said 'OK, which one did you like best?'" Ramona remembered. "And we both picked the rusty one."  See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Natalie McCluskey, interior designer


Home history: The community was built in the 1970s and the house was extremely dated pre-renovation. McCluskey bought the home with the intention of flipping it to add to her professional portfolio. Instead, she fell in love.


Features: The home has a vaulted ceiling in the living room, a dramatic fireplace, an angled roofline reminiscent of Frank Lloyd Wright's work and a backyard that opens onto the greenbelt.  


Design flourish: McCluskey turned to Craigslist and consignment shops for many furnishings, saving her splurges for high-impact pieces like the custom-welded fireplace surround — a contemporary mix of steel and wood — that serves as a focal point for the house. 


Quotable: "I had so much fun doing that," McCluskey said. "That was one of the most fun projects I did and I'll do it again and again." See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Andy Weed, ASU graphics-design professor, and his girlfriend Erin Dean


Home history: The house was originally built in the 1930s by two women who ran a theater for music recitals and elocution on the property. Weed purchased the home in 2001 and has been remodeling it ever since.


Features:  Weed first became interested in the building because it looks simple, like a child's drawing of a stereotypical house. A dozen echinocactus and a single tree are the only landscaping. Inside, a former staircase that led to the attic now serves as a pantry.


Design flourish: The living room is completely monochromatic. Hardwood floors almost match the color of the window frames and the plywood furniture. The living-room furniture consists only of a dining table with chairs, a single recliner chair and a coffee table. What’s most striking is there are no pictures on the walls, which are white and bare.


Quotable: “I think of small things when I think of minimal. Like postage stamps. I’m fascinated with simple. Everything in life is complex," Weed explains. See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Brian and Melissa Farling, architects


Home history: The 1956 ranch house in Tempe was the perfect fit for the Farlings. The location was what they wanted and it hadn't been recently renovated, which would make their own renovations that much easier to complete as well as reduce waste.


Features: The couple has added on to the house over the years and it now has three bedrooms and two bathrooms. It also has a large indoor/outdoor living and dining room space that opens seamlessly into the backyard and pool area with a large sliding glass door.


Design flourish: The outer walls of the master bathroom are made of translucent plastic panels that once served as a skylight in another home. The coffee table was created from the very plywood they used to pour concrete.


Quotable: “We wanted to establish our roots,” Brian said. “We wanted to find a place that we could really dig into. We just really felt that if we had a property with some basic good bones, we could make it into anything.” See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Bill Tonnesen, landscape architect and contemporary artist


Home history: Tonnesen bought his home in Tempe’s University Park neighborhood more than 30 years ago. Over the years, he also acquired the lots on either side of his home, taking much of their backyards to extend his own, and renting out the two homes.


Features: The property boasts a gorgeous swimming pool, a spacious lawn, a basketball court, and a very large studio. In the near future, Tonnesen plans to tear down his home and one of the adjacent rentals, and to blend them into a single, larger home for his family.


Design flourish: A colonnade adorned with horse skulls, bowls of chicken feet, and other random objects glued onto panels, including the naked body of a woman, lying supine, legs apart, with a sheet over her face.


Quotable: “As you walk up to the mailboxes, we’re going to have this series of babies. I bought a really, really high quality medical teaching doll,” Tonnesen said. See the full story. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Residents: Eddie Jones, architect, and his wife Lisa Johnson


Home history: The home was built in 1998 by Jones and is designed to match the natural Sonoran desert landscape. From the street, the home is inconspicuous. It blends in with the surrounding desert, to the point that the front entrance is hard to find.


Features: The house boasts the largest window in Ahwatukee, at 40 feet wide and 18 feet tall. The 17,000-acre backyard is South Mountain Park, the largest municipal park in the country.


Design flourish: The second floor hallway is a 40-foot floating glass floor, meaning you can see the ground floor below your feet. The roof above the hallway is a large skylight. Jones didn’t want to waste the light coming in from the skylight by trapping it with an opaque material.


Quotable: “We talk about bringing the outside in, and typically it’s done in a lateral fashion,” Jones said. “But with this ... if you’re lucky … I’ve been walking here and a 747 has flown under my feet. And that is bringing the outside in!” See the full story.


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.