


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

It's been 60 years, but Tyson Jones believes it is time. His time to take down Dallas Long's Arizona high school shot put record.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Desert Edge's Tyson Jones practices shot put on Tuesday, Feb. 13, 2018 at Desert Edge High School in Goodyear, Ariz. Jones, who has committed to Virginia Tech, is one of the best high school shot put athletes in the country.
(Photo: Sean Logan/azcentral sports)

It's been 60 years, but Tyson Jones believes it is time. His time to take down Dallas Long's Arizona high school shot put record. A record so large that long ago it was out of sight, out of mind.


But if a recent indoor meet in Georgia is any indication, it might go down in Buckeye in early March in Jones' first invitational.


Last week, the Goodyear Desert Edge senior, competing unattached, threw the shot 69 feet, 7 ½ inches. That is an all-time Arizona high school record, but the Arizona Interscholastic Association only counts outdoor meets.


His mark in Georgia is 11th all-time best throw indoors by a high school athlete.


Long's outdoor record of 69-3 in 1958, when he was a senior at Phoenix North, still holds. For now.


Jones' first invitational is March 3 at Buckeye.


"I don't want to put any added pressure on him, but in that meet, he's got a great chance," Desert Edge track and field coach Jose Lucero said. "The kid has worked so hard. I think he has a chance to hit 70."


Jones is talking about hitting the mid-70s, defending his Division II state championship, before moving onto Virginia Tech, a campus he visited and fell in love with during the football season.



    Goodyear Desert Edge track &amp; field athlete Tyson Jones seeks to break Dallas Long's 60-year-old Arizona high school shot put record.
    

"Seventy-four, 75 feet, that's the ultimate goal," Jones said.


Jones had a throw of 71 feet in Georgia that didn't count, because he scratched on it.


He will be in another indoor meet this weekend at Northern Arizona, where he hopes to break 70 feet. Again, he will be competing unattached because the high school season hasn't begun.


But these warmups for his final high school season are sending a loud message, that Long's record won't be around much longer.


Jones smiles when asked about going for the national record. That is 81-3, set by Michael Carter in 1979 for Dallas Jefferson High.


"If you would have asked me this my freshman and sophomore year, I would have never thought I would throw 69 feet and have the state record," Jones said. "But my junior year was when I knew I could break it this year."


Desert Edge's Tyson Jones holds a shot put ball in his hands during practice on Tuesday, Feb. 13, 2018 at Desert Edge High School in Goodyear, Ariz. Jones, who has committed to Virginia Tech, is one of the best high school shot put athletes in the country. (Photo: Sean Logan/azcentral sports)

It was obvious how vulnerable Long's record looked last year when he broke the Chandler Rotary Invitational record at 66-8. It was the 77th year for the Chandler Rotary. He set a personal record at the Division II championships at 67-6 1⁄4.


He doesn't have a Turner Washington (who set a state record in the discus last year) to push him this season. But Jones is a self-motivator who pushes himself. He went on a stricter diet to get himself into better shape for this season. The 6-foot-5 Tyson said he is maintaining his weight at around 295. Last year, he was over 300.


He knew this would be his final football season, so now everything he does is getting him ready for greater things in track and field.


Arizona State and Oregon both liked Jones, but Jones said he wanted to leave Arizona and loved the coaches and atmosphere in Virginia.


"It's a lot different from Arizona," Lucero said. "He's incredibly focused on this (record). Everything he has worked for has culminated into his senior year. He's working hard in the weight rooms and put throwing. He always handles the big moments well."


Allie Schadler, azcentral sports' Female Track and Field Athlete of the Year last season when she had the fastest 1,600 and 3,200 meter times, has passed the running baton to her sister, Samantha, who will look to make her own imprint in the distances as a Rio Rico junior.


"Sammie is working very hard at being her own person and her own runner," said Stephen Schandler, the sisters' father. "She misses her sister a lot but knows that Allie is working just as hard at school and running (at Washington).


"I think that keeps Sam motivated to achieve the very high goals and aspirations she has set for herself."


Chandler has to replace sprinter Anaya Bailey and triple jumper Tiana Poirier-Shelton from last year's Division I championship team, but the Wolves return enough elite sprinters and jumpers to make another title run. Junior Morgan Foster returns to lead sprint relays for Chandler that could be breaking state records.


Phoenix North Canyon sophomore Jadyn Mays might be the state's premier girls sprinter. She ran the 200 meters in 24.05 seconds last June in the Great Southwest meet.


Glendale Raymond S. Kellis senior Jae'Nisa Heckstall will try to keep the top ranking she had last year in the state in the 100 and 300 hurdles.


Richard Thompson South Mountain Classic, Feb. 24, at South Mountain High.


Buckeye Lions Invitational, March 3, at Buckeye High.


Willie Williams Classic, March 15, 17, at University of Arizona, Tucson.


Rattler Booster Invite, March 17, at Phoenix North Canyon High.


Nike Chandler Rotary Invitational, March 23-24, at Chandler High.


Sun Angel Track Classic, April 5-6, at Arizona State's Sun Angel Stadium.


Hohokam Invitational, April 13, at Mesa Westwood High.


Valley Classic, April 14, at Phoenix Alhambra High.


AIA Division I, II, III, IV championships, May 2-4, at Mesa Community College.


Meet of Champions, May 10, at Phoenix Brophy Prep.


To suggest human-interest story ideas and other news, reach Obert at richard.obert@arizonarepublic.com or 602-316-8827. Follow him at twitter.com/azc_obert.
