


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Many neighbors had no idea what the  buildings were, assuming maybe a day-care center or orphanage. Is there one near you?

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    President Donald Trump abruptly reversed himself Wednesday and signed an executive order halting his administration's policy of separating children from their parents when they are detained illegally crossing the U.S. border. (June 20)
    AP

Exterior of Southwest Key in Tucson, on June 20, 2018. Southwest Key, a non-profit, runs shelters for immigrant children.
(Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

Large groups of children come and go at more than a dozen nondescript facilities in quiet neighborhoods around Arizona, black gates opening for white vans and employees only.


Many of the kids are Hispanic, neighbors say, and appear to be as young as 7 or 8. Signs are labeled Southwest Key, and say little else. 


Even though they've lived next door for years, many neighbors don’t know what the facilities are,or what goes on inside.


Tony Andersons, who lives in an apartment complex next to a Southwest Key facility in west Phoenix, said she began wondering about it when she saw groups of young children singing in Spanish.


About a month ago, she asked someone leaving the facility about it and "they said it’s like a rehab center," which she thought was odd for children.


READ MORE: Trump's order leaves fate of 2,000 detained children unclear


Eduardo Grijalva, who lives next to a Glendale location where a mural says "hello" and "bienvenidos," assumed it was an orphanage. On Sunday mornings, he hears kids and teens playing soccer and listening to salsa music.


Both were surprised to learn Southwest Key houses minors who have entered the U.S. without parents or adult guardians and have been detained by immigration officials. The facilities also may be receiving children who have been forcibly separated from their families under the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy to pursue federal criminal prosecution for everyone caught entering the U.S. illegally. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Uproar over the policy has focused a spotlight on the work of Southwest Key and other organizations that house migrant children.


For some Arizona residents, it has brought a sudden realization that a national controversy might be playing out next door. There is one Southwest Key facility — this one decorated with lighthouses — near the Cheery Lynn historic district in central Phoenix. Three are located in Glendale and one in Peoria.


About 2,000 such children have been separated from their families in two months. And some have been brought to Arizona.


One Arizona organization that houses migrants, A New Leaf, confirmed some of its residents are children who have been separated from their parents under the Trump administration policy. 


READ MORE: What happens next for undocumented immigrant families?


On Thursday morning, celebrity lawyer Michael Avenatti held a press conference outside a Southwest Key facility near 27th and Campbell avenues. He had visited a 6-year-old boy from Honduras who was brought there after being separated from his mother on June 2. 


Avenatti said he is working with more than 60 families, including five with children who are being housed in Arizona.


"There's 128 children presently inside gates with the vast majority of them being separated from their parents," he said, gesturing at the Southwest Key facility behind him.


MORE: Michael Avenatti representing 5 immigrant children held in Phoenix


Southwest Key is a growing non-profit corporation based in Austin, Texas.


It operates more than two dozen programs for unaccompanied minors in seven states.


In Arizona, Southwest Key operates at least 13 facilities — 12 in metro Phoenix, one in Tucson — licensed by the state Department of Health Services.


READ MORE: What's changed after Trump's immigration order


The federal government paid Southwest Key nearly $500 million to operate shelters this year, the Dallas Morning News reported.


One such location that has drawn recent national attention is Casa Padre, a Texas facility that houses more than 1,400 immigrant boys in a former Walmart.


It is unclear how many of its locations house migrant children separated from their parents under the Trump administration policy. Some may house minors in Southwest Key's other programs, which divert youth from dropping out of school or from going to jail or prison.


Trump signed an executive order Wednesday intended to keep together migrant families that have crossed the border illegally. 


“We are going to keep the families together. I didn’t like the sight or the feeling of families being separated," Trump said. "This will solve that problem."


MORE: Shelter operator Southwest Key denounces 'separating families at the border' 


Southwest Key Programs issued a statement Wednesday saying it "does not support separating families at the border."


"We believe keeping families together is better for the children, parents and our communities, and we remain committed to providing compassionate care and reunification. For every child who has come through our shelter doors, we start on day one to reunite them with their parents or a family sponsor and to provide the kind of service that will help them thrive."


Exterior of Southwest Key in Tucson, on June 20, 2018. Southwest Key, a non-profit, runs shelters for immigrant children. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

A small group of protesters stood outside the Southwest Key location on Oracle Road in Tucson on Wednesday morning, holding signs with messages such as "seeking asylum is not a crime." 


Nothing visible from the road identified the building as a place that houses detained children. The nondescript tan building, with an open-air plaza in its center, bears the names of restaurants that no longer operate at the address.


The only indication that kids may be on the premises is a mural near the parking lot depicting children at play.


READ MORE: Asylum seekers at the border face long waits, few options


At a preschool down the street, employees said they were unaware children who had been separated from their parents were housed at the facility.


Jocabed Frausto, director of Future Leaders School, was surprised a national news story was playing out so close to her new preschool.


Her first thought was to help. 


Maybe they need stuffed animals to cope with the stress of being separated from their families, she said. Maybe they need snacks or juice, like the treats enjoyed by students at her preschool.


"Children who have a need should be helped. It’s just our responsibility," she said.


Jocabed Frausto, director of Future Leaders School in Tucson, was unaware there is a shelter for immigrant children across the street from her school. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

In May 2016, as the number of unaccompanied minors immigrating to the U.S. from Central America surged, members of the media were allowed for the first time to tour a Southwest Key facility in Phoenix.


It occupied a few nondescript buildings surrounded by a black fence in a diverse, working-class neighborhood in west-central Phoenix.


At the time, the facility housed about 120 minors, most of them male and from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador. It could hold up to 128.


It had classrooms, a cafeteria, dormitories, a basketball court, a large recreational field, and a swimming pool. Medical assistants and mental-health workers were available.


FROM 2016: Feds show off shelter for migrant kids, say they're 'ready' for surge


Alexia Rodriguez, who is now chief program officer for Southwest Key Programs, said at the time that there were misconceptions about the shelters. She said the kids were generally happy to be there.


"When we get these kids, it's really the only time or the first time they get to be a kid," Rodriguez said in 2016. "They don't have to worry about where they're going to sleep at night, what they're going to eat."



    The United States could end up holding 30,000 children by August. Elizabeth Keatinge has more.
    Buzz60

A New Leaf operates two residential programs in Arizona that serve up to 44 immigrant children.


Since 2011, it has received federal contracts totaling about $17.7 million, according to a U.S. Health and Human Services website. 


MORE: Trump reversal followed pressure from Melania, Ivanka, GOP lawmakers


The two Mesa homes were full as of Wednesday, with some slots filled by children removed from families due to the Trump administration’s zero-tolerance enforcement, said Kirby Hurlbut, the agency’s director of youth and residential services.


However, most of the beds have been full for the better part of a year.


"I don’t think the policy (of separating families at the border) changed our occupancy," Hurlbut said, adding the two homes have served a fairly steady stream of unaccompanied minors during the seven years it has had a contract with the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement.


READ MORE: Airlines: Don't use us to separate families


In contrast to larger contractors that are housing immigrant children, Hurlbut said, A New Leaf provides a "homelike" environment. There are no black fences around the property. The bedrooms typically hold from two to four children. There are play areas in the backyards.


The children on average stay one month before being reunited with their parents or housed with a relative, Hurlbut said.


Republic reporters Daniel González, Craig Harris, Agnel Philip, Mary Jo Pitzl and Rachel Leingang contributed to this article. 



    In a sudden reversal, President Trump on Wednesday signed an executive order that he says will keep together immigrant families who have been detained at the U.S. border
    Time

Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.