


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Beginning Monday and for up to nine weeks, dozens of Valley officers will be combing through a Buckeye landfill for the remains of Christine Mustafa.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    This is how Phoenix police will search SR 85 Landfill for Christine Mustafa's remains. The Phoenix woman has been missing since May 10. Carly Henry/The Arizona Republic
    

Christine Mustafa, of Phoenix, has been missing since May 10, 2017. Her family says it's unlike her to leave without checking in on her children, ages 15 and 8 months.
(Photo: Phoenix Police Department)

There’s an area 50 miles southwest of Phoenix that is roughly the square footage of a football field in the center of a 2652-acre landfill.


Beginning Monday and for up to nine weeks, dozens of Valley officers will be searching there for Christine Mustafa’s remains.


The 34-year-old mother was last seen May 10. Phoenix police scoured the neighborhoods and desert near her north Phoenix home in the weeks following her disappearance to no avail.


Mustafa’s live-in boyfriend Robert John Interval Jr., was arrested and charged with her murder in June. And by July, police had cordoned off a section of State Route 85 Landfill in Buckeye to be combed through in cooler months.


Investigators aren’t saying why they believe Mustafa’s body was discarded in a trash bin, dumpster or transfer station — public drop-off sites that lead to the publicly inaccessible landfill. But the contents of any receptacle near the couple’s neighborhood eventually end up there.  


“We really are hoping for success in this,” said Sgt. Alan Pfohl, a spokesman for Phoenix police. “The fact that we have it narrowed down to a fairly small area, we’re very hopeful that we will have a successful search.”


A landfill search is an extreme and rarely-used operation to locate a body. It’s costly and time-consuming, with a low rate of success.


Mustafa is one of more than 800 Arizonans listed on the national NamUs missing persons database. But she is among only a handful of those in recent memory to prompt a large-scale search in a Valley landfill.


In 2012, Glendale police raked through thousands of tons of garbage at the Butterfield Station Landfill in Mobile to detect any sign of 5-year-old Jhessye Shockley. The working theory was that Jhessye was killed, placed in a suitcase and discarded in a Tempe dumpster in October 2011.


A 4 ½ month landfill search that cost more than $750,000 turned up no sign of Jhessye. Even without a body, a jury convicted Jhessye's mother, Jerice Hunter, of first-degree murder and child abuse in 2015. She was sentenced to life in prison.


Pfohl said investigators only search landfills when there’s solid evidence to do so.


Detectives worked with the city’s public works department to pinpoint an area 120 feet wide, 500 feet long and 14 feet deep. Though a massive undertaking, the square footage accounts for only about 1/1900 of the entire landfill.


An estimated 150 dump trucks deliver about 3,500 tons of material to the SR-89 landfill each day. But city and police officials were able to narrow their scope to a three-day window and location using GPS tracking devices on all of the landfill’s heavy equipment. Searchable GPS coordinates show where the garbage originated, where it was dumped in the landfill and where bulldozers moved it.


About 30 sworn officers from Phoenix and other Valley agencies will comb the parameters in Tyvek suits, safety goggles and carbon fiber masks.


Bulldozers and shovels will lift sections of material from the landfill and distribute it into lines in another field near the search site. Searchers will then sift through those lines with potato rakes. If they come up empty, the bulldozer will move that material away, and start the process anew.


“It’s going to be very tedious,” Pfohl said. “We only get one shot at this.”


Officials are hoping to locate Mustafa’s remains quickly, but if the search spans all nine weeks, it will cost more than $1 million in labor and equipment.


Pfohl said he hopes finding Mustafa’s remains will help bring her family closure. It would also likely yield key evidence: murder cases without bodies are always challenging for prosecutors.


“It will solidify the case a little bit more and help us get the conviction that we need,” he said.


Robert John Interval Jr. (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Erin Neathery, a friend and spokesperson for Mustafa’s family, said Interval was a landscaper who made frequent trips to dispose of trimmings.


“It was part of his job,” Neathery said in a Wednesday phone interview. “The Cave Creek transfer station is directly across from his neighborhood.”


Neathery said Mustafa’s family is grateful officers will be searching the landfill and that city officials cordoned off the area in July.


“It’s a ‘what if’ situation,” she said when asked how the family was coping. “What if they don’t find her? What if they do find her? But we’re not going to stop searching in the north Phoenix area.”


Mustafa was last seen as she was leaving work at a Walgreens pharmacy and failed to show up to her shift on May 11. Court documents said Mustafa hadn't missed a scheduled day of work in 11 years. 


Her keys, cellphone and purse were all left behind after she disappeared, police said.


The family told officials that Mustafa wanted to leave Interval because she was fearful of him and that Interval had previously made threatening statements towards her.


Interval is scheduled for his next court appearance on Nov. 27.


READ MORE:


Phoenix police to begin searching SR 85 Landfill for missing woman's body


Police will search landfill for missing Phoenix woman


Missing Phoenix woman's boyfriend arrested, suspected of murder; body has not been found
