


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A hot spring could spark an early start to the monsoon. But those early storms could increase fire danger from dry lightning.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


This storm blew over Chase Field Tuesday night, Aug. 11, 2015, in Phoenix.
(Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

Arizona has become increasingly dry after a disappointing monsoon last summer, followed by an even worse fall and winter.


With more dry weather in the spring, numerous wildfires have popped up under an umbrella of withering heat.


As the June 15 start of the monsoon season approaches (as declared by the National Weather Service since 2008), there may be a silver lining in our early season heat. But it could also result in more wildfires.


Ken Drozd, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Tucson, explains. That office handles much of the weather service’s monsoon forecasting.


“Looking at the official prediction from Climate Prediction Center, it’s favoring wetter than normal for much of Arizona,” Drozd said. "It’s only favoring slightly above normal, but we’ll take whatever we can get, I guess.”


A monsoon storm dumps rain in the desert north of Casa Grande on July 23, 2017. (Photo: Michael Chow/The Republic)

The Climate Prediction Center outlook for June calls for a 33 percent to 40 percent probability of above-average precipitation and a 60 percent probability of above-average temperatures. Considering June is  Arizona's driest month on average (normal rainfall for Phoenix in June is 0.02 inch) a single storm could deliver enough rain to make that prediction true.


Longer outlooks show similar numbers.


The June-August forecast calls for an equal chance of above, below or normal rain and a 60 percent probability of above-normal temperatures. The July-September outlook lists a 33 percent probability of above-normal rainfall and a 50 percent probability of hotter-than-normal temperatures.


Meteorologists use factors such as historical data, surface conditions, El Niño conditions and computer models when putting together seasonal outlooks.



    Azcentral.com photographer Rob Schumacher shot this beautiful time-lapse video of monsoon storm thunderhead building over Carefree.
    Rob Schumacher/The Republic

The dry conditions and early-season heat could help get the monsoon off to a quick start.


Monsoon conditions are characterized by a shift in prevailing winds. In the Southwest, that means a swing from our normal, relatively dry, westerly winds to more moisture-laden winds from the south.


That shift is caused by a clockwise flow of air around a persistent area of high pressure that’s usually located south of Arizona.


When the weather heats up in early summer, that area of high pressure tends to drift northward. When its center settles around the Four Corners area, moist air is drawn into our region. That moist air is a key factor in the development of our summer storms.


Because much of the Southwest has been so dry over the past year – and, remember, it takes less of the sun’s energy to heat dry air – that heating could happen earlier than usual and put monsoon conditions in place.


The Phoenix area typically sees its first monsoon storms in early July.


“Of course, if you start earlier, you have a better chance of having more days with potential rainfall,” Drozd said.


Lightning bolts cover the sky near Cave Creek Rd. and State Route 101 during a monsoon storm on July 16, 2017. (Photo: Jason Bauer/Special for The Republic)

The potential downside to an earlier start of the monsoon is that storms could bring lightning without much rain. That lightning could spark more wildfires given the extremely dry conditions throughout much of the state.


Drozd said that often with the early monsoon storms, moisture arrives first in the mid-levels of the atmosphere before the lower levels where there is greater potential for rain.


“We get those high-based thunderstorms that can form and they try to produce rain, but a lot of that evaporates before it hits the ground,” Drozd said. “You get the lighting, not a lot of rain, and wind gusts with those as well. Lightning and wind is not a good combination for fire.”


I took this photo on Aug. 18, 2017, of a localized summer rain storm, looking west toward the White Tank Mountains.  (Photo: Photo provided by Rick Lloyd)

Meteorologists also are keeping an eye on El Niño conditions (characterized by warmer-than-normal waters) brewing in the eastern Pacific Ocean.


Around here, El Niño conditions are usually associated with the hope of wetter-than-normal winters.  Having just gone through a dry winter influenced by La Niña conditions (characterized by colder-than-normal waters), even a weak El Niño could be encouraging.


If those warmer waters are present in late summer, it could help Pacific tropical storms and hurricanes track a little farther north. It’s doubtful any of those storms could make it to Arizona, but sometimes the resulting surge in moisture associated with them reaches the state.


Phoenix’s record-breaking rain of Sept. 8, 2014, for example, was fueled by moisture from a decaying tropical storm. That storm dropped a historic 3.29 inches of rain on the city in a single day.


Photos by Michael Chow, Rob Schumacher and Mark Henle/The Arizona Republic
DIGITAL -- 9/4/06 --  WILDART-WEATHER -- A monsoon storm moves over Scottsdale towards Phoenix as viewed from north Mesa Monday September 4, 2006.  photo by MICHAEL CHOW / THE ARIZONA REPUBLIC (7/16/07 The Valley is anticipating the start to this year's storm season) (Photo: MICHAEL CHOW, AZR)

While conditions might seem to favor a wetter-than-normal monsoon now, many variables could swing the other way as the summer progresses.


If Arizona is to get much drought relief this summer, we’ll just have to hope those slight chances of rain prove to be enough in the long run.


“It’s only slightly favoring wet over dry,” Drozd said. “But, like we said, if you’re looking for rain, that’s more encouraging than the other way around.”


1. 9.56 inches in 1984.


2.  9.31 inches in 1911.


3.  7.45 inches in 1946.


4.  7.30 inches in 1939.


5.  7.20 inches in 1896.


6.  6.96 inches in 1951.


7.  6.34 inches in 2014.


8.  6.15 inches in 1943.


9.  6.03 inches in 1897.


10. 5.66 inches in 1955.


1. 0.35 inch in 1924.


2. 0.51 inch in 1914.


3. 0.61 inch in 1993.


4. 0.61 inch in 1932.


5. 0.74 inch in 2007.


6. 0.78 inch in 1980.


7. 0.79 inch in 1910.


8. 0.86 inch in 1962.


9. 0.86 inch in 1944.


10. 0.87 inch in 2009.


Before the National Weather Service established monsoon-season dates (June 15-Sept. 30) in 2008, the start of the monsoon was determined by three consecutive days with an average dew-point temperature of at least 55 degrees. The first of those three days was considered the start of the monsoon.


Even with the establishment of a monsoon season, meteorologists still keep track of the first day of monsoon conditions.


MORE ARIZONA WEATHER


7 things Arizonans do during monsoon season


Video: Monsoon facts and figures


5 things to know about Arizona's drought


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.