


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

During her first visit to Arizona as first lady, Melania Trump toured a Southwest Key location in west Phoenix. Earlier, she stopped in Tucson.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


First lady Melania Trump greets staff members at Southwest Key, an immigrant holding facility, on June 28, 2018, in Phoenix.
(Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

First lady Melania Trump toured a Southwest Key migrant facility in Phoenix Thursday afternoon after spending the morning at a Border Patrol facility in Tucson. 


About three dozen protesters gathered outside the Southwest Key location, an education and human-services complex near 27th and Campbell avenues, as temperatures hit the triple digits. A giant, balloon-like figure of President Donald Trump in a Ku Klux Klan outfit towered over the protesters. 


Inside, the tour was led into what appeared to be a classroom. Teaching material about the solar system hung on the walls, as well as number and alphabet charts. 


Vibrant paintings hung on the wall. One included words in English and Spanish, including "DIVERSIDAD" and "familia."


Southwest Key Vice President Alexia Jo Rodriguez told the first lady that the staff is comprised "mainly of immigrants themselves." The facility receives grant money from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.


MORE: Melania Trump meets Tucson border officials, tours facility


"We have been around for 20 years, and this is a licensed child-care facility," Rodriguez  said. "The primary work we do here is to try to do a safe reunification."


On this day, the facility housed 121 children, ranging from infants to age 17. Four of the babies had mothers at the shelter, and four were pregnant teens. The majority of the children were from Guatemala with children also from Honduras, El Salvador and Mexico. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

"I want to support you, and let me know what I can do to help," Trump said to the staff. 


Southwest Key staff members walked her through the process the shelter goes through when a child enters the facility.


A supervisor over the facility's case managers told Trump that staff immediately assures the child that he or she is not in a detention facility, but instead is in a shelter. A case manager then makes two phone calls, one to the child's home country and another to relatives in the United States, informing each of the steps to take to begin the process of getting the child reunited with family.


MORE:  Melania Trump departs from Phoenix Sky Harbor after visiting Southwest Key


Trump asked how long children stay at the facility and was told the average was 47 days.


"And then you connect them with the family?" she asked.


A supervisor answered yes.


"Thank you for taking care of the children," Trump said.


Reporters were then told they could accompany Trump on her tour but could only take notes, not pictures or video.



    After stopping in Tucson, Melania Trump visited a Southwest Key facility for migrant children in Phoenix. Arizona Republic reporters recap the visit.
    Arizona Republic

The tour was led into a room that included the usual trappings of a nursery, including a baby swing and two yellow rocking chairs. 


The first lady walked in, and a little girl zoomed toward her.


"Nice to meet you," she laughed.


She greeted staffers and the children.


"Where are the moms?" she asked.


One was pointed out to her.


"Where is your baby?" she asked the girl, who pointed out a boy who was 14 months old.


"Wow, so cute," the first lady said.


The girl said she had been at the shelter for 12 days.


Trump's visit to the migrant facility was her second stop of the day in Arizona, which earlier included a tour of a U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility in Tucson. The pair of visits are designed to change the narrative around the controversial border policy of separating children from their families. 


This is Trump's first visit to Arizona as first lady. 


First lady Melania Trump visits Southwest Key, an immigrant holding facility, on June 28, 2018, in Phoenix. (Photo: Rob Schumacher/The Republic)

Unlike last week when she visited Texas, the first lady's trip to Arizona wasn't overshadowed by her choice of clothing. 


She stepped off the plane Thursday morning at the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in Tucson, wearing a conservative black top with three-quarter-length sleeves, white flowy pants and white sneakers. Large black sunglasses shielded her eyes from the Arizona sun. 


She caused a controversy last week when she wore an olive jacket that read "I REALLY DON'T CARE, DO U?" on a trip to a migrant children's shelter in McAllen, Texas.


MORE: All eyes on Melania Trump's attire for expected Arizona visit


Protesters lined the street outside the Southwest Key facility in Phoenix, carrying handmade signs and shouting.


"Melania Trump, you can't hide, we can see your racist side," they repeatedly chanted in unison at one point. 


Shortly before 1:30 p.m., the first lady's motorcade left the facility. Some protesters ran toward the caravan, but a law-enforcement official admonished them to "stay on the sidewalk."


"(Expletive) Trump," one person yelled.


"Detaining them is not helping them," another person chanted repeatedly. 


Milagros Renteria, 15, of Phoenix said she showed up to protest because "they’ve been separating children from their parents, and the children deserve to be reunified with families.” 


Residents of an apartment complex next to the Phoenix facility milled about, trying to see what was going on inside the black fence. Despite living next door, many said they did not know what the facility is or why the media was gathered outside. 



    Moments before Melania Trump’s arrival at a Phoenix Southwest Key facility protesters chant “Melania Trump you cant hide, we can see your racist side.”
    Shakkira Harris, The Republic | azcentral.com

"We thought it was a group home for kids who didn't have parents," neighbor Teresa Rodriguez said.


"I just found out today" that it housed immigrant minors, some who were separated from their relatives.


She and neighbor Danielle Sandoval said they've long seen the children playing and swimming in the morning and singing karaoke at night. But they said they noticed recently that the children aren't coming outside anymore. 


Sandoval said she was sad to learn that kids are being separated. But she doesn’t understand why people are bringing their children, let alone during summer. 


“I don't know why they do it," she said. "It's not them that suffers, it's the little ones." 


Protesters started dispersing after Trump's motorcade left the migrant facility. Her plane left Phoenix at 2:06 p.m., heading west over downtown Phoenix. 


USA TODAY reporter Gregory Korte contributed to this story. 


READ MORE: 


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
