


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A rematch of 2017 6A Championship ends in a Millennium win

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Millennium hit key late free throws to seal a win over Surprise Valley Vista
    Jorge Ramos/azcentral sports

Goodyear Millennium girls basketball and Surprise Valley Vista during the third quarter on an out of bounds play.
(Photo: Jorge Ramos/azcentral sports)

In a regular-season rematch of last year’s 6A girls basketball state championship,  Goodyear Millennium returned the favor beating defending 6A champions Surprise Valley Vista.


The Tigers made a late fourth quarter run to seal the 71-68 win and take sole possession of first place in the 6A southwest section. From the start, it was a shootout between two of Arizona’s premier girls’ basketball programs  they buckets throughout the night. Valley Vista only managed to accumulate a nine-point lead before the Tigers came storming back.


Valley Vista struggled to score points in the paint, especially down the stretch. Head coach Rachel Matakas said their height disadvantage was an issue for her team.


“It definitely did (affect her team). But we thought we could match it with speed,” Matakas said.


Two late free throws from Millennium would give them the three-point advantage to seal the win. Millennium extended its win streak to five and ended Valley Vista’s three-game streak. The Monsoons will have another chance at the Tigers on Feb. 6 for the regular-season finale.


"I'll go out and say it. I believe we have the best rivalry in girl's basketball in Arizona," Millennium head coach Courtland Rojeck said after the game about the atmosphere during the game. 


"Every time we play each other, it is like these games. Every single time. There gym is packed. Our gym is packed."


Rojeck added that he prepared his team for this environment by raising the volume on the sound system he has for the entirety of practice.


-  Valley Vista senior guard and University of Oregon commit Taylor Chavez was lights out as she scored 21 of her 33 point in the second half. She nearly nearly willed her team to victory as she scored 11 of her team's 18 points in the fourth quarter.


- Millennium junior forward Dominique Phillips wasthe most dominant player on the court tonight, especially in the clutch as she scored 15 of her 30 points in the fourth quarter. She attacked the rim and Valley Vista's only defense was to send her to he foul line, where she was a perfect 11 for 11 on the night.


Valley Vista will host Glendale Copper Canyon Jan. 23, while Millennium will take on Avondale La Joya Community. Both games will have a 7 p.m. tip-off.


 
