


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Melania Trump's clothing can make a political statement. What message can we expect when she visits Arizona to meet with immigrant children?

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    First lady Melania Trump wore a jacket that read "I DON'T REALLY CARE, DO U?" while on her way to visit immigrant children separated from their parents.
    USA TODAY

Marc Graham holds up a sign referencing First Lady Melania Trump's controversial "I really don't care" jacket during a protest outside of a Glendale Southwest Key facility on Sunday, June 24, 2018.
(Photo: BrieAnna J. Frank)

First lady Melania Trump caused a controversy last week when she wore a $39 olive jacket that read "I REALLY DON'T CARE, DO U?" on a trip to a migrant children's shelter in McAllen, Texas.


The now-infamous jacket, sold by Spanish fashion chain Zara, made what many considered a disturbing statement during the national outrage over the Trump administration's separation of children from their parents at border, even if the first lady's spokeswoman Stephanie Grisham said there was no "hidden" meaning behind it.


LIVE UPDATES: Melania Trump lands in Arizona for immigration visit


With letters visible from any camera lens without zooming in, the message definitely was not hidden.


Trump is expected in Tucson before making a stop at a children's shelter in Phoenix.


The Associated Press reported the first lady boarded her plane Thursday wearing a black shirt and white slacks. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Whether Melania Trump steps into a gala, joins her husband for a dinner with other heads of state or walks into the White House garden, it appears that no expense is spared.


Her wardrobe features $600 Manolo Blahnik heels; $13,000 and $75,000 Hermès bags; and even a $51,500 Dolce &amp; Gabbana coat.


Her choice to wear a $39 Zara jacket last weak was unusual compared to the clothing she has been photographed in at other public appearances.


On Aug. 29, Trump boarded Air Force One headed for Texas following Hurricane Harvey wearing black stilettos.


Harvey claimed at least 75 lives in the United States, brought more than 30 inches of rain in some parts of Houston and devastated homes last August. She was widely criticized for her stilettos on Twitter, and by the time she disembarked in Corpus Christi, Trump traded in her olive bomber jacket and high heels for a white button-down and Adidas "Stan Smith" sneakers.



    First lady of the United States Melania Trump was expected to tour immigration facilities in Arizona.
    Arizona Republic

Her choice in shoes is regularly chronicled by fashion magazines. In October, Trump visited a treatment center for infants suffering from neonatal abstinence syndrome, a collection of symptoms caused by being exposed to addictive drugs in utero. She wore Christian Louboutin Multi Python Pumps, which the celebrity and fashion website PopSugar quoted as costing $1,395, or more than twice the cost of daily care for a baby experiencing withdrawal from narcotics.


Trump returned to the Houston area in December with second lady Karen Pence. She donned a denim button-down shirt, olive pants and emerald Converse Chuck Taylors that nearly matched her FLOTUS-embroidered baseball cap. Trump and Pence also stopped at Whataburger on their trip.


MORE: Stars are responding to Melania Trump with their own jackets


Inside the Upbring New Hope Children Center in McAllen, Texas, last week, she was photographed without her jacket, wearing a cream-colored pocketed button-down. Though the shirt's designer was known at the time of publication, a checkered red "button-detailed" cotton shirt that Trump wore to her first public visit to the White House Garden cost currently retails at $690, and PopSugar quoted the shirt at $1,380 in March.


Based on what Melania Trump has worn at a FEMA briefing and at other shelters, Arizona might expect khaki, olive, white or denim hues, skin-tight pants, and, perhaps, a fishing shirt with two buttoned pockets. 


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Trump, who is a former model, often turns to renowned stylist Hervé Pierre ahead of meetings with other heads of state.


Pierre has styled the three preceding first ladies: Laura Bush, Hillary Clinton and Michelle Obama.


Addressing the United Nations, Trump wore a hot pink coat dress from Delpoza, priced at $2,950, with matching hot pink Christian Louboutin heels in September. She was criticized for wearing a distracting outfit when she was set to give a speech about bullying.


Two months prior, Trump was presented with a doll-sized 3-D printed hot pink stiletto in Warsaw. The shoe, which resembled the Louboutin heels, looks like it might have come from a Mattel Barbie doll package.


The first lady is responsible for funding her own wardrobe.


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.