The sobbing Honduran child whose likeness became the face of the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy was, in fact, never separated from her mother.

The girl's father told The Washington Post on Thursday night that the child, who recently appeared on the cover of Time magazine, and her mother were detained together. 


"The first second I saw it, I knew it was my daughter," Denis Javier Varela Hernandez told The Post. 

Varela said the image shows his daughter, 2-year-old Yanela, and wife, 32-year-old Sandra Sanchez.  Reuters reported that the two were detained together at a facility in the Texas border town of McAllen, where Sanchez has applied for asylum. Honduran Deputy Foreign Minister Nelly Jerez confirmed what Varela told Reuters.  


Varela told Reuters that Sanchez and Yanela left Honduras without telling him or their other three children.


"If they are deported, that is OK as long as they do not leave the child without her mother," Varela said in the interview. "I am waiting to see what happens with them."

A U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement spokesman told The Post that Sanchez was arrested near Hidalgo on June 12 and taken into ICE custody Sunday. Sanchez, who is now being housed at the South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, was already once deported to Honduras in July 2013. 

The photo, taken by award-winning Getty Images photographer John Moore, was used not only on the Time cover, but in newspapers worldwide, across social media platforms and on a Facebook fundraiser that has raised more than $18 million for Refugee and Immigrant Center for Education and Legal Services (RAICES), a Dallas-based immigration legal services provider. 


The Dallas Morning News ran the photograph on the front page on Sunday, June 17 to illustrate families who are facing the zero-tolerance policy at the U.S.-Mexico border. The caption used the phrase "possible separation" to describe the situation. 


The news about the mother and child drew criticism from White House spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders, who tweeted Friday: "It's shameful that dems and the media exploited this photo of a little girl to push their agenda." 

It’s shameful that dems and the media exploited this photo of a little girl to push their agenda. She was not separated from her mom. The separation here is from the facts. Dems should join POTUS and fix our broken immigration system. #ChangetheLawshttps://t.co/Y6KrTp4Ulk

Conservative news website Breitbart posted a story about what they called a "fake news photo." Donald Trump Jr. tweeted the story Thursday night.


The Trump administration announced a zero-tolerance policy in early April, maintaining that every immigrant who illegally crosses the U.S.-Mexico border, including asylum seekers, be criminally prosecuted. Children, who cannot be criminally prosecuted, are separated from their parents and taken into federal custody. More than 2,000 immigrant children have been separated from their families since April. 


President Donald Trump signed an executive order Wednesday to stop family separations at the border. 

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.