


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The president came to Dallas to meet with Republican supporters and donors in advance of the 2020 campaign.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Hurricane Harvey decimated communities along the Coastal Bend and left large swaths of the Lone Star State underwater when it roared ashore in late August.
Now those communities are trying to pick up the pieces.
    Wochit

President Donald Trump arrives Wednesday, Oct. 25, 2017, in Dallas and greets supporters at Love Field. Gov. Greg Abbott was there to greet him.
(Photo: John C. Moritz/USA Today Network)

DALLAS – President Donald Trump arrived in Dallas on Wednesday to a cheering welcome, and later by sign-carrying protesters assailing his truthfulness, where he met with Texas Gov. Greg Abbott for an update on the Hurricane Harvey recovery effort as a prelude to an afternoon of politicking.


"We’ve had tremendous success in Texas,” said Trump, who was flanked by Abbott and Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick. The spoke from a building at Dallas Love Field, where he singled out the Coast Guard for helping to save the lives of some 16,000 Texans after the flooding that followed Harvey.


Abbott, who had met with the president in Corpus Christi and in Austin less than a week after Harvey made landfall as a Category 4 storm, thanked Trump for his commitment to rebuilding the Texas Coast, and the parts of Houston and nearby communities that were hit.


Much of the briefing was private, but reporters who accompanied the president from the nation’s capital along with those from Texas were allowed in for the public remarks.


During those remarks, Trump said he looked forward to seeing plans to address flooding in Houston "on a more permanent basis."


President Donald Trump leaves Air Force One as he arrives in Dallas on Wednesday, Oct. 25, 2017. (Photo: John C. Moritz/USA Today Network)

"Let's take a look at the costs and then see if it's possible to do, because that would save a lot of money into the future and it would also put a lot of people to work,” he said. “So let's see what we can do."
He added: "I'm the builder president. Remember that." 


Also brieding the president were:


Before the smaller version of the presidential jet, nicknamed “Baby Air Force One,” arrived at Love Field, supporters there to greet him were huddled behind a short metal fence. Media were staged at a flatbed trailer nearby to await the arrival of the aircraft.


A secret service agent went over the protocol for greeting the president. One rule audible to the press pool: “Keep your hands out of your pocket” once the presidential party begins exiting the aircraft.


The president descended the plane at 3:24 p.m. to the chants of “Trump, Trump, Trump” and “We love you Trump.”


He greeted Abbott, who waited at the base of the stairs, with a salute.


Then he chatted with the supporters, many of whom took smartphone photos. He appeared to pose for selfies with some of them.


He also waved a hand-painted sign given to him by children that carried the message, “We played hooky to high-five our president.”


Inside, before the president arrived, Elisa Smith, who called herself “a proud Marine wife,” said she kept her kids, 8-year-old Akhyla and 6-year-old Brielle, home for the experience.


“It’s great for the girls to have an opportunity to meet the president,” she said.


After the briefing, Trump and his entourage headed to downtown Dallas for private events, including a high-dollar fundraiser for his expected re-election bid in 2020. Outside the airport, dozens of people lined the street, some carrying signs that were hard to read from the press bus. Visible was a large flag with Trump’s name on it waved by a man wearing jeans.


­­­­­Others took photos and videos as the presidential motorcade sped through Dallas, where streets were blocked off by uniformed Dallas police officers.


In downtown Dallas, near the first private venue – the tony Belo Mansion – the crowds got thicker. And the signs became more visible as the press bus slowed to a stop. “Liar, liar, liar,” read one. Another had Trump’s name with a circle and a slash. Others read: “Shame” and “Trump, that boy don’t act right.”


Trump was expected to hold a roundtable discussion with supporters from the Republican National Committee at the mansion.


A private fundraiser later was expected to be attended by about 200 people with tickets ranging from $2,700 per person to $100,000 per couple. Organizers expect to raise $4 million. 


John C. Moritz covers Texas government and politics for the USA Today Network in Austin. Contact him at John.Moritz@caller.com and follow him on Twitter @JohnnieMo.


RELATED COVERAGE: 


More: How the city at the ground zero of Hurricane Harvey is moving forward 7 weeks later



    President Donald Trump visited Corpus Christi on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017 for a briefing on Hurricane Harvey's destruction.
    Wochit

 
