


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Key officials say they are balancing the need for swift action with the often cumbersome rules imposed by federal agencies.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Pinnacle Roofing Systems company gives tips on how to find a reputable company for home repairs.
    Wochit

Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush
(Photo: John C. Moritz/USA Today Network Austin Bureau)

AUSTIN – Despite assurances from state officials on the front lines in the Hurricane Harvey recovery that they were systematically slashing their way through federal red tape, some lawmakers who represent the Gulf Coast expressed frustration that permanent housing could be years away for families who lost everything.


“When and how is this going to come together?” asked state Sen. Joan Huffman, R-Houston, during a Senate Finance Committee hearing Tuesday on Harvey and its aftermath.


The remark came after Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush, who is leading the housing portion of the recovery effort, told the panel that the more than $7 billion in federal aid promised to Texas and other storm-hammered states won’t arrive until year’s end at the earliest.


And, once the money from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development does reach Texas, some families might still have to wait as long as two-and-a-half years before they are in permanent housing, Bush added.


“Certainly, there is going to be a bigger need than we can provide,” he said.


State Sen. Lois Kolkhorst, a Brenham Republican whose district includes the hard-hit communities of Rockport, Port Aransas and Aransas Pass, said that’s more heart-breaking news for people along the coast whose lives have been in limbo since Harvey made landfall nearly two months ago.


“It’s going to get really tough...,” Kolkhorst said. “The reality that ‘I’m going to be homeless for a year’ has really set in.”


More: HUD announces $57.8 million more in Harvey relief for Texas


More: Lawmakers, school districts grapple with Harvey's effect on property tax collections


HUD announced last week that it soon will make $57.8 million available to be distributed by state officials for Texans to begin repairing and rebuilding homes damaged or destroyed by Harvey. But that is just a fraction of the need, Bush said.


The federal agency also plans $7.4 billion from funds authorized in September, but under federal law, other hurricane-hit regions like Florida and Puerto Rico, along with wildfire-ravaged California, will also be eligible for a portion of that cash.


Meanwhile in Washington, D.C., Congress sent legislation with additional funding for Harvey relief in Texas. Texas lawmakers said more will be needed to help the state fully recover.


“This level of funding does not come close to what will ultimately be required for our state to fully recover," U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz said. "And I am disappointed that the discussions we had in the Senate and with the administration to include an additional $18.7 billion in this bill, as requested in the Texas delegation’s letter to the Senate and House Appropriations Committees, were not addressed."


U.S. Rep. Blake Farenthold, a Corpus Christi Republican whose district was slammed by Harvey, told The Associated Press that Congress still needs more information from the Lone Star State.


"We're still waiting for all the data to come in from Texas to determine what the need is," he told the wire service. "We've already done the supplementals to keep the agencies going, but the long-term stuff — public assistance, FEMA and housing — are the big questions. We still haven't gotten all the numbers in from the state."


In Austin, Kolkhorst said that unless the rebuilding effort picks up speed soon, coastal and island communities where virtually every building was damaged or destroyed might never recover.


“These towns will cease to function,” she said.


Both Bush and John Sharp, the chancellor of the Texas A&amp;M University system who was tapped by Gov. Greg Abbott to work with local officials to rebuild public infrastructure, said it is vital that all federal rules be followed or state and local governments could risk having to repay Washington once the audits are completed years later.


But state Sen. Larry Taylor, a Republican who also represents the Houston area, said he understands need for acting deliberately. But he does not want Texans to feel forgotten or discouraged if they are unable to rebuilding their homes within a reasonable time.


“I don’t want fraud and I don’t want waste, but I do want to take care of people and get them back to their homes,” he said. “People will stay in their community up to the point that they lose hope. Then they leave.”


John C. Moritz covers Texas government and politics for the USA Today Network in Austin. Contact him at John.Moritz@caller.com and follow him on Twitter @JohnnieMo.
