A day after President Donald Trump signed an executive order ending his policy of separating families at the border, strict adherence to the policy of criminally prosecuting all who enter the country illegally seemed to bend slightly for migrant parents. At least temporarily.

In Texas, immigration attorneys said the Justice Department did not pursue cases against 17 parents whose children had been taken from them. The immigrants were brought to a McAllen courtroom in shackles but were not charged, said Natalia Cornelio, an attorney with the Texas Civil Rights Project, which is representing parents charged with illegal entry.


Their children had been taken from them earlier in the week. Cornelio said the parents would be released to Immigration and Customs Enforcement custody while they go through the civil immigration process.


A U.S. Customs and Border Protection official said Thursday that the agency would temporarily stop referring parents for prosecution until the federal government had enough space to house families, The Washington Post reported. But the Justice Department denied this was the case.

The Trump administration’s zero-tolerance policy calls for all adults caught crossing the border illegally to face criminal prosecution. After the policy was put in place in April, 2,300 migrant children were separated from their parents.


A senior Trump administration official on Thursday night said about 500 of them have been reunited since May.


For those caught crossing the border illegally without children, prosecutions continued Thursday.

About 70 shackled immigrants faced criminal misdemeanor charges for illegal entry before a federal magistrate judge in McAllen.


"At this time, everyone stand up and raise your right hand," Magistrate Judge Juan Alanis said from the bench.


Men and women from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico rose. The clanking of their metal shackles against wood pews filled the courtroom.

Here’s what we know and don’t know about the ramifications of Trump's executive order:


Two immigration attorneys in McAllen said they didn’t know why charges weren’t pursued for the 17 immigrant parents. A spokeswoman for the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of Texas said no immigration violation cases were dismissed in federal court Thursday. Cornelio said the government, for some reason, decided not to pursue charges. A case can be dismissed only if it has been filed.


Those parents weren’t told why they weren't charged, McAllen immigration attorney Carlos M. Garcia said. He said their biggest question also remained unanswered: When could they reunite with their kids?

“I just think there’s a lot of confusion,” Garcia said. “It doesn’t jibe with zero tolerance.”

Garcia said the parents included a mother who had fled from El Salvador with her 16-year-old son after he had been recruited by a gang. When he had said he wanted nothing to do with it, Garcia said, gang members had threatened him and his mother with death.


Cornelio said she had seen no effort to reunite these families or any other separated children and parents.


“The parents and their children are each on their own track,” she said. The government agencies don’t appear to talk to each other, she said. “The kids are on their own to try and explain that their parents are in the country and in the custody of ICE.”

The Clinton administration settled Flores vs. Reno in 1997, establishing standards for how immigration authorities should treat children in custody. The settlement requires that children be held in custody for no more than 20 days — even if they are with a parent.


Typically, that means the Office of Refugee Resettlement tries to place children with sponsors within the U.S., ideally relatives or close family friends.


In 2014, President Barack Obama tried to stop a swell of thousands of Central American mothers and their children who were pouring into the United States, many seeking safety from gang violence.


Officials were concerned that immigrants were taking advantage of the asylum process to gain entry. Under U.S. protocol, immigrants who tell federal authorities that they fear for their safety are allowed to pursue asylum claims and are not subjected to ordinary deportation proceedings. (However, Trump’s attorney general, Jeff Sessions, has said gang and domestic violence are no longer reasons to grant asylum.)

On Thursday, Sessions, as directed by Trump’s executive order, asked a federal court in Los Angeles to modify the Flores settlement to allow families to be detained together until their legal proceedings end. Those proceedings can take months or even years. The judge over that court, Dolly M. Gee, is the daughter of Chinese immigrants and was appointed by Obama.


Attorney Elissa Steglich, who runs the University of Texas immigration clinic, said the court would be unlikely to change the agreement.


“The Obama administration also sought to modify it, which the courts denied,” Steglich said.


Obama’s solution was to release entire families while they went through civil proceedings.


Trump has called on Congress to pass immigration legislation that would change the law so children could remain in custody longer. His current order leaves the door open for children and parents to be separated after 20 days.


The executive order said the administration would build or find existing facilities to house families while their cases wind their way through the court system. It isn’t clear where the families would be detained.


There are three facilities in the United States capable of housing families, said Southern Methodist University law professor Natalie Nanasi, who takes her students to assist immigrants detained while crossing into the country illegally.


Two are in Texas — the Karnes County Residential Center southeast of San Antonio and the South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, southwest of San Antonio. The third, the Berks Family Residential Center, is in Pennsylvania.

Those facilities are often already at capacity, several immigration lawyers said. Previously, the Obama administration held families at a military base in New Mexico.


The Pentagon on Thursday agreed to hold up to 20,000 migrant children on military bases after a request from U.S. Health and Human Services. Some bases that officials are considering are in Texas.

The bases aren’t set up to meet children’s needs, including education, and they don’t have mental health providers to help the families deal with what caused them to flee, often gang and domestic violence.


Nansai wondered if the federal government would convert old Walmarts and erect tent cities, as it did to house children separated from their parents.


“We’ve moved from separating families to indefinitely detaining families,” Nanasi said. “I’ve been to these detention centers, and they are jails. They are not child-friendly.”


Converting or building new facilities is a “significant investment” that requires money for staff, food, education and toys, she said, as well as places for families and children to sleep.


Jacqueline Watson, an Austin immigration lawyer, said existing family detention centers specifically house mothers with their children — there’s no setup for fathers and children.

Cornelio said the Texas Civil Rights Projects is seeing almost an even split between men who arrive with kids and women with children. There are slightly more mothers than fathers, she said.


Alexia Rodriguez, vice president of immigrant children’s services for Southwest Key, a nonprofit that is housing many of the separated children, told Texas lawmakers Thursday that before the executive order, the federal government had put in place a “reunification process” for all the facilities that housed immigrant children.  Parents can phone to ask about children, Rodriguez said.


She also said Southwest Key was trying to figure out how the process would work now that Trump has signed the executive order. The nonprofit has been given $1.5 billion in federal funds since 2008 to run shelters for children separated from their parents. Half a billion has come this fiscal year alone.


Details about reunifications had not been made clear to attorneys for parents who have been separated from their children, said Cornelio, the lawyer with the Texas Civil Rights Project.


“We’re not seeing any movement to unify the ...  children who have separated from their parents,” she said.


A Health and Human Services official said Wednesday that children who had already been taken from their parents wouldn’t immediately be reunited with them, but a spokesman later said it was too early to discuss how reunification would be handled.

Alexia said the refugee resettlement office, which takes custody of the separated immigrant children, tells facilities housing kids where the parents are being held. Caseworkers at facilities housing children could put them in contact with their parents as long as those facilities allow it, she said.


Alexia said federal authorities would have to explain how the process will work.


Some advocates said it’s likely some parents will never be reunited with their children.

“I don’t doubt that when this crisis is over, there will be many parents who won’t ever see their children again,” Texas Civil Rights Project spokesman Zenen Perez said Wednesday. “And that is something perpetrated purposely by this administration."


Washington and at least eight other states say they plan to sue the Trump administration over the policy, saying it violates the due process rights of children and their parents.

Nanasi said the law doesn’t require immigrants to be prosecuted or detained for the misdemeanor of crossing the border illegally.


Prosecutors use discretion every day not to prosecute crimes, especially misdemeanors, she said.


“Yes, this is an improvement from having infants being ripped from their breast-feeding mothers or having toddlers screaming for their mothers,” Nanasi said. “Yes, this is better. But just barely, especially given the long-term detention.”


Staff writers James Barragán in Austin, Dianne Solis in McAllen and The Associated Press contributed to this report.

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.