An international development company plans to turn a legacy Garland farm into a 600-home residential community.

Australia-based Wilbow Corp. bought the 103-acre Wyrick farm at the southwest corner of Buckingham and Shiloh roads in Garland.


"It goes back a hundred years and the family finally decided to sell," said Wilbow co-president Chas Fitzgerald. "It's a big project — the largest like this in the area."

Fitzgerald said the residential community will include a variety of townhouses and single-family homes with prices starting in the mid-$200,000s.


'The first phase is over 300 homes," he said. "We're building two major parks."


There'll also be an amenity center with swimming pool and clubhouse in the $165 million project.


"There is a massive dog park and central park," Fitzgerald said. "We have been working on it for three years. They have had a lot of people chasing the land over the years."

Most of the area surrounding the old farm just south of Bush Turnpike has already been developed into neighborhoods and retail.


The Wyrick family bought the land in 1909 and originally operated a dairy farm there. The family once operated a general store on nearby Jupiter Road, according to Wilbow. Duck Creek cuts through one quarter of the property, which is just south of Oak Ridge Golf Course.


The farm was originally owned by the Picketts, whose daughter married into the Wyrick family.


Fitzgerald said builders CB Jeni Homes, Grenadier Homes, MI Homes and Gehan Homes will build the residences.


"We are doing two flavors of townhomes — two-story for younger professionals and one-story townhomes for empty-nesters and retirees," he said. "We are also doing patio homes and some family homes."


The first houses will be ready in early 2019.

Housing analyst Ted Wilson of Residential Strategies said the project is "the largest new infill residential deal in D-FW."


Wilbow is based in Melbourne and has been developing in Texas for 30 years. It has multiple subdivisions in North Texas.

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.