Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Samuel Shaffer, former self-proclaimed prophet of the Knights of the Crystal Blade, could face 25 years to life in prison in Utah.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Defense attorney Troy Sundquist (right) explains the plea agreement to Samuel Shaffer before at the Fifth District Court on Wednesday, Feb. 21, 2018. Shaffer pleaded guilty to rape of a child and child abuse.
(Photo: James M. Dobson/The Spectrum &amp; Daily News)Buy Photo

The former self-proclaimed prophet of the Knights of the Crystal Blade pleaded guilty to marrying and sexually assaulting an 8-year-old girl in Southern Utah.


Samuel Warren Shaffer, 34, was charged with first-degree felony rape of a child and one second-degree felony count of child abuse. His plea acknowledges he had engaged in a sexual act with the underage daughter of a fellow member of the Iron County-based religious sect.


The first-degree felony alone carries a sentence of 25 years to life in the Utah State Prison, while the child-abuse charges carries an addition one to 15 years. The judge can choose to order the sentences to be served consecutively or concurrently. 


More: Religious sect leader, accused of kidnapping, faces multiple felony charges


The plea deal was vital to prevent the child victims from having to testify, Iron County Attorney Scott Garrett explained.


"We're ecstatic about this plea, not only to hold him accountable with a 25 to life sentence, but also to protect the child from being revictimized."


Shaffer's public defender, Troy Sundquist, said his client wasn't necessarily pleased with the outcome, but he ultimately took the plea deal to protect his children. 


"Almost from the beginning that was his main concern — not putting the children through that," he explained. "It was about what was in the best interest for them and for himself, obviously."


Deputy Iron County Attorney Mike Edwards said Shaffer could face additional charges if child pornography is found on a computer currently being searched by law enforcement. 


A pre-sentence investigation report will be completed prior to his sentencing April 10.


The Beryl man told an Iron County sheriff's investigator he had married John Alvin Coltharp’s underage daughter, according to a search warrant. Coltharp, a fellow sect member, had also allegedly married Shaffer’s 7-year-old daughter. Court documents state Shaffer had physically inspected the girl's genitals to determine if she was a virgin.


Shaffer was the original prophet of the small fundamentalist Mormon religious group. He told investigators in December that he had passed the prophecy on to Coltharp, who is currently being held in Sanpete County on charges of kidnapping and sodomy of a child.


John Coltharp (Photo: Sanpete County Jail)

He outlined his beliefs in writings, podcasts and videos hosted on a website titled “The Kingdom of God or Nothing.” Shaffer asserted that his beliefs, including supporting plural marriage and child unions, were handed down to him by God directly on June 22, 2015.


New search warrants recently unsealed in 6th District Court revealed police had expected to find a notebook detailing their plans to kidnap even more children as they prepared for the impending end of the world.


"John and Sam both believed that the end of the world was near," according to the warrant. "Also expected in the recorded notes or revelations is the plan by John and Sam to abduct more family children about the time of the anticipated Muslim invasion of the United States, which was imminent."


Shaffer is still facing two counts of first-degree felony sodomy of a child in Sanpete County. He's also charged with one count of obstructing justice in addition to child bigamy, both second-degree felonies.


Coltharp was arrested at his home by Spring City police Dec. 1 after they said he failed to turn over his four children to his ex-wife, who had been awarded full custody of their two daughters and two sons in November. He told investigators the children were in the care of Shaffer, but refused to revealed where they were.


Shaffer's father, James Shaffer, was recently charged with obstructing justice after being accused of lying to police about having Coltharp's children hidden in his Spring City home. Charging documents indicate the son later picked-up the children and transported them to the compound. 


A statewide Amber Alert was issued Dec. 4 after the Iron County Sheriff's Office raided a compound belonging to Coltharp approximately one mile west of Lund. The grandparents of Coltharp’s children and the two boys were found living in a makeshift residence composed of storage containers on the compound. They told authorities the girls had spent the night with Samuel Shaffer in a tent on the property. He had last been seen leaving the area on foot the day before.


A witness later spotted Shaffer walking alone on a dirt road several miles west of the compound. He was taken into custody without incident shortly after before telling law enforcement where Coltharp’s two daughter and his own biological daughters were hidden. Two of the children were found hiding in a blue plastic 50-gallon water barrel. Shaffer told investigators he had placed the children in the water barrel an estimated 24 hours earlier to hide them from searching law enforcement, the probable cause statement said.


The other two girls were hidden separately in an abandoned single-wide mobile home in “deplorable conditions” approximately five miles away from the property, the report detailed. The mobile home appeared to be primarily used for storage and was not equipped for living.


All four girls were transported by helicopter to Cedar City Hospital after the rescue. One of Shaffer’s daughters was flown by Life Flight helicopter to Primary Children’s Hospital in Salt Lake.


Bree Burkitt is the Cedar City reporter for The Spectrum &amp; Daily News. Follow her on Twitter at @BreeBurkitt, or call her at 435-218-2241.


Read more: 


Southern Utah man pleads not guilty in Christmas Eve officer-involved shooting


Seventh man arrested in child sex case in Iron County


Iron County GOP treasurer, 4 others arrested in prostitution sting
