Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 92F. Winds ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


McALLEN — The owner of a Houston-based Chicago-style pizzeria may have played a role in drug trafficking and money laundering, according to an indictment unsealed last month. 

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — Former NBA player Kermit Washington has been sentenced to six years in federal prison for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in charity donations on vacations, shopping sprees and plastic surgery for his girlfriend. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Separating families violates basic human rights 

A rear tire blow-out caused the vehicle to rollover while traveling on U.S. 77 near Raymondville. The accident left one dead and six others injured.

A rear tire blow-out caused the vehicle to rollover while traveling on U.S. 77 near Raymondville. The accident left one dead and six others injured.

RAYMONDVILLE — A car crash yesterday afternoon sent seven to the hospital and left one dead.


According to Texas Department of Public Safety, a Dodge Caravan had a rear tire blow-out causing the vehicle to rollover.


The vehicle was traveling on US 77 about five miles north of Raymondville.

Mexican national, Edgar Ivan Ramos, 29, died at the scene according DPS reports.


Another person was air flown to Valley Baptist Hospital in Harlingen.


Six passengers were transported by ambulance to hospitals in Harlingen.

Preliminary investigation revealed a Dodge Caravan passenger van (occupied by a driver and seven passengers) was traveling northbound on US 77.


Some passengers were not restrained by safety belts. Two persons were ejected from the vehicle. DPS Troopers are further investigating this fatal crash.

