Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Joshua Frederick Webber, 25, of the 600 block of Wheatlyn Drive, York, faces one count each of simple assault and harassment.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Ted Czech recaps some of this week's crime stories and sings a holiday song!
    Ted Czech and Sean Heisey, York Daily Record

Joshua Frederick Webber
(Photo: Submitted)

Christmas was not exactly the "most wonderful time of the year" for one Red Lion family, as a domestic dispute devolved into a man allegedly jabbing his sister in the buttocks with a meat fork, according to charging documents.


Joshua Frederick Webber, 25, of the 600 block of Wheatlyn Drive, York, faces one count each of simple assault and harassment. On Tuesday, he remained in York County Prison on $25,000 bail, according to online court dockets.


READ: Man swings hammer at girlfriend in York domestic assault, cops say


About 3:36 p.m. on Monday, Pennsylvania State Police were dispatched to the 200 block of East Broadway in Red Lion for a domestic dispute. The woman who called 911, who was not named, said that her son had hit her daughter with a meat fork, documents state.


Once there, police spoke with the victim, Jazmen Nicole Webber, who said she and her brother, Joshua Webber, were arguing when he pushed her to the ground and kicked her, documents state.


Documents did not state about what the two were arguing.


READ: Upset about a shop vac, York County man allegedly strangled wife, police say


The sister then ran upstairs to get away from her brother, but went back downstairs and told him that she could call the police. When she said this, Joshua Webber began to yell, picked up a meat fork and chased his sister up the stairs, documents state, adding "He then struck the left side of her buttock with the meat fork." 


Joshua Webber then fled the area, documents state. 


Police saw two small puncture wounds on Jazmen Webber and also the meat fork, which was on the kitchen table. 


READ: Wife struck by thrown beer bottle in Fairview domestic, cops say


Joshua Webber was arrested later the same day and arraigned on the charges. He has a preliminary hearing before District Judge John H. Fishel on Jan. 8, according to online court dockets.


Take a look at the latest headlines:


Contact Ted Czech at 717-771-2033.


 


 


 
