
    
        
            By Wesley Robinson

wrobinson@pennlive.com

More than a dozen people have died of suspected heroin and fentanyl overdoses in the past 10 days in York County. 

York County Coroner Pam Gay issued a warning in reaction to the spike in deaths Sunday in a news release. She pointed to the fact that there were six fatal overdoses in two days during the recent spike, when explaining that the increased number of deaths is extremely rare but should not be attributed to a "bad batch" of drugs. "There is absolutely no good batch of heroin/fentanyl - any amount, no matter how large or small, can and will kill the user, no matter the supposed tolerance of the user," Gay wrote in the news release.

Gay continued to urge caution, adding that rumors spread about more potent batches after people overdose. Those more potent batches, often laced with fentanyl, claim more lives as users chase the drugs and the dealers who sell them, Gay said. 

Just a day after Gay issued the warning, another person died of a suspected overdose Monday bringing the total to 13 deaths in less than two weeks. Pointing to the beginning of the opioid epidemic in 2014, Gay said there have been other periods like this recent spike that saw 14 overdose deaths in February, July and October respectively. In November 2017, 16 people died of overdoses in a three-week span.

Gay noted that the people at the highest risk for overdose are those who have been off of drugs for a period of time, as well as those just out of prison, rehab or living in a recovery house. In issuing the warning, Gay shared information for the York/Adams Drug and Alcohol Commission at 1-866-769-6822 or call Not One More at 717-424-8890 or 717-850-6350 for those in need of further assistance or family support. 

"We are putting out this warning with the hope that it will save lives, and as a reminder to the public and those who may have loved ones who are users that they should equip themselves with naloxone, as it can help save lives," Gay said.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        