Bucks County has joined 17 other counties across the state that have filed civil suits against drug manufacturers in the hope of stemming record deaths triggered by the opioid crisis and recouping some of the costs of fighting it.


Opioid manufacturers and distributors “misled the public” about the dangers and addictive properties of the prescription drugs and also failed to halt suspicious sales that allowed opioids to flood the market, according to the 159-page civil complaint filed Tuesday in Bucks County Court.


“A pharmaceutical manufacturer should never place its desire for profits above the health and well-being of its customers,” the lawsuit states. “[Drug] manufacturers deceptively engaged — and in many instances profoundly harmed — a patient base that by definition was not able, biologically, to turn away from the drugs.”


The opioid epidemic, fueled by widespread prescriptions for opioid painkillers and cheap and easy access to heroin, continues to claim record deaths.


In 2017, Lehigh County had nearly 200 drug-related deaths, an increase of about 40 from the previous year. Northampton County also had a record number of drug deaths last year with 109 fatalities, an increase of 51 from 2016.


Deaths from drug overdoses in Bucks County were among the highest in the state, according to the Centers for Disease Control. In 2017, there were 232 fatal overdoses, an increase from 168 in 2016.


At least 17 counties in Pennsylvania have filed suit against Purdue Pharma, the creator of OxyContin with an estimated 30 percent of the market for analgesic painkillers and annual sales of more than $3 billion, according to the lawsuits.


In March, Lehigh County District Attorney Jim Martin named eight defendants in a suit alleging opioid manufactures breached their legal duties by failing to investigate and report suspicious opioid orders.


Bucks County officials said the estimated costs related to opioids have had a “staggering effect” that includes hiring more coroners and detectives to investigate drug deaths and target dealers, a $20 million prison expansion to handle the exploding inmate population and skyrocketing social service needs.


Although the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says fentanyl remains the biggest opioid killer, authorities say the throes of the opioid addiction began with drug manufacturers that may have known their wares were addictive, but continued to flood the market to rake in huge profits.


Experts in product liability litigation and public health policy say local governments face a tough road to hold drug companies and distributors responsible for the harm their products have caused, saying pharmaceutical companies are likely to vigorously defend themselves.


Fatal drug overdoses


Bucks County: 
2017: 232
2016: 168


Lehigh County: 
2017: 197
2016: 157


Northampton County:
2017: 109
2016: 58


pamela.lehman@mcall.com


Twitter @pamelalehman


610-820-6790