Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Kevin Bell, 40, of Newberry Township, 
was sentenced on Tuesday in Jennings Circuit Court in Indiana to four years in prison.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    To report information on any of these individuals, call the Adams County Sheriff's Office at 717-337-9828.
    Wochit

Kevin Bell, 40, of Newberry Township.
(Photo: Submitted)

A York County man who was pinned inside an SUV for days after going down a ravine in Indiana in a car crash that killed his girlfriend was sentenced on Tuesday to serve four years in prison.


Kevin Bell, 40, of Newberry Township, pleaded guilty in Jennings Circuit Court to driving while suspended causing death in connection to the wreck that killed Nikki Reed, 37, of Seymour, Indiana, on Sept. 17, 2016. He’s been locked up for more than one year and will receive credit toward his sentence.


READ KEVIN BELL'S ACCOUNT: York County man trapped 3 days in SUV in Indiana: 'I loved her'


Bell was driving a 1999 Ford Explorer on U.S. Route 50 near the Kentucky-Indiana border when he went off the road, down an embankment and into a tree, the Indiana State Police said. He was traveling with Reed from York County to Indiana for a family birthday party.


In an interview, Bell told investigators that he crashed because Reed was rubbing his crotch and chest. He broke his leg. Eventually, after a few days, he was able to crawl out of the vehicle, police said.



    Dover-area man Kevin Bell faces charges in a car crash that he said left him trapped for approximately three days in the wreckage with his girlfriend's body.
    York Daily Record

He gathered his belongings, including two 14-pound bowling balls. Bell found his cellphone face down on the floor, police said, and sent one text message to his boss that said “car accident” before the battery died.


Three days after the crash, Bell was able to climb to the road. He did not initially mention the crash, police said.


Bell had an active warrant for his arrest in Pennsylvania. And, police said, he was driving with a suspended license — and failed to report Reed's death “even though he had cellphone access and signal.”


Kevin Bell, 40, of Newberry Township, was sentenced on Tuesday in Jennings Circuit Court in Indiana to four years in prison in connection to the car wreck that killed his girlfriend, Nikki Reed, 37, of Seymour, Indiana, on Sept. 17, 2016. (Photo: Submitted)

RELATED: Dover man trapped 3 days in wreck with dead girlfriend


Previously, Bell said in an interview with the York Daily Record/Sunday News that he crashed when Reed showed him pictures on her cellphone. “I loved her,” he said. “I feel terrible about what happened.” 


Patrick Magrath, Bell’s attorney, could not be reached. Neither could Chief Deputy Prosecutor Drew Dickerson.


Bell has been incarcerated since Oct. 14, 2016.


Contact Dylan Segelbaum at 717-771-2102.
