


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Pennsylvania school district that made national news by adding buckets of stones to its defenses against armed intruders increased security Monday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    A school district in Pennsylvania is facing some mockery after it planned to arm students with rocks in case of an active shooter situation.
    Buzz60

Breaking news.
(Photo: USA TODAY)

A Pennsylvania school district that made national news by adding buckets of stones to its defenses against armed intruders increased armed security at its schools Monday.


David Helsel, superintendent of Blue Mountain School District in Orwigsburg, said social media posts misrepresenting the district's overall plans for dealing with school shootings put his schools at risk.


"This unfortunate circumstance has increased our concern regarding the possibility that something may happen because of the media attention," Helsel said Sunday in an open letter to parents and staff. "Starting tomorrow and into the near future, we have arranged for additional armed security for our buildings."


Helsel acknowledged that five-gallon buckets of river stones were placed in classrooms throughout the sprawling, rural district so students would have something to throw at an attacker who breached doors that should be locked during such an emergency.


But Helsel has repeatedly stressed that the stones are a "last resort."


More: Rick Santorum: Learn CPR instead of protesting for 'phony gun laws'


More: Day after March for Our Lives, Pope Francis urges youth to lead


All Blue Mountain Schools are equipped with intercom and emergency phone systems, walkie-talkies, surveillance equipment and other security equipment, Helsel said. All classroom doors have been equipped with locking mechanisms.


Blue Mountain has held training scenarios and drills for students and staff. The district's emergency security guidelines for intruders are based on ALiCE Training Institute guidelines. ALiCE stands for Alert, Lock Down, Inform, Counter and Evacuate, and the guidelines require students and teachers in locked-down classrooms to put up physical barricades.


If the intruder gets past these barricades, all students are encouraged to throw items — stones in Blue Mountain schools — at the intruder to inflict as much damage as possible while protecting themselves, Helsel said.


ALiCE did not immediately return a call for comment from USA TODAY.


The issue comes as schools across the nation review security following a Valentine's Day shooting rampage at Marjory Stoneman Douglas school in Parkland, Fla., that left 17 staff and students dead.


"ALiCE guidelines suggest that students and faculty fight back against an intruder rather than wait passively for an intruder to attack," Helsel said. "Yes, all classrooms have buckets of river stones that students and faculty can throw at an intruder as a last level of defense against intruders."


 
