


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

'The Death Cure' is wrapping up with Dylan O'Brien, but 'The Darkest Minds' and 'Mortal Engines' launch as potential franchises.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    'Maze Runner: The Death Cure,' starring Dylan O'Brien, is the last film in the sci-fi series based on James Dashner's 'Maze Runner' novels.
    USA TODAY

'Maze Runner: The Death Cure,' with Dylan O’Brien (left) and Thomas Brodie-Sangster, kicks off a busy 2018 full of book-to-movie young-adult adaptations.
(Photo: Joe Alblas/20th Century Fox)

As long as there are teenagers, there will be young-adult books, and the popular literary genre hasn’t fallen out of favor with Hollywood.


The Harry Potter, Twilight and Hunger Games movies, as well as standalones like The Fault in Our Stars, stoked the flames of YA fandom but also created adaptations that had a broader audience than just kids. This Friday, another novel-to-film series ends, with Maze Runner: The Death Curewrapping up a dystopian epic full of teen heroes.


More: Dylan O'Brien says his 'Maze Runner' experience is no longer 'tainted' by injury 


Also: 10 books to read before they become movies in 2018


But there are more YA movies and franchises on the way. Here’s a guide to those on the way in 2018:



    A 16-year-old girl falls in love with a mysterious soul who inhabits a different body daily in 'Every Day.'
    USA TODAY

Angourie Rice stars as a 16-year-old girl who falls in love with a wandering soul who wakes up in a different body and lives a different life daily in the adaptation of David Levithan’s 2012 romance.


In 'A Wrinkle in Time,' Storm Reid is a teen who embarks upon an astonishing adventure in search of her father. (Photo: Atsushi Nishijima)

Director Ava DuVernay takes Madeleine L’Engle’s classic 1962 sci-fi novel to the big screen, with Storm Reid as a 13-year-old girl who ventures through time, space and multiple dimensions to save her scientist father (Chris Pine).



    Simon Spier's love story is a little complicated because he hasn't told his family or friends that he's gay in "Love, Simon."
    USA TODAY

In director Greg Berlanti’s adaptation of Becky Albertalli’s 2015 coming-of-age tale Simon vs. the Homo Sapiens Agenda, Nick Robinson is the closeted gay title character whose high school life is complicated by the potential reveal of a secret online correspondence. 


Tye Sheridan is a teen who escapes his dystopian reality for a virtual one in 'Ready Player One.' (Photo: Jaap Buitendijk)

Steven Spielberg puts his signature touch on author Ernie Cline’s 2011 genre mash-up: There’s plenty of nostalgia for children of the 1980s but a core story for younger audiences that revolves around an Ohio kid (Tye Sheridan) who escapes his dystopian reality by immersing himself in a wondrous virtual one.


A teen (Asa Butterfield, left) raised under a dome forms a punk band with his rebellious friend (Alex Wolff) in 'The House of Tomorrow.' (Photo: Shout Studio)

Futurism meets rebellious youth in this cinematic take on Peter Bognanni’s 2010 book about a 16-year-old orphan (Asa Butterfield) raised under a dome by his oddball grandma (Ellen Burstyn). He decides to form a punk band with a heart-transplant recipient (Alex Wolff). 


Amandla Stenberg is the star of a new franchise based on the sci-fi book series 'The Darkest Minds.' (Photo: Richard Shotwell/Invision/AP)

Alexandra Bracken's sci-fi book series, in which a mysterious disease kills 98% of the world’s children and leaves the rest with superpowers, gets the cinematic touch from director Jennifer Yuh Nelson. Amandla Stenberg stars as a girl who escapes a government camp and joins a group of other youngsters on the lam.


Lucas Hedges, a 2017 Oscar nominee for 'Manchester by the Sea,' stars as a gay kid whose outing leads to conversion therapy in 'Boy Erased.' (Photo: Dan MacMedan/USA TODAY)

In actor/director Joel Edgerton’s adaptation of Garrard Conley’s memoir, Lucas Hedges stars as the son of a small-town Baptist minister (Russell Crowe). When he's outed as gay, he's forced by his dad and mom (Nicole Kidman) to attend conversion therapy.



    Many years after the 'Sixty Minute War,' cities survive a now desolate Earth by moving around on giant wheels in 'Mortal Engines.'
    USA TODAY

The post-apocalyptic world of Philip Reeve's novels — in which gigantic moving metropolises consume smaller towns for resources — centers on the teaming of a low-class British historian (Robert Sheehan) and a fugitive assassin (Hera Hilmar).


Daisy Ridley (left) stars as a lady-in-waiting to Queen Gertrude (Naomi Watts) in 'Ophelia' (expected in 2018), a spin on Shakespeare's 'Hamlet.' (Photo: Sundance Institute)

Based on the 2006 Lisa Klein YA novel, director Claire McCarthy’s female-empowerment spin on Shakespeare’s Hamlet premiered Monday at Sundance Film Festival. It centers on the title character (Daisy Ridley), her gig as lady-in-waiting for Queen Gertude (Naomi Watts) and Ophelia’s blossoming love for the infamous Danish prince (George MacKay).


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
