


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

"No child should ever feel hungry, stalked, frightened, terrorized, bullied, isolated or afraid, with nowhere to turn.," Melania Trump said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    First Lady Melania Trump is calling on world leaders to "step up" to improve the lives of children. She made the remarks during a luncheon that included spouses of world leaders. (Sept. 20)
    AP

First lady Melania Trump addresses other spouses of world leaders at a United Nations luncheon on Sept. 20, 2017 in the United States Mission in New York.
(Photo: DON EMMERT, AFP/Getty Images)

 


First lady Melania Trump advocated for children at Wednesday's U.S. Mission to the United Nations luncheon.


Wearing a bright fuchsia, knee-length dress, she made a plea to her audience. "Together, we must acknowledge that all too often it is the weakest, most innocent and vulnerable among us, our children, who ultimately suffer the most from the challenges that plague our societies," she said. "Whether it is drug addiction, bullying, poverty, disease, trafficking, illiteracy, or hunger, it is the children who are hit first and hardest in any country. And as we all know, the future of every nation rests with the promise of their young people."


"Our choices on how we raise and educate our children will, in fact, provide the blueprint for the next generation," added Trump, who called being a mother to Barron Trump, 11, her "most important and joyous role." 


Trump encouraged parents to extend their care and guidance beyond the own broods. 


"When we join together as parents caring for children, whether they live in our own families, across the street, across the nation, or across the globe, we claim our responsibility to the next generation to ensure they are prepared to accept the torch of leadership for the world of tomorrow," Trump stated.. 


She said through example, "we must teach each child the values of empathy and communication" as they "are the core of kindness, mindfulness, integrity and leadership."


"Our choices on how we raise and educate our children will, in fact, provide the blueprint for the next generation," added Trump, who called being a mother to Barron Trump, 11, her "most important and joyous role." 


Her message comes on the heels of the president's speech Tuesday in which he used colorful language to address the United Nations General Assembly. During his remarks, Trump called North Korean leader Kim Jong Un "Rocket Man" and commented on "loser terrorists."


Critics have been open with their feelings that the president's strong language conflicts with the first lady's message of peace.  


But Trump implored her audience to educate children on the importance the "Golden Rule" in her speech Wednesday. "Do unto others as you would have them (do) unto you," she said. 


Zoning in on the importance that all children feel safe, the first lady will declare, "No child should ever feel hungry, stalked, frightened, terrorized, bullied, isolated or afraid, with nowhere to turn. We need to step up, come together, and ensure that our children's future is bright."


More: Melania Trump billboard removed in Croatia after legal action threatened



    A Croatian private school is using First Lady Melania Trump’s image to promote their English classes. Veuer's Natasha Abellard (@NatashaAbellard) has the story.
    Buzz60

Prior to the election, Trump said cyberbullying would be her focus, which she spoke about with a female audience in Berwyn, Pa. last November. “Technology has changed our universe. But like anything that is powerful it can have a bad side," Trump said at the time. "Our culture has gotten too mean and too rough, especially to children and teenagers."


When USA TODAY followed up on Trump's cyberbullying campaign in May, Grisham said the initiative was a work in progress. "Mrs. Trump is being very thoughtful when it comes to building out her initiatives," she said via email.


More: Melania Trump's made-in-Italy dress undermines POTUS' made-in-USA tweet


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
