


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

However temperatures around issue seem to be cooling more than a week after President Trump re-launched the controversy.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

The Ravens stood for the national anthem Sunday after kneeling beforehand.
(Photo: Mitch Stringer, USA TODAY Sports)

BALTIMORE — She didn’t want to give her name. She didn’t want to talk about anthems or protests or social injustice.


“We came here to watch the game,” this Baltimore Ravens fan said Sunday on the cusp of a sunny football afternoon.


She spoke for many across the land. Some see kneeling during the national anthem as patriotic protest. Some see it as disrespect to flag and country. And some see it as something they don’t want to think about as they settle in to watch the football games they attend to forget the troubles of the world outside the stadium walls.


The national anthem was an NFL flashpoint for another Sunday, but at what seemed a lower temperature this time. The heat on display as the anthem played last Sunday came just two days after President Trump said NFL owners should fire the “son of a b---” who fail to stand when it’s playing.


More: Steelers' Alejandro Villanueva: 'Unacceptable' to use me as tool in national anthem debate


More: 40 things we learned in Week 4 of the 2017 NFL season


More: Martha Ford asked Lions not to kneel, promised to back players' agenda


The passage of time probably played a part in Sunday’s apparently lower temps, but perhaps it was also because the president had moved on to other targets, as is his wont, picking improbable Twitter beefs over this weekend with the mayor of suffering San Juan, Puerto Rico and his own secretary of state.


Trump did tweet this on Saturday: “Very important that NFL players STAND tomorrow, and always, for the playing of our National Anthem. Respect our Flag and our Country!”


The Ravens found a middle ground. They briefly took a knee before the anthem — to loud booing — and then stood for The Star-Spangled Banner here in the city where Francis Scott Key wrote it in 1814.


All this began a year ago, when Colin Kaepernick — then of the San Francisco 49ers and now a displaced quarterback — protested during the anthem to shine a light on issues of  social injustice and racially motivated police brutality. Trump’s fire-them rant at an Alabama rally — ignoring what the protests are about and centering instead on when they take place — reignited the controversy.


Fans on both sides of a national divide attended Sunday’s game at Baltimore’s M&amp;T Bank Stadium.


Mitchell Scott, a 20-year Air Force veteran from Waldorf, Md., said he supports the protests wholeheartedly. “As someone who fought to defend the Constitution,” he said, “I’m happy.”


Larry Legg, of Henderson, Md., wants protests out of sports. “You play in this country, respect this country,” he said.


But what about the idea that the protests are about social injustice?


“Then make it about the social issues,” he said, “and not about the flag of this country that gives you the opportunity to be here and to be millionaires.”


Scott, the Air Force vet, mentioned the deaths of Freddie Gray in Baltimore and Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo.


“It’s about so many people who lost their lives, unnecessarily,” Scott said. “They’re trying to raise attention to it. So I understand what they’re doing. My thing is, when you take a knee, you’re not disrupting the (anthem), you are taking a knee in silence, in reverence, to the issue.”


In Glendale, Ariz., where San Francisco was playing its first game since Trump’s remarks, roughly 30 49ers kneeled. The Buffalo Bills, Detroit Lions and Miami Dolphins were among other teams who had some players kneel. Some teams stood but linked arms in solidarity. Nine or so Browns raised fists as they stood in Cleveland.


One Browns fan held up a sign that said: “Only here cuz season tickets already paid for! We support those who stand!”


The White House calls all this a black-and-white issue, but some fans see shades of gray.


“I don’t agree with the protests but I respect the players as people,” Denver Broncos fan Morgan Paulk said. “I know a lot of my friends are people I disagree with, but they’re still my friends. If we don’t have freedom of speech for everybody, we don’t have freedom of speech for anybody.”


Paulk wore an orange Brandon Marshall jersey, No. 54.  Paulk bought it before last season and didn’t know what to do when Marshall joined Kaepernick’s protest for a time in 2016. Paulk’s solution: He put American flag patches on the upper left front and center back, above Marshall’s name.


“These are $100, you know,” he said. Since, he wears the jersey to every game: “I had one guy, two weeks ago, he said, ‘What’s the deal with the shirt?’ I said, ‘Well, you know what the deal is.’ ”


Zaid Rodriguez wore a red 49ers Kaepernick jersey as he raised money for a sixth-grade youth football team he helps coach. He said some Broncos fans said they’d donate if he took the jersey off; others shook his hand.


Jose Romero, who said he served two tours in Iraq, including the first Desert Storm, wore a Broncos Super Bowl 50 shirt.


“As a retired Marine and a Bronco fan, it’s mixed emotions,” he said. “I love my team, but I love my country more.”


Romero said it is all about respect: “Respect where you live, respect your country, respect the troops and respect each other.”


Trey Long of Aurora, Colo., usually flies one American flag and one Broncos flag at his tailgate. This time, he had two American flags. He wants politics out of football. He just wants to watch the games.


“It’s upsetting, it’s disappointing,” he said. “I understand both sides. It’s disappointing from Trump, and I’ve been somewhat of a Trump supporter. So just very disappointing.


“But then with the players, I just feel like it takes away from what the country is about. Even the arm-in-arm thing, I don’t know if I’m a big fan of it. I still think they’re taking away from the national anthem.”


Last week Long unfollowed Von Miller, and other Broncos who’d protested, on social media. “To make a point,” he said.


But, by this weekend, Long was following them again.


Rickey Mitchell of DuPont, Wash., said he is a 23-year-veteran of U.S. Army with a son and son-in-law in the military. He was wearing a Seahawks jersey prior to Sunday night's game with the Colts in Seattle.


“It doesn’t bother me. I’m going to stand, I don’t care what they do,” he said. “Somebody does something wrong or right every day. I’m not going to have a heart attack or a stroke or high blood pressure worrying about somebody else.”


Jennifer Newton of Mesa, Ariz., speaking before the Arizona Cardinals played the 49ers, said she is sick of the protests.


“They just need to knock it off,” she said, “and the President needs to stay out of it.”


Contributing: Dave Birkett, Detroit Free Press; Gregory Moore, Arizona Republic; Jim Hoehn, Indianapolis Star, all part of the USA TODAY Network


PHOTOS: NFL anthem protests


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
