Sunny skies. High 94F. Winds light and variable..

A mostly clear sky. Low around 70F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 9, 2018 @ 11:54 pm

Five Richmond Cycling Corp youth visited the city's Confederate monuments Friday morning and wrote a Facebook post about their experience and thoughts.

Five Richmond Cycling Corp youth visited the city's Confederate monuments Friday morning and wrote a Facebook post about their experience and thoughts.

Friday morning, Richmond Cycling Corps took five of its members, ages 16-17, on a tour of the Confederate monuments in Richmond. 

The purpose, according to a RCC Facebook post, was so the young men, all from Section 8 public housing, could "formulate their own opinions" about the monuments before Saturday's expected rally at the Lee monument by a small pro-Confederate group out of Tennessee and "the media frenzy that's going to ravage through Richmond tomorrow." 

After the tour of the monuments, 17-year-old Daquan Morton, with input from the four other RCC youth, wrote what RCC posted on its Facebook page Friday night, which appears below.

According to its Facebook page, Richmond Cycling Corps "is an opportunity-rich outreach program which uses the sport of cycling as a lever for deep and impactful change. We empower youth in public housing to break free from the cycle of systemic poverty. For this momentous undertaking, we employ a hands-on system of case-management attached to a spectrum of mentors, resources, counseling, high standards, and tough love."

Below is the RCC Facebook post:

This morning, we took five RCC youth, ages 16-17, all from section 8/public housing, to the confederate monuments for one purpose: So they can formulate their OWN opinions before the media frenzy that's going to ravage through Richmond tomorrow. It was a powerful experience, and upon returning back to RCC Headquarters, after an amalgamation of input from the other four RCC youth, Daquan Morton typed with fervor and produced the piece below. Most often, we have the distinct honor of being the voice for our youth-- an honor built on our deep relationships and trust with them. What is written below is THEIR voice, from THEIR emotion, and of THEIR reasoning. Aside from one sentence removed for ease of comprehension, it is completely unedited.

"Today me and my peers decided to visit the monuments to see what all the fuss was about and we came up with this.Is it more convenient to take down some statues than to improve the real problem of society? A Lot of people think that the problem with society is racism, but racism is only the feeling of one race being better than another. From living in low income areas we have our own ideas about society. Everybody pointing blame at monument avenue and statues that reside there, but those statues never did anything to me or people that i care about. The only thing that ever harmed people in low income areas is the violence that reside there in low income areas. In low income areas 5 kids each [the five who visited the monuments today] from a different area [different apartments] collectively knows twenty-two dead [over the past year], where the protest about that, where are the reporters, where are all the organizations that claim to be to alive to better the lives of blacks. From the day we are born we are taught nobody cares and that nobody can help. What if i told you that there were kids starving in your backyards living in rundown buildings? What if i told you that there are kids that rather rob,steal and kill rather than going in the house with nothing to eat? Everyday kids like these say to themselves “do whatever to get to them bands [money] and if they don't give it to me ima take it”, now you might think that makes them savages or ruthless but it's all we know. The schools we go to are unaccredited and broke meaning everybody young,dumb, and broke. Instead of using money to knock down statues that most people in low income areas never even seen how about using that moving to improve schools,fix up the community that we see everyday, or why not protest in our neighborhoods where we see violence and hate the most. We all was taught about pride and loyalty, but why nobody ever taught us not to die over the neighborhood that our mother renting. We live in two different worlds we on instagram holding money to our ears but you’ll don't call that money over there in your world. Everybody wants to help but nobody is really helping are they?"

-Written by Daquan Morton (age 17), on behalf of the following RCC Youth: Cahlee Minor (16), DaMonte Cosby (16), Tawante Nash (17), William Turner (16).

Inches and chance were all that separated Bethany Harper, 12, from the bullets that ripped t…

Richmond officials proclaimed a return to normalcy a day after dueling protests at the Rober…

Richmond police say they’re preparing for the worst ahead of a small rally in support of Confederate monuments planned for Saturday, but so fa…

LIVE: Coverage of the pro-Confederate rally and counterprotests in Richmond 

Two questions kept coming up Thursday ahead of a small rally planned Saturday by a little-known Confederate heritage group that’s generating s…


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




