


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Bell: Jackson's a quarterback. Just ask him. Or look at the numbers. Or listen to NFL decision makers.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    USA TODAY Sports' Lindsay H. Jones and Mike Jones tell us what they heard from the quarterback prospects at the NFL combine.
    USA TODAY Sports

Former Louisville, QB Lamar Jackson is a two-time ACC offensive player of the year.
(Photo: Jamie Rhodes, USA TODAY Sports)

INDIANAPOLIS — Lamar Jackson served up a pretty strong message, repeatedly, during his 15 minutes at the podium Friday during the NFL scouting combine: He’s a quarterback.


“Whoever likes me at quarterback, that’s where I’m going,” the former Louisville star declared.


“That’s strictly my position.”


All the buzz surrounding Jackson has focused on the possibility of him becoming a wide receiver. Hall of Fame general manager Bill Polian generated headlines recently by insisting that Jackson switch positions. On Friday, a report surfaced on NFL Network stating that multiple teams have asked Jackson to work out Saturday at both quarterback and receiver.


“No teams have asked me to be a wide receiver,” Jackson countered. “I don’t know where that comes from. Strictly quarterback.”


You’d think that statement would have cleared it up. But Jackson, 21, fielded no fewer than a dozen questions about the topic that would not quit.


More: Josh Rosen, Baker Mayfield, Lamar Jackson all show genuine selves at NFL scouting combine


More: Baker Mayfield: I'll be 'brutally honest' with NFL teams about past incidents


More: Sam Darnold focused on curtailing turnovers, not reworking throwing motion


More: Josh Rosen wants to leave NFL teams with no questions about his commitment


Would you at least consider working out at receiver?


Jackson: “I’m not going to be a wide receiver tomorrow. At all. Quarterback is my position."


This whole subject should be insulting to a man who won the Heisman Trophy in 2016. The past two years, Jackson passed for 7,203 yards and 57 touchdowns in a pro-style offense coached by Bobby Petrino, one that also produced former first rounder Teddy Bridgewater. Jackson has fleet feet, though never completed 60% of his passes in a college season.


Is this talk about receiver disrespectful?


Jackson: “That’s crazy. I thought I did a good job at quarterback. But they see what they want to see. I’m here at the combine. I’m happy to be here. I’ve just got to show off my ability.”


Perhaps a better question is why Jackson doesn’t have an agent who could perhaps serve as a buffer between the teams and help squash the notion of a position switch. He contends that with a rookie salary cap, he doesn’t need an agent. His mother, Felicia Jones, is serving as his manager. Jackson has an attorney to help with the contract and a marketing rep in tow.


Then again, maybe there are racial overtones in play with the talk about receiver. The NFL is more progressive than it was years ago, when it was typical for athletic African-American quarterbacks to switch to other positions. But I wonder whether some — like Colin Kaepernick, who ignited the protest movement in the NFL and still hasn’t landed a new job despite a dearth of talent at the position — are held to a different standard.


Jackson wouldn’t touch that topic and also danced when asked whether the media has had a role in portraying the issue in a different manner than it would for a white passer. 


“I can’t speak for the media,” he said. “I stay away from it. I’m a quarterback.”


At some point — hopefully, like ASAP — maybe people will quit asking Jackson about being anything other than a quarterback. Clearly, not every NFL decision-maker agrees with Polian, so there’s that.


“I don’t know what the other teams think about him,” Baltimore Ravens GM Ozzie Newsome said Friday. “But on our board, he’s a quarterback.”


Earlier this week, Kansas City Chiefs coach Andy Reid laughed off the suggestion of a switch. Reid has a history of creatively molding his offense to accommodate mobile quarterbacks, with Donovan McNabb, Michael Vick and most recently Alex Smith as examples.


“I think you would want to try it there and see,” Reid said, his response dripping with sarcasm. “He’s pretty good. I mean, I’d give it a whirl.”


Yeah, Andy, I know. It’s rather absurd that we’re going here with Jackson.


“Let’s exhaust that other thing that we know he’s good at and see,” Reid said. “Let’s get him in, let him wing it a little bit. We’ll be able to fit some things in there, I’m sure.”


Jackson has verbalized the message enough himself: He’s a quarterback. Of course, that stance must be best exemplified on the field with his performance and development over due time.


Yet the unspoken message he’s delivered may be essential, too. He sure seems like he’s capable of handling naysayers, as those questions about being a receiver kept rolling off his broad shoulders.


Are you offended?


Jackson: “I have faced adversity my whole life. Coming up in youth football. Going to high school, and they said, ‘You can’t do this.’ Got to college, and I’m here now. So I’m ready for it.”


Still, the questions kept coming with different twists.


Consider the idea of playing quarterback, but being another “Slash” who doubles at another position?


Jackson: “That’s basically another position. You’re just trying to avoid the question. I’m a quarterback. No Wildcat (either). Not the Dolphins with Ronnie Brown and Ricky Williams. No sir.”


Enough already.


Jackson is a quarterback — seemingly equipped to avoid the pressure in more ways than one.


***


Follow NFL columnist Jarrett Bell on Twitter @JarrettBell


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
