


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Eagles' Chris Long, who donated his 2017 base salary worth $1 million to educational charities, said others are close to matching contribution.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' Steve Gardner tells you which players to add and which to drop heading into Week 7 of the fantasy football season.
    USA TODAY Sports

Chris Long is making a huge contribution to educational groups.
(Photo: Jake Roth, USA TODAY Sports)

Eagles defensive end Chris Long, who donated his entire 2017 base salary worth $1 million to benefit educational charities, tweeted Thursday that fans and other athletes were close to matching his contribution. 


He wrote: "Nearing $100k toward a match in just over 24 hrs by fans+athletes! Keep it going. Invest in our youth and education. link in bio! #pledge10"


MORE: USA TODAY Sports' Week 7 NFL picks


MORE: Colin Kaepernick's attorney responds to Donald Trump's NFL tweets by quoting JFK


The campaign, called "Pledge 10 for Tomorrow," also encourages fans and businesses to donate to match Long's contribution.


Long, through the Chris Long Foundation, announced Wednesday that he will donate his next 10 game checks to organizations that support educational equality in the three cities where he has spent his 10-year career — Philadelphia this season, Boston (New England Patriots) and St. Louis (the former St. Louis Rams).


Long, who met Tuesday with NFL owners and commissioner Roger Goodell about ways the league can help players' social causes, had never publicized his donations before this season. But he said last month that he changed his mind because of the controversy involving the national anthem protests and violence during a Ku Klux Klan rally last summer in Charlottesville.


Contributing: Martin Frank of the The (Wilmington) News Journal, part of the USA TODAY Network.


Nearing $100k toward a match in just over 24 hrs by fans+athletes! Keep it going. Invest in our youth and education. link in bio! #pledge10

PHOTOS: NFL Week 7 Power Rankings


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
