
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

03/19/2018 08:53 AM EDT

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

Good Monday morning!


Story Continued Below

Christie vetoed it eight years ago, but now a bill that will close the last big sick leave — or “boat check” — payout loophole has a real chance at becoming law again.

The bill, just like the one Christie vetoed, caps sick leave payouts for all current and future public employees at $15,000, unless they’ve already accumulated more than that, in which case the payout is frozen.

That was never strict enough for Christie, who insisted on zero. But now we have a governor who’s eager to please the public unions. And the police and fire unions don’t like this bill. So the question now is whether what was not strict enough for Christie is too strict for Murphy. Read about it here (on POLITICO Pro). 

WHERE’S MURPHY? At Rutgers in New Brunswick for a 1pm “announcement” 

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “If he did do it it would be inappropriate … Bob Mueller has conducted this investigation so far with great integrity, without leaking and by showing results and I don’t think the president is going to fire somebody like that.” — Gov. Chris Christie on ‘This Week’

HAPPY BIRTHDAY – State Sen. Patrick Diegnan, Assemblywoman Angelica Jimenez, ELEC 825’s Mike Makaraski, fledgling NJ-bred author Philip Roth, 

WHAT TRENTON MADE

NOBODY COULD HAVE PREDICTED MURPHY WOULD RAISE TAXES — “Murphy’s first budget shows how much can change, post-Christie,” by The AP’s Michael Catalini: “New Jersey officially put Chris Christie in the rearview mirror when he left office this year, but Gov. Phil Murphy’s new budget puts the change in administration in starker focus. Gone is an inherent opposition to higher taxes, public-sector unions and increased spending. Murphy, a Democrat, unveiled his $37.4 billion budget Tuesday, offering a contrast with his Republican predecessor. ‘It represents a sharp break from the direction we had been taken over the past eight years and turns our state’s trajectory to one of opportunity and fairness for all,’ Murphy said. Republicans say the state can’t afford the spending or the tax hikes and are predicting a retrospective rise in Christie’s approval rating ‘Let’s see whether Chris Christie is a little more popular a year from now than he is at this moment,’ Assembly Minority Leader Jon Bramnick said.” Read the report

AND WHO COULD’VE PREDICTED THAT SLAVISH DEVOTION TO AN UNPOPULAR GOV WHO USED PARTY RESOURCES TO BOOST HIS OWN AMBITION WOULDN’T PAY OFF? — “Are N.J. Republicans really doomed now that Christie is gone and Murphy is in charge?” by NJ Advance Media’s Brent Johnson: “For eight years, the Republican Party in New Jersey revolved around one person: Chris Christie. But the two-term governor is gone now, and the Jersey GOP is in poor shape. Almost irrelevant, really, with Democrat Phil Murphy in the governor's seat and his party firmly in control of the state Legislature. In fact, Republicans are left with their smallest number of state lawmakers in nearly four decades -- 41 out of 120 seats in the Legislature. In Washington, no Republican has been elected to the U.S. Senate since 1972, and Democrats are aiming at picking up a U.S. House seat or three in November's mid-term elections. Few states have a lower opinion of Republican President Donald Trump, and registered Democratic voters outnumber Republicans nearly 2-to-1. 'Do we have one?' Matt Hale, a political science professor at Seton Hall University, said when asked about the state of New Jersey's GOP. 'I think the Republican Party is trying to regroup and figure out what life after Chris Christie is like. And they haven't figured that out yet.' 'It's a tough time being a Republican in New Jersey right now,' Hale added. So what in the world is the party to do now? Insiders say Republicans should follow this formula: Take aim at Murphy and stay far away from Trump.” Read the report

SCHOOL AID — Murphy open to school-funding changes as some question aid figures, by POLITICO's Linh Tat: Gov. Phil Murphy is open to revising the school-funding formula as part of this year’s budget negotiations and has not ruled out providing supplemental aid to districts, his chief of staff said Friday. The comment came one day after the state released preliminary school aid figures for the upcoming fiscal year, which showed districts receiving an average increase of 5.1 percent. The Murphy administration has touted the fact that 94 percent of districts, or 546 communities, would receive some boost in aid, and that no district or charter school would receive less than it got this year. But some lawmakers and school administrators aren’t happy that districts which have been overfunded by the state for years will continue down that path — and in some cases, see their funding increased — while underfunded districts are still playing catch-up. Read the report

 —“The list: For these 10 district, more school aid still means much less” Read the report

—“Late governor's ashes take trip to saloon, per his wishes” Watch the video

—“Mike on Murphy's tax hikes: Expect backlash. Julie: Not terrifying. Plus, tips for the gov” Read the interview

—“Murphy candidate for commission post loses vote” Read the report

—“NJ marijuana legalization prospects have lawyers getting serious about weed” Read the report

THEY CALL HIM MELLI YELLI — Juan Melli, the Hoboken/Dawn Zimmer spokesman who founded Blue Jersey a decade ago, and with whom I briefly overlapped at Politicker, is joining Mercury Public Affairs as a vice president. Mercury has deep ties to Chris Christie (Mike DuHaime), Bob Menendez (Michael Soliman) and Cory Booker (Modia Butler). Melli: "I am excited to join such a talented team and look forward to helping clients in New Jersey and across the country solve their most complex challenges.” Soliman: “As a respected and experienced communications expert, Juan will be a tremendous asset to our team and provide best-in-class service to our clients." Here’s some fun awkwardness: DuHaime did polling work for the Rockefeller Group regarding its north Hoboken development. As you may recall, Zimmer — when Melli was spokesman — accused Kim Guadagno of pressuring her to sign off on that project. 

CRAZY ONLINE POLL OF THE DAY: The Jersey Journal asks “Do you believe President Trump’s claim that he makes things up?” Trump last week told donors he made up his assertion that the U.S. has a trade deficit with Canada during a meeting with Justin Trudeau (it doesn’t). So you either believe Trump’s claim that he made that up, or you believe Trump made up his story about making it up. “No” is not a valid answer. 

CARTOON BREAK — “The ghost of governor's past,” by Drew Sheneman See the cartoon

—“GOP Attacks on Jim Florio are Strategically Foolish” Read the column

THE TRUMP ERA

CAUGHT IN THE WEBBER — GOP struggles with post-Frelinghuysen primary fight, by POLITICO's Matt Friedman: Staring down a blue wave, Republicans in New Jersey’s 11th Congressional District are facing a stark choice as they defend a seat they’ve held for more than three decades: back a down-the-line conservative or an unorthodox newcomer who might broaden the party’s appeal in New Jersey even as Donald Trump threatens to shrink it. Rodney Frelinghuysen, a blue-blooded 12-term incumbent who chairs the House Appropriations Committee, is retiring rather than face the first serious general election challenge of his congressional career, in a district Hillary Clinton carried by one point in the 2016 presidential election. The conundrum for New Jersey Republicans is one the party will face in vulnerable seats across the country as they attempt to navigate a mid-term election where the president’s party typically loses seats — and where anti-Trump sentiment on the left is fueling talk of a Democratic wave. This district’s primary could be a referendum on how big the party’s tent will be for the midterm. Read the report 

IMMIGRATION — “ACLU Sues Trump Administration for Detaining Asylum Seekers Indefinitely,” by WNYC’s Matt Katz: — “The American Civil Liberties Union and other human and civil rights organizations filed a class-action lawsuit Thursday against the Trump Administration for what it describes as the unconstitutional, indefinite detention of immigrants fleeing persecution and seeking asylum. And it's using a detainee in New Jersey to make its case. The suit says a man identified only as N.J.J.R. was beaten in his native Venezuela because he opposed the government. He arrived in the United States in October seeking refuge, but after he declared asylum he was detained as his case was adjudicated. Though N.J.J.R. proved to asylum officers that he had a credible fear of persecution, agents from Immigration and Customs Enforcement did not release him on parole to a sponsor, who had offered to give him a place to stay. He is still being held at Essex County Jail.” Read the report

PORTAL TO HELL — Gateway chairman resolutely optimistic in face of dire signs from D.C., by POLITICO's Dana Rubinstein: With President Donald Trump apparently dead set on denying federal funding for a vital new rail tunnel linking New Jersey with New York’s Penn Station, one tunnel booster is drawing sustenance from an unusual source: his experience in the fight to legalize same-sex marriage in New York state. “I was asked at that time ... ‘Well, how is it going to get done?’” Steve Cohen, who was then Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s second-in-command, said Friday. “And I said, 'I’m not sure. I just know it’s going to get done.’” It did, thanks in part to the Cuomo administration’s unexpected ability to win the backing of wealthy Republican donors, paired with the changing zeitgeist. Cohen now chairs the Gateway Program Development Corporation, the multi-agency group tasked with building a new tunnel to Penn Station, rehabilitating the one that’s there and building a new bridge across the Hackensack River. The existing tunnel and Portal Bridge are both 107 years old and falling apart. On Friday morning, in fact, a bridge malfunction snarled Amtrak and NJ Transit service for several hours. "This morning is an example of what happens to commuters and the economy when the federal government is missing in action," New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy said in a statement. Read the report

— "Not Again! Old N.J. Bridge Gets Stuck, Halting NYC Trains," by Bloomberg's Stacie Sherman: “Welcome (back) to commuter hell. Amtrak and NJ Transit were forced to suspend trains to New York’s Pennsylvania Station during Friday morning rush hour after the decrepit swing bridge over the Hackensack River jammed open. NJ Transit first alerted commuters to the stuck bridge about 5:30 a.m. on Twitter. Limited service resumed about 8 a.m. after the span was coaxed into action.” Read the report

FIRST CHRISTIE, NOW TRUMP. THE MASOCHIST PARTY — “Trump's poison could kill fellow Republicans in Jersey,” by The Star-Ledger’s Tom Moran: “Rep. Tom MacArthur, alone among New Jersey Republicans, has embraced Donald Trump with a full bear hug. Maybe he thought that would work out for him politically, but it's shaping up to be a disaster. He's toast as a statewide candidate in Blue Jersey, where Republicans had hoped he might rise to the U.S. Senate or governor's mansion. And now he has fresh reason to worry that he could even lose his seat in Congress. That reason is Conor Lamb, the rookie Democrat from southwestern Pennsylvania who just stunned the political world by marching into deep red territory and grabbing a seat from a Trump loyalist. The ground is shifting, and it's happening across the country … David Wasserman, the analyst at Cook Political Report, is skeptical that Kim can win. ‘In Pennsylvania, part of it was Trump, but part of it was the quality of the Democratic candidate,’ he says. ‘Trump is lifting Democrats across the board. But they need a credible candidate, and I'm not sure Andy Kim has that yet.’” Read the report

*TOM MACARTHUR NOTWITHSTANDING — ”Donald Trump may not like what these Jersey Republicans did,” by NJ Advance Media’s Jonathan D. Salant: “Three New Jersey House Republicans -- more than any other state -- were among the 10 lawmakers who most often broke away when a majority of their party and a majority of Democrats were on opposite sides, according to Congressional Quarterly's annual vote studies … Rep. Frank LoBiondo was the third biggest dissenter on House votes, deviating from the party line 21 percent of the time. Rep. Chris Smith was fifth at 17 percent and Rep. Leonard Lance ninth with 15 percent.” Read the report

— “Leonard Lance’s congressional district now a ‘toss up,’ report says” Read the report

WHAT 100% RATING FROM THE NRA? — “Van Drew gets Atlantic County Democratic nomination by a landslide,” by The Press of Atlantic City’s Nicole Leonard: “Jeff Van Drew officially has support from the Atlantic County Democrats after winning the nomination by a landslide Sunday at the county convention. Nearly 400 people came out for the 33rd Atlantic County Democratic Convention at Greate Bay Country Club to nominate their pick for New Jersey’s 2nd Congressional District seat and support Democratic freeholder candidates running against Republican incumbents. State Sen. Van Drew, D-Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland, who is considered a front-runner to replace outgoing U.S. Rep. Frank LoBiondo, R-2nd, got 131 votes and secured the nomination against three other candidates vying for the position … Will Cunningham, a Vineland native and former staff member for U.S. Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., came in second with 41 votes.” Read the report

LOCAL

JUST IN TIME FOR MURPHY TO AVOID AWKWARD QUESTIONS ABOUT IT — “Deal reached to end Jersey City teacher strike,” by The Jersey Journal’s Terrence T. McDonald: “A deal was reached Sunday night on a new contract for Jersey City's teachers, paving the way for them to return to classrooms Monday morning after striking on Friday. The tentative contract agreement would end an eight-month dispute between the 29,000-student district and its 3,100 teachers. It must be approved by the nine-member school board and members of the teachers union. ‘I am very proud of the board trustees who took time away from work and family over the last nine weeks to reach this historic milestone,’ Board of Education President Sudhan Thomas said in a statement. The deal came after a 13-hour negotiation session Sunday.” Read the report

DO YOU KNOW WHO I AM? — “He told cops 'I'm a f--king judge' after failed sobriety test. And he beat DWI rap,” by NJ Advance Media’s S.P. Sullivan: “Wilfredo Benitez was passed out in the driver's seat of his silver BMW hatchback at 2:13 a.m. with his hazard lights flashing along the shoulder of Route 80, records show. Two New Jersey state troopers who found his vehicle on the stretch of highway in Teaneck quickly began to suspect he was drunk. Benitez struggled with the field sobriety test, according to a police report, but insisted he wasn't a ‘drug addict’ or ‘a drunk.’ He was ‘a f--king judge,’ he said. Newly obtained video shows Benitez -- a municipal judge in East Orange, Belleville and Bloomfield -- repeatedly told the two troopers about his position before they cuffed him on suspicion of drunken driving. He then told the trooper reading him his rights that he was ‘being a d--k,’ the video shows. Police later administered a breath test that found Benitez's blood-alcohol level was twice the legal limit, but the court case against the judge fell apart because of flaws in the investigation, NJ Advance Media has learned … ‘You're wasting your time and you know it,’ Benitez said, repeatedly interrupting the trooper. ‘I'll fight you. You know you're being a d--k. I will f--king fight you.’” Read the report

PSST… YOU’RE WEARING BODY CAMERAS — “WATCH: Trenton cop pummels suspect, department clique attempts cover-up,” by The Trentonian’s Penny Ray: “Disturbing body camera video of police apprehending a suspect shows a city cop punch the man after he was already on the ground with other cops attempting to place him in custody. That officer, identified as Drew Inman, is the son of Hamilton cop Daniel Inman, and he was recruited in May 2016 under the tenure of Trenton Police Director Ernest Parrey Jr., a longtime friend of the elder Inman ever since graduating the academy together in 1985. After Drew Inman pummeled the suspect to the point where he screamed, he bragged about it to another cop who was recording the incident via body camera. Now, Inman and other city police officers are under investigation by federal authorities, according to several reliable sources with intimate knowledge of the case. But that’s just the beginning of the story. Since then, sources say, some in the department have schemed to cover up the involvement of Inman, as well as one of his police academy classmates Mark Kieffer III, the son of Captain Mark Kieffer Jr.” Read the report

NEWARK — “39 candidates, 10 positions, and a shot to shape the future of N.J.'s largest city,” by NJ Advance Media’s Karen Yi: “With less than two months to go until Newark's municipal elections, the final roster of candidates is bringing back some familiar faces eager to jump back into the fray and breaking old alliances. At least five people who have held elected office before in the city want back into politics and two former city workers are challenging their ex-boss for his seat. Others who were once supported by Mayor Ras Baraka are running on his opponent's slate. There are 39 candidates who were certified for the city's May 8 elections -- in which all nine council seats and the mayor's term are up. Newark is in control of its schools after 22 under state takeover. New brands like Whole Foods are coming to town, and there's an increased appetite among developers saying yes to Newark. As residents in the changing city debate the need for affordable housing, safer streets and higher-paying jobs, a crowded field of politicians is fighting for the chance to lead the way.” Read the report

CRUZING FOR A BRUISING DECISION — “Judge halts Paterson mayoral ballot over Cruz residency,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “A judge on Friday issued an order halting the printing of ballots in the Paterson mayoral election pending a March 26 hearing regarding the residency of one of the candidates. The order by Passaic County Superior Court Assignment Judge Ernest Caposela stemmed from a lawsuit filed on Friday seeking to remove Alex Cruz from the field of candidates on the argument that Cruz resides in Little Falls and not in Paterson. Cruz’s residency has been in question ever since the longtime Paterson police officer announced his intention to run for the city’s top job in January. The lawsuit was filed by Yanet Iturralde Santana, who had hired a private investigator to check Cruz’s Paterson address along with the home in Little Falls where he acknowledges having lived for many years.” Read the report

FIRST CORRUPT JC COP TO GET PRISON TIME — “Ex-Jersey City cop sentenced to 18 months in prison for off-duty jobs scheme,” by The Jersey Journal’s Patrick Villanova: “A former Jersey City police officer was sentenced yesterday to 18 months in prison for his role in an off-duty jobs scheme that included paying bribes to get off-duty work he did not perform, federal authorities announced. Michael O'Leary, 35, of Jersey City, previously pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge John Michael Vazquez to one count of conspiracy to commit bribery and was facing up to five years in prison. Vazquez imposed the 18-month sentence yesterday in Newark federal court. O'Leary is the third ex-cop sentenced as part of federal investigation of the city's off-duty jobs program, which has ensnared 11 officers total, including ex-Police Chief Phil Zacche.” Read the report

OCEAN COUNTY —“NJ school changes gun rule after NRA group’s lawsuit threat,” by NJ101.5’s Dan Alexander: “LACEY — A school district under fire from gun advocates has changed a student handbook after the state chapter of the NRA threatened a civil rights lawsuit over a rule that ostensibly prohibited students from handling guns off school grounds. The controversy erupted this week after a Facebook post claimed that two students had been punished with detention after they shared a picture captioned ‘fun day at the range.’” Read the report 

RI.P. — “John D. Burzichelli, former mayor, dies at 83,” by NJGlobe’s David Wildstein: “John D. Burzichelli., a former Mayor of Paulsboro and the father of Assemblyman John J. Burzichelli, passed away today. He was 83.” Read the report

—“Long resigns as Cumberland Dem Chairman” Read the report

—“Paterson DPW director Manuel Ojeda returned to work after assault conviction” Read the report 

—“Lodi school board appoints Latina trustee Leslie Vizcaino” Read the report

—“Two N.J. congressmen call for ban on tourist helicopter flights following fatal crash” Read the report

—“Bayonne election is 4AO: Political Insider” Read the column

—“Investors bid $1.4 million at auction of Paterson properties” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

HIGHER EDUCATION, LOWER STANDARDS — “Princeton students want a softer penalty for cheating. Are they wrong?” by NJ Advance Media’s Adam Clark: “After years of Princeton doling out one-year suspensions for first-time violations of its Honor Code, students passed a referendum this fall to reduce the standard penalty for cheating on exams to disciplinary probation -- or so they thought. With the vote, they ignited a messy and historic fight that has divided the student body, provoked alumni and prompted the administration to intervene. ‘Academic integrity is one of the hallmarks of a Princeton education,’ university officials told students in January, when Princeton put the suggested revisions on hold until the faculty makes a recommendation to accept or reject them. … The dispute stems from what probably seemed like a simple pact in 1893, when Princeton professors agreed not to proctor exams in exchange for students pledging not to cheat and to report anyone who even looked like they were trying to gain an unfair advantage.” Read the report

—“AR-15, bomb kit seized from ex-Cornell student from N.J.” Read the report

OH, HE’S A LITTLE WALKAWAY — “Jon Bon Jovi's son helped lead a walkout at his N.J. school,” by NJ Advance Media’s Marisa Iati: “It was a Saturday soon after 17 people were brutally killed in Parkland, Fla., when Jake Bongiovi and Rickey Eng saw plans on Instagram for a national student walkout. The pair, both sophomores at The Pennington School, felt inspired by the movement that called for students to leave their schools in unison in support of government action to prevent school shootings. ‘It's enough. It's happened too many times that we watch it,’ said Bongiovi, 15, who is the son of rock star and New Jersey native Jon Bon Jovi. ‘And we cannot let it go away this time.’” Read the report

POLITICO Space is our new, free weekly briefing on the policies and personalities shaping the second space age in Washington and beyond. Sign-up today to start receiving the newsletter right at launch on April 6th. Presented by Boeing.

THEY FOUGHT WARS OVERSEAS ONLY TO HAVE TO FIGHT AN ICE CREAM WAR AT HOME — “Jersey Shore ice cream wars. Who gets to sell?” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Avalon R. Zoppo: “For decades, they have peddled ice cream on the beaches of Ventnor, selling frozen treats to generations of families and becoming popular fixtures along the sand. The city’s ice cream vendors have long been drawn from the ranks of veterans and retired firefighters, who pay $55 a year for licenses to sell. Earlier this month, the city proposed to change that by ending contracts with its 15 vendors and auctioning off a single, larger license to the highest bidder, a system that brings in $85,000 a year to neighboring Margate. The backlash was swift. Beachgoers in Ventnor, it seems, are nothing if not loyal. Hundreds of people flooded social media and called city hall with complaints and suggestions. A petition against the change started by homeowners Maryse and Mark Naman garnered more than 12,000 signatures in less than four days. ‘Let’s help our Veterans [and] keep it for Veterans only,’ one Ventnor resident wrote on the town’s Facebook page amid a slew of similar comments. Within days, the idea was tabled.’” Read the report

—“They're going to Disney World! The Twisters of South Jersey, a special needs cheerleading team, heads to Florida for national championship.” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC