Pennsylvania newsrooms have been documenting the opioid crisis for many years. But now, in a special project, “State of Emergency: Searching for Solutions to Pennsylvania’s Opioids Crisis,” they are marshaling their resources to spotlight county by county what Pennsylvanians are doing to try to reverse the soaring number of overdose deaths.


Journalists have produced text stories, photos, video and audio in more than 50 counties to cast a spotlight on strategies and initiatives that are showing promise. This initiative is a joint effort of the Pennsylvania Associated Press Media Editors, the Pennsylvania Society of News Editors and the Pennsylvania Associated Press.


MAP: Drug-related deaths in Pa. counties »


Tapping into the Civil War 


A building that was used to care for wounded during the Battle of Gettysburg may be renovated as a substance abuse recovery center. The former Mercy House in downtown Gettysburg would include a drop-in center with offices for individual and group counseling and four apartments for six recovering addicts. The county hopes to have the center operating in 2019 and expects it to be sustained through state funding and rental income. — Gettysburg Times


Serenity houses 


Gus DiRenna, a former heroin user and drug dealer, offers a simple formula for recovery: a private room, an honest job and a sponsor. He believes he’s found a sustainable model that does it all. He houses people in recovery, charging them reasonable rents for single rooms. He connects them to others with more experience in recovery. And he employs some of them in the hard work of converting other properties into shelter for others with similar problems. — Pittsburgh Post-Gazette


Bucking the trend? 


One county in Pennsylvania is seeing a sharp decrease in opioid overdose deaths. Officials in Armstrong County and beyond are asking why, and will it last. The Armstrong-Indiana-Clarion Drug and Alcohol Commission has tried a variety of commonly used tools to combat the overdose death epidemic, including participation in the “Warm Hand-Off Program.” That program provides consultation and resources from certified recovery specialists to help in getting addicts into treatment — sometimes directly from hospital emergency rooms following an overdose. — Leader-Times


Newspaper vs. coroner 


The Beaver County Times is headed to court in a battle with the county coroner over data on local drug overdose deaths. The media company wants to investigate a claim from health care and law enforcement officials: that the ever-growing number of overdose deaths caused by opioid addiction affects every community in the county, regardless of size or affluence. — The Beaver County Times


Coroners on frontline 


Autopsies to determine the kind of drugs an overdose victim had in their system are an important tools aiding law enforcement in the war against opioid abuse. Bedford County Coroner Rusty Styer notes new drugs like carfentanil, which can be deadly to the touch, have sparked an increased awareness of the need for extreme caution at the scene of a suspected overdose death. — The Gazette


Courting sobriety 


A new drug treatment program, built on a deep commitment by the Berks County court system, is seeing strong results. A team of judges, probation officers, public defenders and assistant district attorneys meets monthly to brainstorm ideas. They’ve already begun programs, including exercise groups, a book club and garden club. Their aim is to create a greater sense of community for those who have completed these programs. — Reading Eagle 


Businesses step up 


More than $3 million from a nonprofit funded by two dozen Blair County businesses have allowed local police to expand drug investigations, both in numbers and scale, over the last decade. The grants have gone to paying police overtime, adding a full-time drug prosecutor, training and equipment, including armored vests. The contributions also fund treatment and prevention. “Operation Our Town has played a large role in cleaning up what is going on here,” Altoona police say. — Altoona Mirror 


Highlighting small steps 


Bradford County Coroner Tom Carman has seen the number of drug deaths triple compared with this time last year, but says there’s a lot that’s making a difference at the local level. This includes responders, schools and even individuals arming themselves with naloxone, and the rise in local rehabilitation facilities. — The Daily Review 


Pathways to treatment 


Experts agree time is of the essence when someone asks for help recovering from opioid addiction. State and county officials are working to open more ways to get that person the assistance he or she needs. — Bucks County Courier Times 


Treatment in jail 


A large majority of inmates, as many as 70 to 80 percent, have substance abuse issues, and many of them detox from drugs behind bars. Some prison systems are recognizing the need to do more to help them maintain sobriety both behind bars and on the outside. — Bucks County Courier Times 


Children’s agency 


Butler County’s Children and Youth staff has become more proactive in the midst of the opioid crisis. The agency has been dispatching a staffer to the scene of any overdose victims where children are present. Officials have ramped up pill-collection drives in an attempt to clear homes of drugs that could be abused by senior citizens as well as younger family members who live in the home. Organizations such as Hope for Broken Hearts offer an ear and strength in numbers for those who have lost loved ones to the epidemic. — PennLive/Patriot News 

Building coalitions 


When the opioids crisis first hit Cambria County, schools, health care agencies, social services, businesses and law enforcement agencies attacked the scourge on different fronts. But nothing seemed to make a dent. Then they realized they had to coordinate their efforts, and a coalition was formed. A website was created to communicate events and partnerships were formed with news outlets. Now, the coalition’s director says, “It’s purposeful, aligned action.” — The Tribune-Democrat. 


Task force 


A group of community leaders in Carbon County meets each month with a common goal of eliminating overdose deaths. The diverse group of civic-minded people is striving to understand how the opioid epidemic is affecting the county and what it can do to make a difference. — Standard Speaker 


Narcan kits 


Last year, Gov. Tom Wolf announced a statewide effort to combat the opioid crisis, to use $5 million in funding to provide more than 63,000 Narcan kits to first responders around the state over a two-year period. In Centre County, Dr. Kasandra Botti of Mount Nittany Medical Center is coordinating the program and working to expand the network of first responders receiving the life-saving drug. — The Daily Collegian 


Warm handoff follow-up 


Though Chester County, with the state’s highest per-capita income, calls itself Pennsylvania’s “healthiest and wealthiest” county, it is not at all immune to the opioid crisis. Officials here recently started adding on to the “warm handoff” concept by adding steps aimed at helping people in addiction not only recover, but also stay in recovery. — The Philadelphia Inquirer. 


Community action 


A DuBois man, spurred by the pain that opioids have inflicted on his family, is spearheading a citizens’ movement in Clearfield County. John Saunders says he’s working to form a coalition to work with authorities in exposing drug dealers. The group, Community Action Against Drugs, already has more than 1,000 followers on its 3-month-old Facebook page. — Courier Express/Tri-County Sunday 


Policing 


In Columbia County, Berwick police officers are trying to extend a helping hand to addicts, guiding them toward treatment even as they crack down on drug dealers. The program is in its infancy, but Chief Kenneth Strish has high hopes it will both cut down on crime and save lives. “Protect and serve,” the chief says, also applies to those with an addiction. — Press-Enterprise. 


Everyone’s problem 


Communities across Pennsylvania are embracing the need to focus on prevention and treatment in addressing the opioids crisis. In Crawford County, the local chapter of the advocacy group Not One More says it has seen growing community support for getting help for those battling addiction. But it says more can be done. — Meadville Tribune. 


Intervention court 


Cumberland County’s opioid intervention court is the first in the state and the second in the country to address the connection of opioid overdose victims and their relationship with the criminal justice system. The program looks to provide assistance, including medication assistance, in a strict format as perpetrators work their way through the system, often on nondrug-related charges, such as theft. — The Sentinel 


Staying clean 


The opioid epidemic takes a huge toll on those left behind. Some loved ones choose to do something about it. Elizabeth Loranzo died March 19, 2017, of an accidental overdose from taking heroin laced with fentanyl. Her mother, Wendy Loranzo, created The Elizabeth Loranzo iCare Foundation, a nonprofit organization that provides support, financial and otherwise, to people battling addiction, depression, anxiety, domestic abuse and alcoholism. Elizabeth’s fiance, Kyle, hasn’t used heroin since the day she died. This is his story. — The Press &amp; Journal 


Art awareness 


The sculpture is beautiful, yet horrific. In an exhibit opening June 24, 5,577 baggies, each with a crystal bead representing a person who lost their addiction battle in Pennsylvania last year, dangle by filament from the ceiling of the State Museum. This dramatic work of art was constructed by those touched by addiction and serves to illuminate and bring awareness to the epidemic affecting so many across the state. It is one thing to hear the numbers, but a whole other experience to see them. — PennLive/The Patriot-News 


Medication access 


Medication assisted treatment is among the most promising solutions to Pennsylvania’s opioids epidemic. Studies show people trying to recover from addiction using one of three potent anti-addiction drugs are 50 percent less likely to die from an overdose than those who try to recover without it. They also stay in treatment longer, and are more likely to return to treatment if they relapse. The state is working to extend availability of these “gold standard” medications into Pennsylvania’s hardest hit rural areas. — PennLive/The Patriot News 


County of firsts 


Delaware County has been a pioneer in the fight against opioids. It has notched important firsts in Pennsylvania in the use of Narcan by first responders to aid people overdosing, and also in the use of litigation to fight pharmaceutical companies that profited off the excessive prescribing that fueled the opioid crisis. It’s even had a drug treatment court for 20 years. — The Philadelphia Inquirer


Faith-based help 

Local churches, the Salvation Army and other faith-based organizations are on the front lines in the battle against opioid addiction in Erie County. The Salvation Army nationwide operates more free residential treatment programs than any other addiction rehabilitation service. In Erie, its downtown center can house as many as 50 men. While the therapy is faith-based, everyone is welcome. — Erie Times-News


Recovery house 


Genesis House is a transitional home in Fayette County that works to turn around the lives of parolees, those ordered by the court to be there and those with completed sentences. About a dozen men in different stages of addiction recovery live there. Genesis also operates a construction business made up of house members who learn and apply trade skills while generating money to keep the home open. — Herald-Standard


Erasing the stigma 


Those battling the opioids crisis in Franklin County have one overriding goal: ending the stigma of addiction and seeking treatment for it. If people are embarrassed, the district attorney says, “you don’t confront it, it inevitably gets worse.” — Public Opinion


Work program 


Getting a recovering addict back to work can be one of the last and most important steps in completing his or her treatment. That’s easier said than done, with the risks associated with hiring someone who is an admitted addict and their potential of having a criminal record. Fulton Behavioral Health in McConnellsburg is developing a pilot program it will implement this fall to find patients meaningful work. — PennLive/Patriot News 


Volunteer coalition 


Two years ago, Green County residents were alarmed by the soaring rate of drug and alcohol addiction in their community. In response, the Coalition for a Brighter Greene was born. The volunteer effort has since then spawned prevention, treatment and recovery programs and is working on a host of new initiatives, including a help line and truancy mediation. — Herald-Standard 


Neonatal care 


The littlest victims of the opioids epidemic — babies with neonatal abstinence syndrome — have found passionate advocates in Indiana County. Josh and Stephanie Rosenberger speak from experience as they counsel other local couples deciding whether to become foster parents for addicted babies. The need for foster homes is great and the Rosenbergers want to see the formation of a mentorship program. — Indiana Gazette 


Town hall help 


In one of the state’s hard-hit areas for opioids abuse, a town hall worked to educate the community on aspects of the epidemic. People on the front lines of the fight against drug abuse shared insights during a roundtable in Sykesville. Many in the audience were searching for information on drug rehabilitation and ways family members can encourage friends or co-workers to seek help. — The Punxsutawney Spirit 


Medicine cabinets 


Juniata County agencies are working to educate senior citizens on how to keep their prescriptions out of the hands of drug abusers. The agencies visit senior centers to explain the Prescription Drug Take Back Program. Seniors bring their medications to centers where members of probation and parole departments take them for disposal. The seniors are also given tips how to keep current prescriptions hidden from visitors in their home. — Lewistown Sentinel 


Help cards 


It seemed like a missing link. People who pick up opioid prescriptions and syringe packages from pharmacies do not get any information about where to find immediate and long-term help for addiction. Michael Arcangeletti, a recovering addict clean for almost a decade and graduate student studying social work, is changing that. He printed 1,000 information cards and is working with pharmacies to have the cards included with prescriptions. The cards contain phone numbers, addresses and websites for medical providers and organizations that offer addiction help. — The Times-Tribune 


Battle plan 


Community organizations, government agencies, business and health systems are holding quarterly public meetings to coordinate and strengthen efforts throughout Lancaster County. The most recent session finally brought welcome news; Overdose deaths in the county dropped from 47 in January through March 2017 to 36 in the same period this year. Beyond the meetings, the coalition has conducted an extensive needs analysis, produced a strategic plan, and started a public awareness campaign. — LNP News 


Treatment court 


In recent years, Lawrence County Drug Court has morphed into a treatment court. A mental health component has been added to help people through the emotional part of the journey back from addiction, and help them cope with other problems in their lives while they are going through the renaissance. More than 100 people have gotten help through treatment court to break free from illegal pursuits and start living normal, balanced and productive lives. — New Castle News 


Drug dog 


While police and some large security firms employ drug-sniffing dogs, Fred Nell said his small, private business is a rarity in Pennsylvania. His dog Sadie does 25-30 searches per month, and demand for the Lebanon County-based business is booming so much that Nell is considering training a second dog. — Lebanon Daily News 


Revived and Revisited

Two or three days after a person suffers an overdose, Lehigh County police officers and addiction recovery specialists visit that person's home to encourage them to seek treatment. Before the launch in February of the Blue Guardian program, officers were frustrated they couldn't do anything after reviving someone, especially because that person will likely return to their addiction. Officials hope that the model will be adopted in other counties. —The Morning Call


A Luzerne County woman founded the support group Moms of Cherished Angels after her 22-year-old son died last August due to an accidental overdose. A few weeks into their meetings, the women decided talking wasn’t enough. They decided to fill backpacks with toiletries and donate them to those entering rehabilitation centers. They wanted to do something to both keep their children’s memories alive and help others who are suffering. With the packages of toothpaste, shampoo, notebooks and more come notes of encouragement. — Hazleton Standard-Speaker 


Hospital clinics 


One of the newest treatments to combat the opioid crisis in Luzerne County is the Medication-Assisted Treatment Addiction Clinic at Geisinger South Wilkes-Barre hospital. The clinic is similar to a methadone clinic but uses buprenorphine (Suboxone) or naltrexone (Vivitrol) to help suppress withdrawal symptoms and cravings for opioids. Unlike methadone, those drugs can be administered in an office setting or prescribed to take home. The opening of the clinic came during a year when Luzerne County experienced a record 151 drug overdoses, most of them tied to opioids such as heroin and fentanyl. — The Citizens’ Voice


Water bottles 


A veteran Little League umpire is getting the message out in Lycoming County about the dangers of opioids. Barry Rake started his initiative last fall and, with the help of about a dozen volunteers, has already distributed approximately 7,000 water bottles in the county. The plastic sports bottles carry the “Too Smart to Start” slogan and contain a message about drug abuse directed at parents. — PennLive/Patriot-News 


Faces in the fight 


Photo essay: Award-winning photographer and writer John Beale teaches photojournalism at Penn State University. Last month, for this special State of Emergency project, he spent time in Mercer County finding and photographing people who are making a difference in the fight against opioid addiction there. Drug-related deaths in the county increased by 120 percent in two years. — Penn State University 


Rural collaboration 


Better collaboration between agencies, greater funding, a warm handoff program and more resources including Narcan and drop boxes are helping fight opioid abuse in Mifflin County. “Opioid addiction doesn’t discriminate and it does happen to anybody. Now, we have more resources available to fight crisis and we appreciate that,” said Mike Hannon, who leads the area drug and alcohol commission. “The collaboration among agencies in rural Pennsylvania is the strongest asset we have against the problem.” — Lewistown Sentinel 


Medical marijuana 


In April, the state Health Department added treatment of withdrawal symptoms from opioid addiction to the list of approved uses for medical marijuana. Experts explored the potential of cannabis in helping addicts kick drugs during a public forum at the East Stroudsburg University.  — Pocono Record 


Adoptions 


In Montgomery County, adoption agencies are working with new mothers in addiction who do not feel they can raise their child on their own, but don’t want to lose touch with them. Adoptions From the Heart, a private adoption agency, saw its rate of opioid-involved birth mothers rise from 33 percent in 2016 to 52 percent in 2017. The women describe the decisions to give up their babies as the hardest thing they have done in their lives. But they say they are doing it out of love. — The Philadelphia Inquirer 


Recovery through faith 


Schwenksville’s Liberty Ministries offers a home and recovery support for recently released convicts who battled addiction. While in-prison programs are growing, support in transitioning back into the community is limited. More than two dozen faith-based community groups are helping in ways that the prison alone can’t do.— The Intelligencer 


Alternative prescriptions 


Geisinger Health System took efforts to change its internal culture of prescribing opioids, slashing by half its opioid prescriptions and focusing instead on a regimen of pain management combining physical therapy with changes in diet and behavior. Opioid prescriptions dropped from a monthly average of 60,000 to 31,000 since 2014, according to the health system. How Geisinger got there came, in part, through prescribing data and changing how prescriptions are ordered. Geisinger developed a provider dashboard to identify heavy prescribers in its system and educate all clinicians system-wide on best prescribing practices. It also shifted to electronic prescribing. This summer, all prescriptions will be made electronically. — The Daily Item 


Surrender and get help 


Three police departments in Northampton County allow those suffering from addiction to come into the station, surrender their drugs and immediately be paired with drug counseling without fear of jail. The goal is to allow people who seek help a way to cut through the red tape and has also helped improve relationships between the officers and the communities they serve. — The Morning Call


Continuum of care 

The development of a drug rehabilitation facility is at the heart of Northumberland County’s attempt to establish a continuum of care. A former juvenile detention center building is under renovation in Coal Township for a multiservice treatment facility. Gaudenzia Inc. will offer outpatient services along with a seven-bed detox center and 16-bed inpatient rehab facility. County officials think the capacity will quickly expand. The care continuum includes the potential to have 24/7 drug and alcohol assessments for police referrals, potentially funneling people to rehab instead of jail when they’re picked up by police. — The Daily Item 


Building community 


As a rural county, Perry County is not always able to help its residents addicted to opioids, whether in providing medication-assisted treatment or simply transporting them for counseling. But county health officials are focusing on prevention in the battle to fight opioid addiction for the long-term. Helping adults care about their community and about young people is the first step in a campaign they hope reaps benefits far into the future. — The Sentinel 


Safe injection sites 


Earlier this year, Philadelphia became the first U.S. city to declare its support for opening a safe injection site where people can use drugs in the presence of medical staff who can save them from an overdose, and also connect them with treatment. But getting wary residents to accept the idea has been such a challenge that six months later, the city still doesn’t have a firm plan in place. This is the story of two unlikely crusaders for the sites — a man who escaped addiction, and his wife who fears he could always return. — The Philadelphia Inquirer 


Pathways to housing 


Pathways to Housing, a Philadelphia program that is unique in the nation, offers people in addiction a home of their own — without requiring them to be sober first. This housing first approach is finding a strong rate of success not only in getting homeless people off the street, but in giving people the stability they need to start the hard work of recovery. — The Philadelphia Inquirer 


Bias against medication 


Addiction researchers say the best hope for a sustained recovery from opioid use is medication-assisted treatment to blunt the cravings and withdrawal pains that send so many people back to drugs despite their best intentions. Yet 12-step groups mostly define recovery as total abstinence, leaving patients who would like the support of others feeling alone and stigmatized. At Prevention Point, the Philadelphia social service agency that is, among many other things, eastern Pennsylvania’s only official syringe exchange, women in recovery share their experiences — including how medication-assisted treatment has made all the difference in their lives. — The Philadelphia Inquirer 


Support group 


It began with the sharing of stories in a Pike County diner about how addiction affected their lives. The four friends lamented how others in their community were going through this with nowhere to turn for help. In that moment, in the summer of 2016, they decided to create Hope4Pike. Since then, the nonprofit organization has created a support group and is raising public awareness that drug and alcohol addictions are treatable diseases. “As a nation, we have been slow to react to this epidemic,” said Susan Ficken, one of the group’s founders. “We weren’t content to wait for someone else to take action.” — The Times-Tribune 


Diversion programs 


The opiate epidemic has divided public opinion on how to best deal with the users fueling it: Many who sell drugs like heroin to support their habits and who blur the lines between respective ends in a supply chain. Drug courts or prison diversion programs like the one in Potter County have emerged in response to, or alongside, that debate. They offer convicts treatment instead of jail time, and embody the growing belief that drugs are a public health problem and should be treated as such. This is the future of the War on Drugs, and it lives here, high atop the Allegheny Plateau in Pennsylvania's rugged northern tier. — PennLive 


Schuylkill County


Treatment court 


Schuylkill County started a drug treatment court in 2017 to combat the opioid crisis and other forms of drug addiction. After completing inpatient treatment,  people in the program attend weekly court sessions, where participants read from essays about how the program has affected them. Sanctions are levied against participants who violate program rules. This year, the first graduates should finish. With that comes dismissal of charges against them. — The Republican-Herald 


Honest obituary 


When Bridget and Brian Farrell shared their daughter’s poem about fighting drug abuse in her obituary, the online post was read by millions. Delaney Farrell died of a heroin overdose last summer at age 23. She chronicled her battle to stay clean and sober in a journals and letters to loved ones. Her parents hope her words can help others in their fight against addiction. — The Daily Item 


Jobs program 


A program in Somerset County is seeking to help adults in recovery from addiction by finding them meaningful employment. The Chamber of Commerce says the effort also helps meet the need of employers who are facing a labor pool that has shrunk because of the opioids crisis. Candidates chosen for the program have shown a continued commitment to turning their lives around. Once they are hired, a rehab center that is taking part in the initiative gives them random drug tests to assure employers they are staying on the right path. A state lawmaker plans to make a push for a statewide pilot program operating along the same lines. — The Tribune-Democrat


Courthouse help 


Sullivan County is a rural, low-income area with less than 17 people per square mile, and brings many challenges to those battling with addiction. A Better Today provides counseling and other outpatient services right in the county courthouse. — Daily Review 


Drug drop boxes 

Getting unused prescription painkillers off the streets is one way counties are fighting the opioids overdose epidemic. Rural Susquehanna County has used both a drop box and a collection van to give residents a convenient way to dispose of their medications. Neighboring Hazleton in Luzerne County has also started sending a van out on rounds to scoop up unused prescriptions. — The Times-Tribune


Supporting children 


An intervention effort led by the Tioga County Opioid Coalition has dramatically improved coordination among agencies and schools dealing with families affected by opioids. Quick responses by children and youth caseworkers are working as a form of much-needed early intervention. Their ability to get into homes allows staff to reach more people, because not everyone who overdoses ends up hospitalized. — PennLive/Patriot-News 


Inmate relapse prevention 


Wait time is an enemy of addiction recovery and, too often, a delay of days or weeks between leaving jail and landing an open spot in a rehab program is enough to facilitate a relapse. Union County launched a relapse-prevention education program at its jail aimed toward helping inmates stay sober upon release before beginning therapy. Up to eight inmates attend 90-minute sessions over eight weeks with a drug and alcohol counselor from White Deer Run in Lewisburg. Inmates undergo cognitive behavioral therapy, studying stages of change — from the initial stage of not recognizing one’s addiction exists to the final stage of maintaining sobriety. — The Daily Item 


Club serenity 


A club in southwestern Pennsylvania has more members than it wants, and still keeps growing. Club Serenity’s mission is to provide peer support and mentoring for those battling addictions. Its 12-step meetings can attract as many as a staggering 500 people. — Herald-Standard


A sympathetic ear 


A man who spent 37 years in addiction was in danger of throwing away more than three years of clean living when he decided to confide in a supervisor at work. He received a sympathetic ear, and that made all the difference. "Some of us need outside help. We’ve got to go talk to people,” he said. — Observer-Reporter


Opiate blocker 


A woman who battled heroin addiction for five years, and did several stints in jail, decided to be one of the first two people in Washington County to volunteer for a program that combines injection of an “opiate antagonist” with outpatient treatment. If a person who receives the shot tries to get high using an opiate, the medicine blocks it. The woman says other treatment didn’t work at all. “There were times when I’d get out of jail and do drugs within that hour,” she said. “This time it was really different, and the shot had a lot to do with it.” — Observer-Reporter


A communal battle 


What began as a father’s quest four years ago to try to protect his children from addiction has grown to a hands-on heroin prevention task force with nearly 4,000 members online. Wayne County Heroin Prevention Task Force members provide Narcan training and kits to residents, speak about the dangers of opioids to students, help addicts and their families and safely dispose of found needles at parks, playgrounds and elsewhere. — The Times-Tribune


Extended care facility 


With a growing need for extended care facilities in rural areas to treat drug addicts, a Wyoming County father and daughter plan to open the Endless Mountain Extended Care. The intensive, inpatient program for men is the first of its kind in the county. Arianne Scheller, 38, a licensed counselor, teamed up with her father, Stephen Scheller, who began his fight to overcome addiction when she was in high school. “He came to me and said, ‘You have the degree, I have the sobriety. Let’s do something,’ ” she said. — The Times-Tribune


Changing police mindset 


Police and recovering addicts once had a strictly adversarial relationship. When the two groups sat down for a conversation, it helped change attitudes on the force. The meeting was organized by the York area chapter of Not One More, a national support group that work to raise awareness and prevent drug abuse on the local level through education and community partnerships. — York Daily Record