
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

03/26/2018 06:51 AM EDT

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

Good Monday morning!


Story Continued Below

Two days after huge rallies for new gun control laws across the country, including many in New Jersey, the Assembly this morning is scheduled to take up a package of six gun control measures. That includes a reduction in permitted ammunition magazine capacity from 15 to 10 rounds — something long sought after by gun control advocates that first hit a wall with Senate President Sweeney and, after he relented, Gov. Christie.

But the Senate also has a session today, with no gun control bills scheduled for a vote. That’s raised suspicion among some gun control advocates that Sweeney is slow-walking the effort. One source emailed me a copy of an invitation to an April 6 New Jersey Outdoor Alliance dinner honoring Sweeney. The group, while it’s focused on pro-hunting issues, has endorsed candidates who protect “the rights of hunters from draconian gun control measures.” To that source, it suggested Sweeney was tacking right on guns. 

That’s not the case, the senate president told me in an email yesterday. The gun bills, he said, “will get done.”

WHERE’S MURPHY? At a CWA Local 1036 conference at Harrah’s in Atlantic City, 2:15pm

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “Congressman LoBiondo made a 'No Franking' promise when he came to Congress in 1995, to not spend taxpayer dollars on the 'glossy brochures' that members send to their constituents. He has kept that promise throughout his 24 years." — Jason Galanes, spokesman for U.S. Rep. Frank LoBiondo, who in 1994 pledged to serve no more than 12 years if elected. 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY – Booker finance director Lauren Dikis, Monroe Republican Harold Kane

WHAT TRENTON MADE

SWEENEY AND MURPHY TO COMMUNICATE THROUGH SEPARATE RADIO SHOWS — “Ask Senate President Steve Sweeney anything at NJ 101.5,” from NJ 101.5: “Steve Sweeney will join New Jersey 101.5's Eric Scott for "Ask the Senate President" at 7 p.m. on Tuesday. In the tradition of New Jersey 101.5's long-running "Ask the Governor" series, the program will give residents the chance to ask one of the state's highest-ranking officials their questions — about policy, politics or their day-to-day struggles with government. It's a chance to cut through the bureaucracy and get immediate answers. State Senate President Sweeney, though of the same party as new Gov. Phil Murphy, may be the best hope for residents worried the governor will raise their taxes with an ambitious budget full of progressive priorities.” Read the report

TALKING TO EACH OTHER WOULD BE A GOOD WAY TO START — “N.J.'s riskiest budget in a decade counts on tax-shy contingent,” by Bloomberg’s Elise Young: “Murphy has proposed a record $37.4 billion spending plan that presumes lawmakers will approve new taxes on millionaires, retail sales, legalized marijuana, electronic cigarettes, corporations and such services as Uber and Airbnb. That’s the greatest revenue risk for a budget since 2009, the last time a governor tried to tap New Jerseyans for more than $1 billion in general-fund tax increases. If Murphy’s fellow Democrats who control the legislature don’t cooperate, they’ll potentially derail a record $3.2 billion pension payment and more school funding. Should they sign on, they may antagonize voters and drive wealth from a state more burdened than most by President Donald Trump’s new $10,000 limit on state and local tax deductions … After eight years of Christie, Democratic lawmakers should be natural allies with Murphy … Instead, the relationship appears to be chilly as the budget heads to its first legislative committee hearing on March 28.” Read the report

FULOP INSISTS HE WON’T BE IN CONGRESS BY THEN — “In annual address, Fulop pledges a second reval for Jersey City,” by The Jersey Journal’s Terrence T. McDonald: “Jersey City's long-delayed property revaluation is going so swimmingly, Mayor Steve Fulop wants to do it all again next year. Fulop said last night he plans to put a measure before the council in the upcoming weeks that would pave the way for a second reval in 2019, one the mayor said would readjust assessments in the wake of an expected dip in home values caused by the current reval. ‘We are doing our best to make this difficult time as manageable as possible for residents because we don't want any resident to have to struggle,’ he said.” Read the report

“Murphy, in address to progressives, doubles down on budget priorities,” by POLITICO’s Katherine Landergan: “Gov. Phil Murphy on Friday took a hard line on his recently unveiled budget blueprint, defending his proposed tax increases as the key first step toward properly investing in New Jersey‘s future. Murphy, who introduced a $37.4 billion spending plan earlier this month, is asking lawmakers to raise taxes by nearly $1.7 billion to pay for many of his agenda items, including boosting school funding, offering free community college and fixing the state’s beleaguered commuter bus and rail agency. ‘We’ve always thought big and acted big. This is who we have been for generations,’ Murphy told an audience of progressives at a conference in New Brunswick convened by the left-leaning think tank New Jersey Policy Perspective. ‘The first step in our road back is to hold our New Jersey values up.’ Murphy, a Democrat, repeatedly called his proposed tax increases “the right thing to do” and criticized former Republican Gov. Chris Christie, his predecessor, for shrinking government and cutting taxes as a way to benefit his own political image — not New Jersey’s residents. He also railed against the slight reduction in the state sales tax — part of a deal Christie brokered to raise the gas tax — referring to it as a “gimmick.” Read the report

—“Murphy embraced by supporters at progressive confab” Read the report

FISCAL CONSERVATISM IN ACTION — “New Jersey state debt increased by 7.9 percent in Christie’s last year,” by POLITICO’s Katie Jennings: “New Jersey state debt increased 7.9 percent during former Gov. Chris Christie’s final year in office — the highest annual percent change in the past decade, according to an annual debt report released Friday. The state’s bonded obligations increased by nearly $3.4 billion, to $46.1 billion, as of June 30, 2017, according to the report. This included nearly $342.8 million to renovate the Statehouse, a last-minute project Christie pushed through in his final year.The last time the state saw an annual percent increase near as large was in 2008, when the state debt rose 6.34 percent under former Democratic Gov. Jon Corzine. Christie, a Republican who pledged fiscal conservatism, claimed during his final public address in January that he saved New Jersey from the brink of “financial ruin.” But the state saw 11 credit downgrades during his eight-year tenure as unfunded pension liabilities continued to balloon.” Read the report

1/4 MASTRO — “Murphy wants $2.1M to help immigrants with legal aid,” by The AP’s Michael Catalini: “Poor immigrants facing deportation in New Jersey could get access to legal aid under a $2.1 million cash infusion in Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy’s proposed budget. Murphy’s proposed spending, which comes as President Donald Trump oversees a crackdown on immigration, has progressive groups and advocates for legal aid applauding while Republicans question the affordability of higher expenditures. Murphy’s proposal, outlined in documents supporting his first budget address to the Democrat-led Legislature, falls under the heading ‘Ensuring Social Justice,’ but includes scant details. ‘The Governor will support New Jersey residents against Washington attacks by allocating $2.1 million to support nonprofit groups providing legal assistance to those facing detention or deportation,’ the administration says in its budget-in-brief.” Read the report

NOT PAID ACTORS — “Students across New Jersey march to protest gun violence,” by NJTV’s Briana Vannozzi: “The demands for change came from even the youngest of marchers. Throngs of student took to the streets — thousands in Newark — hundreds of thousands more across the country, calling for action and government accountability. “To our lawmakers, please hear me when I say this: We are not here to ask you to do something, we are here to demand that you do something,” said student organizer Princess Sabaroche. “I want to go to school to learn and make a positive change, not go get shot,” student activist Darcy Schleifstein said. The campaign is riding momentum, as outcries for stricter gun control strengthen in the wake of the Parkland, Florida school shooting. In all, 22 marches were held across New Jersey, all organized entirely by student activists, catalysts for social change.” Read the report

—“March for Our Lives 2018 — Coverage from around New Jersey” Read the report

—”NJ Democrats ramp up efforts to move state to left in post-Christie era” Read the report

—“Alcoholism's pain never ends; A brother's memoir: O’Scanlon” Read the op-ed

—“DREAMers need real tuition equality. N.J. lawmakers can take a big step Monday”  Read the op-ed

THE TRUMP ERA

FRANKOPHILES — “Your lawmakers used $660K of your money to tell you about themselves. Who spent the most?” by NJ Advance Media’s Jonathan D. Salant: “Your lawmakers in Washington last year spent spent more than $666,000 in taxpayer money on mailings, robocalls and other communications to show you what they're doing, according to a new report tracking members of the U.S. House. Known as "franking," the funds go to such things as legislative updates, newsletters and notices about upcoming public events featuring the officeholder, leading critics to question the practice … Rep. Chris Smith, R-4th Dist., spent more than any other New Jersey lawmaker in 2017, $158,665, according to reports from the Clerk of the House … At the other end of the scale, Reps. Donald Payne Jr., D-10th Dist., and Frank LoBiondo, R-2nd Dist., spent no money. LoBiondo is retiring after his term ends next January." Read the report

CD7 —“Leonard Lance, facing anti-Trump wave, is in grave danger,” by The Star-Ledger’s Tom Moran: “Rep. Leonard Lance wants us to know that Donald Trump and he have nothing in common and might even be bred from different species of animals. ‘My personality is vastly different than Donald Trump's,’ Lance says. ‘I don't think I'm high on his list. And I hope that in America we are judged by our own actions.’ What you are hearing is the sound of a blue-state Republican running for his life as a tidal wave bears down on him .... Lance has voted with Trump on 88 percent of the bills that have crossed his desk, but he's abandoned ship on the two biggest ones. He voted against the tax bill, and against the repeal of Obamacare … Lance is part of a vanishing breed in American politics, a moderate Republican from a gentler era, a buffalo in the age of the railroad. During his decade in Congress, he has beaten back angry challenges from the Tea Party over and over, and now he faces fury from the opposite direction. So, go ahead, feel sorry for the guy if you must. He's caught in a trap. But know this: Trump wants Lance to win this race. And if your top priority is to stop Trump, then logic demands that you work to stop Lance.” Read the opinion piece

—“Stormy Daniels to '60 Minutes': I feared for my safety after threat to ‘Leave Trump alone’” Read the report

—“NJ 'Dreamers' frustrated by federal spending bill” Read the report

LOCAL

LANCE’S DISTRICT — “Bernardsville Mayor Kevin Sooy switches parties, will run as Democrat,” by MyCentralJersey’s Mike Deak: “For the first time in decades, Bernardsville, where Democrats were once considered an endangered species, has a Democratic mayor. Mayor Kevin Sooy has declared he is switching parties and will run for re-election as a Democrat. ‘I understand that, on its face, this decision may surprise some people,’ Sooy said. ‘I want to stress that serving and running as a Democrat is consistent with my goals for our town and the issues I want to continue to pursue.’ … Sooy's conversion adds momentum to a Democratic surge in Bernardsville which has been dominated by Republicans who have advanced to political office outside the borough, including both former Congresswoman Millicent Fenwick and former freeholder Peter Palmer. In November, Democrats Christine Zamarra and Thomas O'Dea Jr. defeated GOP candidates William Youngblood and Karen J. Gardner.” Read the report

R.I.P. — “Jersey City cop dead from gunshot wound,” by The Jersey journal’s Caitlin Mota: “A city police officer died at Jersey City Medical Center tonight from a gunshot wound to his upper body, sources and officials said. The shooting occurred at about 7:50 p.m. inside a Woodlawn Avenue home, city spokeswoman Kimberly Wallace-Scalcione said. Police were called to the home on reports of an officer being shot. They found the 33-year-old off-duty officer with a gunshot wound. He was pronounced dead at Jersey City Medical Center, she said. The circumstances surrounding his death are unclear, but the Hudson County Prosecutor's Office said it is investigating.” Read the report

CARTERET— “Cops say fellow officer crossed line in bloody arrest. Here are the candid conversations,” by NJ Advance Media’s Craig McCarthy: “One officer described a chaotic scene when he arrived at an arrest last year to find a bruised 16-year-old cuffed and face down in a bed of rocks with ‘blood all over the f-----g place.’ A second described his appalled reaction on seeing the injured teen at Carteret police headquarters. Another said the incident was ‘indefensible.’ They said they knew their now-indicted fellow officer had pummeled the teen, but believed the department would cover for Officer Joseph Reiman, according to a previously unreleased dashboard-camera video. ‘Things don't look good,’ an officer says on the recording. ‘Didn't look good at the scene,’ another responds. The candid conversations between three officers from the early morning of May 31 were revealed this past week after NJ Advance Media reviewed hours of previously unreleased police dashboard and body camera videos in the arrest of a borough teen -- an encounter that has spurred criminal charges and a federal lawsuit … Reiman, 31, a former Marine who joined the force in 2015 as a disabled veteran, has been suspended with pay as the case continues. The officer is the youngest brother of Carteret's longtime mayor, Daniel Reiman.” Read the report

—Feds looking into 'disturbing' video of cop punching man in head 12 times” Read the report 

NOT EVEN PATERSON FALLS WILL FALL FOR THIS — “Paterson mayoral candidate says he spends weekends at home in Little Falls,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “Paterson mayoral candidate Alex Cruz spends weekends with his wife and children at their home in Little Falls, and sleeps on weeknights at an apartment in the city, according to statements he filed in court. Cruz, whose residency has come under question since he announced his intention to run for mayor in New Jersey’s third most populous city back in January, said he moved from to Paterson from Little Falls in November 2016. ‘I have lived in Paterson and have spent my nights in Paterson for a majority of the time on a weekly basis since then,’ Cruz said in the court papers he filed on Thursday. The statements were made in a bid to fend off a lawsuit attempting to keep him off the ballot in the May 8 mayoral election. ‘I work in Paterson,’ added Cruz, a city police officer and president of the city police union. ‘My roots are in Paterson. My intent to be domiciled in Paterson is manifested by my conduct. I am unaware of any rule of law which requires a husband and wife to live together seven nights a week or to have the same domicile.’” Read the report 

HUDSON COUNTY JAIL — “Outrage after 4th Hudson County jail suicide in less than one year,” by The Jersey Journal’s Caitlin Mota: “Less than 48 hours after telling police he wanted to jump off a bridge during a West New York arrest, a 26-year-old man was found hanging in his jail cell on Sunday morning. The man, whose name is being withheld pending the notification of his family, previously indicated to medical personnel at the Hudson County jail that he had suicidal thoughts, officials said. News of the man's death -- the sixth since June, four of which have been classified as suicides -- is not sitting well with county officials who have signaled its contract with an outside medical provider could soon be terminated.” Read the report

COMING SOON TO FOX NEWS — “City kicks God out of its meetings to be more inclusive. Now, believers are offended,” by NJ Advance Media’s Bill Gallo Jr.: “In municipalities around the state, something is missing from many meeting agendas -- an invocation. Woodbury -- which has taken steps to be more inclusive and welcoming to all, especially the LGBTQ community -- is one of the latest municipalities to replace the traditional opening prayer with a silent moment of reflection. But not everyone's happy about it. ‘Council meetings are open to the public to conduct city business,’ said Jessica Floyd, mayor of the Gloucester County city of 10,000. ‘To be clear, no one comes to council meetings for an invocation, they are coming to discuss the everyday affairs of the city.’ The decision evolved after the formation of the city's Human Rights Commission, one of the first panels of its kind in the region … Councilman Kenneth McIlvaine was one who responded at the meeting about the change to members of the public who questioned the move, one of whom called the action ‘reserve discrimination.’ ‘I'm very spiritual, I'm very religious, however this is what council has decided on as policy and unfortunately I have to sit here, like you, and concur with the policy that has been made.’” Read the report

—“Ticket-fixing Jersey Shore judge avoids jail, might get record expunged” Read the report

—“Bayonne mayor expects commuter ferry to Manhattan by end of the year” Read the report

—“Hudson political war message: I never liked you | Political Insider” Read the column 

—“County exec will run on his record” Read the column

—“Former Passaic County employee admits food stamp theft” Read the report

—“Here's where 19 N.J. towns currently stand on legal weed” Read the report

—“Meet the man who knows how to make Newark healthier” Read the report

—School choice advocates to rally as Murphy takes a more cautious approach to charters Read the report

CARTOON BREAK — “The return of school funding,” by Drew Sheneman See the cartoon 

EVERYTHING ELSE

TRUMP ONLY DRAINED RED STATE SWAMPS — “Troopers rescue man stuck in a swamp because, well, New Jersey,” by NJ Advance Media’s S.P. Sullivan: “Getting swallowed by a swamp on the side of the turnpike would have been a uniquely Jersey way to go. Authorities say state troopers rescued a man stranded and freezing waist-deep in the marsh along the highway's shoulder in Elizabeth last weekend. It's nothing unusual for an officer on patrol to find someone standing on the shoulder with their hazard lights flashing, but when Trooper Victor Rios pulled over at 4:43 a.m on St. Patrick's Day, he could hardly believe his ears. ‘My cousin's stuck in the swamp,’ the man told him, according to dashboard video released by the State Police on Friday. What? ‘My cousin is stuck inside the swamp.’ How? The victim had unwittingly waded into the muck near mile marker 102.3 in Elizabeth while trying to walk toward a friend's disabled vehicle on the other side of the marsh, according one of the troopers at the scene.” Read the report

—“Meet the rapper whose Star-Ledger song landed him a tour with Fetty Wap,” by NJ Advnace Media’s Amy Kuperinsky: “Terrence Kelsor Jr. remembers the last time he was in The Star-Ledger. "I was on honor roll in the seventh grade," he says. About 20 years later, he has managed a return to its pages. How? He wrote a song about his hometown paper. In October, Kelsor, a rapper who goes by the name Rilla Gauge, released the song "Star Ledger," an up-and-at-'em anthem that uses the morning paper to convey a go-getter message. He's since embraced the nickname ‘Mr. Star Ledger’ and recently took the song on tour as an opener for Fetty Wap, the megastar from Paterson, performing the track for a series of crowds including one in Atlanta that wouldn't have been familiar with the paper. (That's OK, he says, they bopped along anyway.)” Read the report

HEALTH CARE — “New Jersey Venture Aims to Stop ‘Exodus’ of Medical Students,” by WSJ’s Melanie Grayce West: “Years in the making, Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine at Seton Hall University is finally ready for students. The school, located at the former Hoffmann-La Roche campus in Nutley, N.J., is a joint venture of Seton Hall University and Hackensack Meridian Health. The college began accepting applications this week for its first class of 55 students, who will begin studies this July. … Over just a few days, 400 people have applied, according to a spokeswoman for Hackensack Meridian, the state’s largest health network.” Read the report

POLITICO Space is our new, free weekly briefing on the policies and personalities shaping the second space age in Washington and beyond. Sign-up today to start receiving the newsletter right at launch on April 6th. Presented by Boeing.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC