Our website uses cookies to improve its performance and enhance your user experience. Through cookies, certain personal data is collected and may be stored temporarily. You can change your cookie settings through your browser. More info: Privacy Policy

On this episode of The Critical Hour with Dr. Wilmer Leon we discuss FREEDOM.

Yesterday most Americans celebrated Independence Day commemorating the adoption of the Declaration of Independence in 1776. It is meaningful to all and has become troubling to too many?166 years ago today, the great abolitionist and adviser to President Lincoln, Frederick spoke to the Ladies' Anti-Slavery Society in Corinthian Hall in Rochester, New York. The title of his remarks was "What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?". Delivered July 5th, 1852. Is that speech still relevant today? Should we look at last 10 years of American policy with a real emphasis on past 17 months with zero-tolerance, the Muslim ban, etc. as just the ugly process of democracy — the analogy being the sausage making process or is it evidence that American Jeffersonian democracy or the constitutional republic is failing?

Later in the hour hear a first-hand account on what's really going on inside the detention centers and inhumane treatment of immigrants and asylum seekers. We also take a look at the psychological effects of long-term detention. Is the Trump Administration being truthful?

GUESTS:

Gary Flowers — He has served as vice president and national field director for Reverend Jesse L. Jackson's Rainbow PUSH Coalition from 1997 to 2007 in Chicago, IL; he was Executive Director &amp; CEO of the Black Leadership Forum, Inc., and a public policy analyst at the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law in Washington, DC. He currently hosts the Gary Flowers show on radio station Rejoice WREJ- 101.3 FM and AM 990.

Christine Ho — Founding director of Friends of Broward Detainees, a volunteer visitation program that provides humanitarian support for unauthorized immigrants and asylum seekers inside the Broward Transitional Center, the immigrant detention center in South Florida.

We'd love to get your feedback at radio@sputniknews.com

The fact of registration and authorization of users on Sputnik websites via users’ account or accounts on social networks indicates acceptance of these rules.

Users are obliged abide by national and international laws. Users are obliged to speak respectfully to the other participants in the discussion, readers and individuals referenced in the posts.

The websites’ administration has the right to delete comments made in languages ​​other than the language of the majority of the websites’ content.

In all language versions of the sputniknews.com websites any comments posted can be edited.

A user comment will be deleted if it:

The administration has the right to block a user’s access to the page or delete a user’s account without notice if the user is in violation of these rules or if behavior indicating said violation is detected.

Users can initiate the recovery of their account / unlock access by contacting the moderators at moderator@sputniknews.com

The letter must contain:

If the moderators deem it possible to restore the account / unlock access, it will be done.

In the case of repeated violations of the rules above resulting in a second block of a user’s account, access cannot be restored.

To contact the team of moderators, write to moderator@sputniknews.com

Get push notifications from Sputnik International