
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

07/06/2018 07:25 AM EDT

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

We’re talking about $64,000 out of more than $100 million. That’s the sum of what Donald Trump, once just a loud real estate developer, has given to Andrew Cuomo’s campaigns since 2000, and most recently in 2009. To get some perspective, think of it this way: Cuomo’s campaign as of January had at least $31 million in the bank, which in the last six months of 2017 generated $107,067.95 of interest and dividends. Since the governor’s a Democrat running for a third term and casting himself as a leader of the resistance to the Trump administration, why not give the money back? Why let your opponents, like Cynthia Nixon did on Thursday, launch attack ads?


Story Continued Below

“I’m going to be deeply critical of him and keep the contributions,” Cuomo told reporters on Thursday. We suppose. But it’s becoming part of an awkward pattern that paints the governor as, well, hungry for campaign cash: he lagged behind his contemporaries in doffing cash from disgraced Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein last autumn. He’s glossed over or ignored previous campaign pledges to stop raising money from his appointees or people seeking to win contracts. A pair of federal trials have made clear that there’s quite a correlation — if no prosecutorial allegation of causation — between Cuomo donors and people who build government facilities. Said Nixon spokeswoman Lauren Hitt: "Governor Cuomo cannot serve as a defense against Donald Trump when he’s accepted tens of thousands of dollars from him. There is a reason Donald Trump gave Andrew Cuomo money. Trump knew Cuomo was his best chance to retain the status quo in New York.”

But the governor is choosing to fight. “This is nothing more than a cheap distraction from a campaign gasping for air,” Cuomo 2018’s Abbey Fashouer shot back. “No governor has fought harder against Donald Trump than Gov. Cuomo. In fact, Trump considered running against the governor in 2014. Gov. Cuomo is 100 percent focused on continuing to lead the fight against the Trump Administration and win the U.S. House and State Senate so we can keep families together, protect New Yorkers from Trump’s disastrous tax plan, safeguard our state’s environment and defend New Yorkers’ civil rights — and no press release is going to change that.”

It just prompts a $64,000 question.

IT’S FRIDAY. The heat is set to break! Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? In New York City with no announced public schedule.

WHERE’S BlLL? Back on vacation.

WHERE’S MARC? At balloon festivals in Dutchess County.

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “SEASON 2 SURVIVOR”— Daily News: “Check his pockets on the way out!”— See Them — Newsday: “EPA CHIEF RESIGNS”— El Diario New York:”detenido aunque tenía visa” —TRANSLATION: “Arrested even though he had a visa”— See Them

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 2 col., above the fold: “MIRED IN SCANDAL, PRUITT IS FORCED TO EXIT E.P.A. POST”— 1 col., above the fold: “TARIFFS USHER IN UNCERTAIN TIMES”— 3 col., above the fold: “Clock Ticking, Agents Rush to Reunite Families” — 1 col., below the fold: “Eye Is On Judge Who Had Hand In Starr Report” — Wall Street Journal: — 4 col., above the fold: “Pruitt Resigns Amid Ethics Inquiry” — 1 col., above the fold: “U.S., China Set For Long Battle On Trade” — 2 col., below the fold: “To Win More Fans, Walmart Takes a Stand On Politics” — See Them

VIDEO OF THE DAY: “DO YOU LOVE ME?” — Cuomo in Brooklyn

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “I connected with her campaign — a young woman out on the streets, taking on an icon. She didn’t have the money Crowley had. She had the gumption.” — Former Congresswoman Liz Holtzman, once the youngest woman ever elected to Congress, on Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s primary win. 

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— 1199 FOR KLEIN — POLITICO’s Jimmy Vielkind: The power healthcare workers’ union, 1199SEIU, is endorsing Sen. Jeff Klein for re-election. Big purple is breaking with its sibling 32BJ, which made news last week when it backed Alessandra Biaggi in her Democratic primary challenge to the Bronx senator who founded, and until April headed, the GOP-allied Independent Democratic Conference. 1199 said it was un-bothered by that maneuver, which at times empowered Republicans, and pointed to the IDC’s recent dissolution. “Jeff Klein has stood with 1199SEIU Nurses and Healthcare Workers for over a decade, fighting for our rights and better health care policies and services for all New Yorkers,” Gabby Seay, the union’s political director, stated. “At a time when New York State is under attack from Washington D.C., Senator Klein has put the state Democratic Party, New York workers and their families, and our union values above all else, and we are committed to applying our full strength and resources to backing his campaign and ensuring that he remains the representative for the 34th Senate District.”

— SCHNEIDERMAN TAKES HIS PENSION — New York Law Journal’s Dan Clark: “Former New York State Attorney General Eric Schneiderman is set to receive a gross annual pension of $63,948 after filing for retirement last month. Schneiderman filed for retirement June 5, the state comptroller’s office confirmed Thursday. Schneiderman will collect a gross monthly pension of $5,329, or $63,948 annually, from the state. He received his first payment at the end of June. Schneiderman was an employee of the state for about two decades before his abrupt resignation in May amid domestic violence allegations. He was first elected to the State Senate in 1998, where he served until his election as attorney general in 2010. … If Schneiderman is prosecuted and convicted on sexual assault or harassment charges outside of his role as attorney general, he will still collect his pension in full. The state’s laws on pension forfeiture only strip an elected official’s pension if they are convicted of a crime related to their office. The law is also not retrospective. It only applies to crimes committed after January 2018. The claims in The New Yorker article were alleged to have happened before then.” Read more here.

— OH SANDY — Page Six: “Cuomo took time away from his re-election bid to surprise girlfriend Sandra Lee with a romantic birthday dinner at La Crémaillère in Bedford, NY, spies told Page Six. A source said that Cuomo ‘reserved a completely candle-lit private room,’ and before they ordered their meals, ‘he presented her with a beautiful card and an antique Italian cameo set.’ The very private couple were seen smooching at their table. We hear they’ll also celebrate in the Hamptons this weekend.” Read more here. 

2018 MIDTERMS

Before there was Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, there was Liz Holtzman — New York Times’s Ginia Bellafante: “In June 1972, Emanuel Celler, a Democratic congressman from Brooklyn, sat down for an interview with The New York Times in advance of a primary that he was virtually assured of winning. Mr. Celler had arrived in Congress with the backing of Tammany Hall, during the presidency of Warren Harding — in 1923 — and he now, half a century later, had the support of the powerful Brooklyn party boss Meade Esposito, whose celebrity in the borough was such that a veal dish bearing his name appeared on the menu of a popular restaurant on Montague Street near the Brooklyn courthouses, which were filled with the judges he had essentially placed. This omnipotence was to have insulated Mr. Celler from his own irrelevance. He kept such a distance from his constituents that he did not even maintain an office in the district, which encompassed largely white middle-class Flatbush, Midwood and Marine Park as well as parts of poor African-American neighborhoods in central Brooklyn. Celler was 84 years old, and he was cranky. Of his two opponents, he concerned himself with only one, a 30-year-old Harvard Law School graduate, Elizabeth Holtzman, a reform candidate, who had been active in the civil rights movement and served as mayoral aide to John V. Lindsay. ‘Her fulminations are as useless, as we say, as a wine cellar without a corkscrew,’ Mr. Celler told The Times, proceeding to call her campaign statements ‘irrational’ and her persona, more generally, ‘as irritating as a hangnail.’” Read it here. 

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

De Blasio used a $3M counterterrorism plane to zip home from vacation — New York Post’s Yoav Gonen, Larry Celona, Tina Moore and Max Jaeger: “The NYPD used a $3 million counterterrorism plane to shuttle Mayor Bill de Blasio back and forth from his Canada vacation to the Big Apple for an event Thursday, The Post has learned. Hizzoner, who is in Quebec on a weeklong respite, briefly flew back to the Bronx for a memorial for slain Detective Miosotis Familia. “NYPD is transporting him in their plane,” de Blasio spokesman Eric Phillips told The Post. “Their plane” is a Cessna 208 Caravan that cost roughly $3 million and was picked up by the department in 2017, sources said. The high-tech aircraft is outfitted with special sensors that can detect at a distance radioactive material used to make “dirty bombs.” Police sources questioned the use of a special plane for mayoral transportation. “It is very unusual to go on an international flight to go pick up the mayor,” one source said. “I think it’s excessive, because that wasn’t what that plane was designed to do. It’s designed for counterterrorism measures. To go to Canada to get the mayor? It’s excessive.” Read it here. 

LEAD NOT LIMITED TO NYCHA — POLITICO’s Amanda Eisenberg: New York City's failure to disclose how many children in public housing have elevated lead levels in their blood has highlighted the state's own outdated measures for determining when a child has been subjected to lead contamination. The New York Daily News reported this week that, since the city adopted a more stringent threshold to take action on behalf of children with elevated blood lead levels, it had far more cases than it previously disclosed of children considered to be at dangerous levels. Gov. Andrew Cuomo, following a familiar pattern in his dealings with the New York City Housing Authority, announced this week that he would intervene and the state would test blood lead levels for any NYCHA family that requested one. "You’re talking about, potentially, hundreds of thousands of children, so the logistics of this situation would be formidable," Cuomo said Tuesday, amid revelations that the city had far more incidents of lead contamination in children than previously thought. “Lead poisoning is nothing to be trifled with." 

— But, according to state data and interviews with state and city officials, the state health department has a less stringent measure to determine if a child has dangerous blood lead levels, and the problem of lead contamination is worse throughout New York's more upstate counties than it is in the city. New York state lists an elevated blood lead level as 10 micrograms or more of lead per deciliter of blood, with home inspections triggered at the 15-microgram threshold, according to state law... A little more than 10 out of 1,000 children younger than 6 years old in 15 counties such as Erie, Niagara and Rensselaer — where cities like Buffalo and Albany are located — reported high blood lead levels of 10 micrograms per deciliter or higher, according to the data. In pockets of those areas, such as four ZIP codes in Buffalo, upward of 40 percent of children are exposed to lead poisoning, according to a 2017 Reuters investigation. New York City, on the other hand, has an incidence rate of less than 7.8 children per 1,000 with blood lead levels at 10 micrograms or greater. Read more here.

DRIVING THE MESSAGE — "Researchers' Counterintuitive Conclusion? New York May Have Too Much Parking," by Commercial Observer's Matt Grossman: "The parking woes of automotive New Yorkers are the stuff of legend, lamented in the tabloids and immortalized on the episode of Seinfeld in which Jerry Seinfeld's bumbling friend George Costanza takes a job helping neighbors comply with those pernicious alternate-side commandments from on high. ... But for all the arch drama and clumsy ballet of maneuvering ungainly vehicles into scarce eight-by-16-foot rectangles, little scientific inquiry has quantified whether Gothamites' passion and fury is warranted. Eric Scharnhorst, a researcher who has worked in urban design with Denmark's Gehl Architects, and the Mortgage Bankers Association, which published his work, gave Commercial Observer the first look at new research aimed, in part, to fill that gap. The main problem, Scharnhorst found, is that parking spots proliferate like weeds: encouraged or even mandated by zoning ordinances, the number of places to leave a car can quickly outpace actual demand. Instead, the researcher and his colleagues in the world of parking academia hope cities like New York will consider market-based approaches instead." Read the story here.

TRUMP’S NEW YORK 

— BYE BYE BREAK — Daily News’ Jillian Jorgensen: “New York City has nixed a $48,000 tax break President Trump was set to receive on his Trump Tower condo following inquiries from the Daily News about whether he is still eligible for the savings. On Tuesday, city records indicated that Trump was set to save $48,834.62 on his tax bill for the year beginning July 1 through the city’s condominium abatement, a popular tax break available to condo and co-op owners.” Read more here.

— Wife of pizza deliveryman pleads for his release from ICE— Daily News’s Edgar Sandoval: “A month ago, Pablo Villavicencio kissed his wife and daughters goodbye as he left for work to deliver pizza, thinking he would hug and kiss them again later that night. His life as a dedicated husband and loving father was turned upside down when he stepped onto the Army’s Fort Hamilton base in Brooklyn with a delivery. Soon he found himself confused and being cuffed by Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents and locked up in a dingy New Jersey detention facility. “It’s been a month of nightmares,” his wife, Sandra Chica, said from their Hempstead, L.I., home Thursday. “It’s been a month of questions and no answers.” In an exclusive interview with the Daily News, Chica reflected on the ordeal the family of four has suffered since President Trump’s anti-immigration officials tore them apart. Chica and her girls, Luciana, 4, and Antonia, 2, are hoping a federal judge releases Villavicencio when he pleads his case July 24.” Read it here. 

— TRUMP’S TAXES — David Cay Johnston in the New York Times: “On June 14, the New York State attorney general, Barbara Underwood, filed a civil complaint against President Trump and his three oldest children, accusing them of ‘persistently illegal conduct’ in using the Donald J. Trump Foundation as ‘little more than a checkbook for payments from Mr. Trump or his businesses to nonprofits, regardless of their purpose or legality.’ Ms. Underwood believes there is abundant evidence to bring criminal charges against Mr. Trump as well. She made that position very clear in the letters she sent to the Internal Revenue Service and the Federal Election Commission in Washington recommending “further investigation and legal action.” Ms. Underwood sent those letters, at the same time she filed the civil complaint, because New York state law does not grant her automatic authority to initiate criminal investigations. Her criminal referral to Washington noted that it would be a crime for the president to interfere in such an investigation. However, given Mr. Trump’s assertion that he has the power to halt any criminal inquiry and to pardon himself for federal crimes, a criminal investigation by any part of the federal executive branch seems highly unlikely. The attorney general could, however, easily gain that authority. All that’s needed is for Gov. Andrew Cuomo, the New York State Police or the state Department of Taxation and Finance to make a request, and the authority would be granted to her.” Read more here.

SUPPORTING IMMIGRANT CHILDREN — New York Daily News' John Annese, Kerry Burke and Janon Fisher: "The woman arrested for scaling the base of the Statue of Liberty on Wednesday as part of a protest against U.S. immigration policy is an immigrant herself and an active participant in the resistance movement against President Trump, according to fellow demonstrators. Therese Patricia Okoumou, 44, of Staten Island, was born and educated in the Democratic Republic of Congo, but she has lived in New York for at least the last 10 years, records show. She joined the group Rise and Resist, which unfurled an 'Abolish ICE' banner at the base of the statue on Wednesday, a few months ago and has been taking part in about one protest a week with the group, according to member Jay Walker." Read more here.

TIFFANY TRUMP DOES THE HAMPTONS — Page Six: “On-again couple Justin Bieber and Hailey Baldwin celebrated July Fourth together at life coach and model Tinamarie Clark and David Rosenberg’s estate in Bridgehampton — but they weren’t the guests getting the most buzz. A tipsy insider noted: “There was Secret Service and a lot of security at the house, so they had to be there for someone important. I had way too much to drink so I didn’t recognize anyone.” Page Six learned that the heavily guarded guest was Tiffany Trump, who wore a long blue dress and Instagrammed her journey to the event — on a party bus, complete with dancing, drinking, music and a big-screen TV — with Tao Group’s Chris Allam and party boy David “Papi” Einhorn.” Read it here. 

IF YOU READ ONE THING — Michael Grunwald in POLITICO Magazine’s July/August issue, “The Tunnel That Could Break New York: How politics, and Donald Trump, turned America’s most important repair job into a $30 billion grudge match.” Read it here. 

SOCIAL DATA: 

 HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Friday — Josh Elliott is 47 … Whitney Smith … Cynthia Keyser (h/t Jon Haber) … Saturday — Journalist Danielle Tcholakian … Broome County GOP chairman Bijoy Datta … NY1’s Juan Manuel Benitez … former gubernatorial candidate M. Myers Mermel … Sunday — New York City Councilman Brad Lander … Michael Gareth Johnson of Ocean Gold Media

CONGRATS — Ted Dintersmith, author of ‘What School Could Be’ was presented the NEA 2018 ‘Friend of Education’ award by NEA President Lily Eskelsen García. The former venture capitalist spent a school year visiting more than 200 schools in 50 states to find out what‘s working in our school systems.

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

EPA ADMINISTRATOR SCOTT PRUITT finally resigned Thursday following a seemingly endless string of scandals in which journalists, with the help of whistleblowers, exposed corruption and ethical lapses. The Washington Post's Phil Rucker touted the work of his colleagues and journalists at other outlets as "extraordinary" and an example of "accountability journalism at its very best."

— "Not a single story we wrote about Scott Pruitt and his tenure at the EPA — by me or my colleagues at The NYT — was personal," the New York Times's Eric Lipton tweeted. "It was about transparency, accountability, &amp; governance. Pruitt likes to call it 'The Rule of Law.' He just gave us an enormous [amount] of material to write about."

— "Scott Pruitt was a case study in how investigative reporters keep doing their work, regardless of whether anyone in power seems to care what they say," tweeted Kyle Pope, editor of the Columbia Journalism Review. Thursday's resignation, he continued, "shows that facts, eventually and even in this administration, do matter eventually."

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

BUILDING IN THE FLOOD ZONE — New York Times’s Stefanos Chen: “Rather than retreating from flood-prone neighborhoods after Hurricane Sandy, some developers are wading deeper into waterfront markets, especially in Queens and Brooklyn, where they are finding large parcels of land close to mass transit. These are calculated risks, bolstered by years of flood-zone price growth and unwavering demand. Whether these new apartment buildings can endure another major storm does not seem to be a concern for most residents, who are glad to have new options in inventory-starved markets. Critics, though, ask whether the neighborhoods can withstand the surge of new development and the stress it will add to an already strained infrastructure. These new buildings might remain unscathed in a flood, they say, but what about the damage caused by the torrent around them? Waterfront building has continued apace since Hurricane Sandy, and it could soon accelerate. As of January, there were roughly 12,350 new apartments under construction or planned in the city’s worst flood zones, according to Localize.city, a real-estate data website. That means 12.4 percent — or roughly one in eight new apartments — will be built in a high-risk flood zone, up from 10.7 percent in 2014, said Tal Rubin, the company’s vice president of research. And last year, 2,362 flood-zone units were completed — nearly double the number delivered in 2014, she said.” Read it here. 

“Allure closes on Harlem nursing home purchase following settlement with AG” — Real Deal’s Rich Bockmann: “The Allure Group closed on its $25 million purchase of the Greater Harlem Nursing Home following a settlement with the state Attorney General’s office earlier this year.Allure, led by Joel Landau, sealed the deal for the Greater Harlem Nursing Home &amp; Rehabilitation Center at 30 West 138th Street on June 27, property records filed with the city Thursday show. The company had signed the contract back in March 2014, but as Allure became embroiled in controversy over its Rivington House deal, Attorney General Eric Schneiderman’s office put the brakes on two deals the company was working on.” Read it here. 

ENTITLEMENT — "Judge annuls DFS' 'absurd' anti-marketing rules for title companies," by The Real Deal's E.B. Solomont: "New York title insurers can get back to schmoozing. In a major victory for agents, closers and underwriters, a judge on Thursday annulled the strict anti-marketing regulations enacted earlier this year by the Department of Financial Services. The rules had been an attempt to crack down on excessive wining and dining in the industry, but insurance companies and their representatives called it a death knell to their business. In a 15-page decision, Judge Eileen Rakower sided with the industry and challenged DFS' use of a state insurance law to prevent companies from engaging in ordinary marketing activities." Read the story here.

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— With two votes, Dylan Ratigan won the Women’s Equality Line in NY-21.

— Rochester Mayor Lovely Warren let a valedictorian banned from speaking at his charter school give his address at City Hall.

— Part of a railroad bridge in downtown Syracuse collapsed.

#UpstateAmerica: In Rochester, it hasn’t been this hot for this long since 1988.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX


CORRECTION:  This newsletter has been updated to correct which day Cynthia Nixon released attack ads. 


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew


                                            By Edward-Isaac Dovere

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC