
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

03/09/2018 07:17 AM EST

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

Mayor Bill de Blasio found himself in a familiar, if uncomfortable position Thursday, when he hosted a town hall for high school students to talk about gun violence. He wanted to talk about national politics — in this case, the national gun control movement, and the recent school shooting in Parkland, Florida — a subject over which he has virtually no control, but which he’s eager to discuss, like many other national political issues. But he’s not the mayor of the country, he’s the mayor of New York City, and the high school students he’d assembled wanted to talk about metal detectors, over-policing and the NYPD, whose policies he actually has the power to change. Reports from the town hall said de Blasio grew “testy” and “sarcastic” with the students when they refused to follow his directions, and stick to the topics he prescribed. A group of students protested outside, against what they said was the over-policing in city schools of students of color. 


Story Continued Below

While de Blasio can easily claim to be on the far left nationally when it comes to gun control, New York City’s own politics have different calibrations. The goalposts for what it takes to be a liberal champion in the town he actually governs often lie outside of the mayor’s comfort zone, and his official deference to the NYPD makes him seem centrist in a place where liberal distrust of law enforcement is an entrenched political belief. Centrist is not part of the Bill de Blasio brand. 

The town hall did not produce a made for TV moment for the mayor, showcasing his positions on gun control. Little wonder then that he’s getting out of town, headed to the annual South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, where the narrative is a little bit closer to the one he’d like to be a part of — a narrative focused squarely on how he’s still at the vanguard of progressive politics. In Austin, he’s participating in a panel with other mayors called “Mayors Disrupting Locally, Leading Globally.” The topic: “While federal leaders show neglect or even hostility towards cities, mayors face the issues head-on as they lead diverse and growing cities through turbulent times.”

IT’S FRIDAY. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? Making an announcement about offshore drilling with Al Gore at NYU, then returning to Albany for a Somos El Futuro conference.

WHERE’S BlLL? Making his regular weekly appearance on WNYC’s The Brian Lehrer Show, then heading off to Baltimore and later this weekend, the South by Southwest festival, where he’ll appear on a panel of mayors. 

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “THE KIM AND I”— Daily News: “THE NYCHA FOLLIES, Starring Andrew Cuomo and Bill de Blasio: ANY HEAT YOU CAN FIX, I CAN FIX BETTER. I CAN FIX ANY HEAT BETTER THAN YOU.” — See Them

More Tabloids: — Newsday: “TRUMP TO MEET WITH KIM JONG UN”— El Diario New York: “Las dos caras de NYC para ellas”—TRANSLATION: “The two faces of NYC for them” —  See Them

The Free Papers: — Metro New York: “SPRING ARTS GUIDE”— AM New York: “SPRING MOVIE PREVIEW”— See Them

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 2 col., above the fold: “NORTH KOREA ASKS FOR DIRECT TALKS, AND TRUMP AGREES” —3 col., above the fold: “Russia’s Biggest Problem in Syria: Assad, Its Ally”—3 col., below the fold: “Crisis Below the Streets Masks Headaches Above”—  Wall Street Journal: — 5 col., above the fold: “Trump to Meet North Korea’s Kim” — 5 col., above the fold: “New Tariffs on Steel Spare Top U.S. Alles”—3 col., below the fold: “Rising Mortgage Rates Pose Test for U.S. Housing Market”— See Them

VIDEO OF THE DAY: On MSNBC, Steve Kornacki explains why Cynthia Nixon’s primary challenge could be a problem for Cuomo.

PLAYBOOK POOL: March Madness is here, which means it’s time for the 2nd Annual Playbook Pool bracket challenge hosted by our Playbook outposts across the country (DC, NY, NJ, MA, IL, FL, &amp; CA)! Track who’s up and down throughout the tournament as you compete against your friends, top Playbookers, and political insiders and VIPs to win prizes including Apple Watches, Airpods, Go Pros, Google Home, Snapchat Spectacles and more. Create your bracket starting on Selection Sunday (March 11) after the highly-anticipated field of teams in this year’s tournament are chosen. Click HERE to get in the game!

COMING SOON: Roger Stone makes a “Special Guest Appearance” at the Queens GOP’s annual Lincoln Dinner onMarch 18 at Antun’s in Queens Village.

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

NYCHA WARS — Daily News’s Ken Lovett and Greg Smith: “Eureka! Mayor de Blasio suddenly realized Thursday that he can speed up boiler repairs at the city Housing Authority after initially saying the job would take years and couldn’t start until July. His announcement that NYCHA has now found a way to expedite heating system repairs came the morning after Gov. Cuomo said he plans to declare an emergency to jump-start NYCHA’s fixup. Since October, 323,000 public housing tenants have suffered heating outages at some point due to boilers and heat systems that failed at developments citywide as the mercury dropped.” Read more here 

“Al Sharpton, Reconsidered” — New York Times’s Greg Howard: “Mr. Sharpton has doggedly agitated for social justice for over 50 years, organizing, marching and fighting for black people. The deaths of Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner and Michael Brown have fueled the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement. Their cases are in the mainstream partly because their families picked up the phone and called Mr. Sharpton. But these aren’t the things that readily come to mind when people, particularly white people, think of him. He is known best for the worst thing he’s done: His loud support of Tawana Brawley, an African-American teenager whose claims of abuse and rape by a gang of white men turned out to be a hoax.

— Mr. Sharpton is many things to many people — a freedom fighter, a boogeyman, a racial opportunist, an aging man just hanging on. But he has used his entire career to tell America a story about itself that it does not want to hear: that racism exists today, and is pervasive outside of the Deep South. And he has worked ceaselessly toward two intertwined, impossible goals. First, the demand for equal rights for all. The second is about securing his legacy as the Martin Luther King of the North...Mr. Sharpton lacks a clear legacy, and his fight with Mr. Trump appears in part a branding exercise. Most activists can’t control how they’re remembered; someone else ultimately writes their legacies once they’re silenced or dead. But Mr. Sharpton is different. Regardless of what Mr. Trump does, Mr. Sharpton will spend the final chapter of his life building a civil rights museum in Harlem. ‘It’s going to cost me $50 to $100 million,’ Mr. Sharpton said. He added that he is negotiating between two potential sites, and he’s still young enough to dedicate years of energy to the project.” Read it here 

De Blasio, on a National Mission, Heads to Texas — POLITICO’s Gloria Pazmino: Mayor Bill de Blasio is Texas bound this weekend on a three-stop politicking tour. De Blasio, ever eager to expand his national profile, is expected to attend the South by Southwest conference in Austin to meet with the U.S. Conference of Mayors, host a panel discussion and attend a strategy session to discuss the 2020 census and immigration reform, aides told POLITICO on Thursday. Before his trip to Texas, the mayor will make a pit stop in Baltimore on Friday to address the Congressional Progressive Caucus Center Strategy Summit. The mayor’s five-day travel itinerary is expected to cost approximately $8,000, which will cover the cost of travel, lodging and meals for the mayor and his staff. The cost will be covered by city taxpayers as the trip is considered government-related work, City Hall said. He will travel with three of his aides and his security detail. De Blasio was not required to get Conflict of Interest Board approval, staffers said. Read more here. 

ONE CITY’S TRASH...IS ANOTHER CITY’S LAWSUIT — Associated Press: “A train transporting sewage from New York and New Jersey has prompted complaints of a rotten stench and fly infestations in Alabama with Birmingham city officials saying they’re working with authorities to clear the air. The stench is nearly unbearable, Birmingham City Councilman John Hilliard said this week at a city council meeting. Numerous train cars transporting sewage sludge have been rolling across the South to an Alabama landfill since early 2017, sparking widespread complaints, Al.com reported. The sewage sludge is being transported from New York and New Jersey, lawyers for the Alabama town of West Jefferson said in a January lawsuit. It smells like “dead, rotting animals” and human waste, and has caused fly infestations in the community, the attorneys wrote.” Read more here 

“Why New York’s New Mayor of the Night is Such a Smart Move”—Slate’s Rachelle Hampton: “What makes urban spaces like New York so dynamic is the presence of both an all-night party scene and quiet family neighborhoods—respectful coexistence is a must if the city wants to remain attractive to a wide range of residents. For any city to maintain this sort of dynamism, especially amid the tensions of gentrification, mediator roles like Palitz’s are vital. In London, for example, a similar “night czar” backed campaigns that kept LGBTQ venues from closing, and in Amsterdam, the nachtburgemeester instituted 24-hour venues on the outskirts of the city, which not only decreased congestion in the city center but also created a dedicated nighttime district with flexible hours. Other than her listening tour, Palitz hasn’t revealed what she has planned as she transitions into her new role, but one hopes that similarly inventive interventions and compromises will spill out of her office, like so many party-goers onto the sidewalk after last call.” Read it here. 

— HORSE OF A FAMILIAR COLOR: After four years plus of calling for laws restricting the use of carriage horses in New York City, NYCLASS is still at it, and planning a noon protest on March 14th on the steps of City Hall to “demand action from Mayor de Blasio” 

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— MALONEY BUCKS NIXON, BACKS CUOMO — New York Post’s Carl Campanile: “New York’s elected gay political leaders are warning ‘Sex and the City’ actress Cynthia Nixon that they’ll stick with Gov. Andrew Cuomo if she decides to run against him. The most notable brushback came from Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney, the first openly gay member of Congress from New York, who represents the city’s northern suburbs. ‘Many of us in the community, who have been fighting for equality for decades, are recommending she reconsider,’ Maloney said in a statement. ‘I can say unequivocally that the LGBTQ community has not had a greater champion than Governor Cuomo. He has not only been on the right side of our issues, but has delivered results that have changed the trajectory of our nation’s progress toward LGBTQ equality. Simply put, I owe my marriage to leaders like Andrew Cuomo.’ Maloney was referring to Cuomo’s approval of the Marriage Equality Law in 2011 — an achievement that Nixon herself praised in public statements.” Read more here

— CUOMO THREATENS CON ED — POLITICO’s Marie J. French: Cuomo has escalated his attack on Con Edison, explicitly raising the specter of revoking the utility’s license and turning operations over to another company if the pace of power restoration in Westchester doesn't accelerate following the second major winter storm in the past week. “These utility companies thought it was going to be a lifetime franchise. Con Ed is going to be there and their children are going to be there. What we did on Long Island after Hurricane Sandy is we changed the utility company,” Cuomo said during a conference call Thursday with reporters. “I’m not married to you, and I can revoke the license and the franchise and bring in someone new. I’ve done it before and I can do it again.” Cuomo did not revoke any licenses of private utilities following Sandy in 2012. The governor was referring to the Long Island Power Authority — a public entity that Cuomo controls — being restructured with control of the day-to-day management transitioned to a private utility, according to governor spokesman Rich Azzopardi. Cuomo did threaten to revoke operating certificates of the investor-owned utilities and the Long Island Power Authority after Sandy, although there was some question of whether the Public Service Commission had that authority at the time. The state established more robust authority for the PSC to revoke operating certificates of utilities in the 2013-14 budget, but it has never been exercised. Read more here

— About 57,000 customers were without power Thursday evening, down from about 80,000 earlier in the day, after the biggest snowstorm in years blasted the Lower Hudson Valley on Wednesday. The National Guard is being deployed to Rockland as towns and municipalities struggle. “I’m angry and the anger is because of the individual stories,” Westchester County Executive George Latimer told the Journal News. “I get 20, 30 stories every day of people that are in dire straits and when I hear those stories, they aren’t just statistics.” Work to restore power to more than 14,000 PSEG Long Island customers who still don’t have electric service could extend into the weekend. Did you think it was over? Not so fast — the latest nor'easter could threaten the Lower Hudson Valley on Monday.

— Westchester residents think Cuomo’s been missing in action after this most recent storm. 

TRUMP’S NEW YORK 

-- “Trump threatens veto over Gateway tunnel funding,” by POLITICO’s John Bresnahan, Burgess Everett and Eliana Johnson: “President Donald Trump has threatened to veto a massive omnibus spending package if it includes money for the Gateway tunnel project in New York City, according to multiple sources. Trump's threat has complicated the outlook for the $1 trillion-plus spending measure, which Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) want to pass before government funding runs out on March 23. While it is highly unusual for a Republican president to threaten a veto on a funding bill coming from a GOP-run Congress — and risking a potential government shutdown — Trump is adamant in his opposition to the federal government underwriting the project, the sources said. ... The Gateway program costs an estimated $30 billion, with the long-sought tunnel project tallying $13 billion. Under an agreement worked out by the Obama administration, New York and New Jersey would pay half the cost, with the federal government picking up the rest.” http://politi.co/2DcyeIf 

HOUSEKEEPING — ICYMI — “Ben Carson Removes Anti-Discrimination Language From HUD Mission Statement,” by HuffPost’s Amanda Terkel: “Housing and Urban Development Secretary Ben Carson is changing the mission statement of his agency, removing promises of inclusive and discrimination-free communities. In a March 5 memo addressed to HUD political staff, Amy Thompson, the department’s assistant secretary for public affairs, explained that the statement is being updated ‘in an effort to align HUD’s mission with the Secretary’s priorities and that of the Administration.’ The new mission statement reads: HUD's mission is to ensure Americans have access to fair, affordable housing and opportunities to achieve self-sufficiency, thereby strengthening our communities and nation.” Read the story here

SOCIAL DATA

ABOUT LAST NIGHT -- Pool report from a tipster: “Last night was The World Values Network’s Champions of Jewish Values National Awards Gala at the Plaza Hotel in NYC. The silent auction supports the group that promotes issues crucial to Israel. Impromptu silent auction lunch items with Sean Spicer and Caitlyn Jenner both got $10K. Steven Mnuchin, Rep. Ron Desantis (R-Fla.), Caitlyn Jenner, Adar Gandelsman (Miss Universe Israel) were all honored for their support of Israel. Israel's Ambassador to U.S. Ron Dermer and Dr. Mehmet Oz also participated in the event.” Spicer’s tweet with pics of him, Dermer, Jenner, Mnuchin, Dr. Oz, DeSantis, Gandelsman and Rabbi Shmuley  http://bit.ly/2DcIZu7 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Charlie Gibson is 75 ... former USAID Administrator Raj Shah, now president of the Rockefeller Foundation, is 44 ... former Sen. James L. Buckley (Conservative-N.Y.) is 95 ... former Rep. Vito Fossella (R-N.Y.) is 53 ... Neal B. Shapiro, president and CEO of WNET, is 6-0 … Erika Tannor, director of communications for NYC Councilman Rafael Espinal … Investigative Post reporter Charlotte Keith … SUNY counsel Beth Garvey … Michael Harrison, a former Long Island regional director for Cuomo ... Saturday — Democratic activist Ben Yee … Executive Chamber photographer Phil Kamrass … former Senate aide Jason Kippen … Danny Hakim, former New York Times Albany bureau chief … Sunday — Haley Viccaro, a spokeswoman for Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul.

WELCOME TO THE WORLD -- Sara Eisen, an anchor on CNBC’s “Squawk on the Street” and recently named co-anchor of “Power Lunch” and Matthew Levine, head of U.S programming at Bloomberg TV, recently welcomed Samuel Harrison Levine. Pics by Miriam Dubinsky Photography  http://bit.ly/2FitGG2 ...  http://bit.ly/2FqcPgw

WHAT WALL STREET IS READING -- “Nickolas Meyer, the Goldman Wine Thief, Spent Decades Fleeing His Midwestern Roots: Now a return to his hometown might be the best he can hope for,” by the Weekly Standard’s Alice Lloyd: “Meyer’s bail agreement, set at $1 million last Tuesday in the Southern District Court of New York, would let him leave Manhattan’s Metropolitan Correctional Center (MCC) for his Ohio home. … Ryan … Chaland’s business, Wineliquidators.com, purchased wine stolen from the Napa Valley restaurant The French Laundry in 2014, so Meyer wasn’t the first wine thief Chaland has worked with. ...

“‘He was the best of the best of the best,’ he says, describing meetings at Meyer’s Midtown apartment, where they’d sip espresso and strike deals. What did surprise Chaland, he says, was that Meyer was playing him all along: He used the previously reported alias ‘Mark Miller’ when he reached out online and claimed he had wine to sell on behalf of a private and powerful boss whom he never named. Chaland describes himself now as the victim of a talented con artist. ‘He had a really good thing going for him apparently,’ he says. ‘He screwed over his boss, he screwed over people like myself.’” http://tws.io/2DaYm6p

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone:

MURDOCH ON THE MEND? — Daily News: “News Corp head Rupert Murdoch may have suffered a head injury, according to a newsletter from a media gossip site, which supports multiple claims from our own sources that the billionaire businessman hasn’t been himself in recent months. The report from popbitch.com in the UK— which News Corp vehemently denies — couldn’t have come at a worse time for the 86-year-old businessman. His company is putting the finishing touches on a deal to sell $52 billion in assets to Disney as well as shelling out $16 billion that would give them control of Sky.

— In January, it was reported that Murdoch took a tumble on his son’s yacht, which News Corp said would cause him to “work from home” for a month. He’s been laid up in his Bel-Air estate ever since, even declining to come outside and mingle with firefighters at a fund-raiser he hosted on his own property last month.” Read it here. 

HILLARY CLINTON HAS APPEARED before as a guest at Tina Brown's Women in the World Summit, but this year she will be attending as a moderator. Clinton will lead an April 13 panel with four journalists on the rise of authoritarian regimes and the surge in extreme nationalism.

- "Hillary in the chair felt like a great way to tap into the global knowledge and experience of the most qualified person in the world to moderate a panel of top-class journalists on the subject," Brown told Morning Media. "Last year David Remnick moderated the journalism panel on fake news - who better than Hillary to moderate this year's journalism panel on the rise of strongmen regimes?"

- Meanwhile, former President Barack Obama is in advanced talks with Netflix for a series of shows, though according to the New York Times, they are not intended as a platform "to directly respond to President Trump or conservative critics."

- "In one possible show idea," the Times reports, "Obama could moderate conversations on topics that dominated his presidency - health care, voting rights, immigration, foreign policy, climate change - and that have continued to divide a polarized American electorate during President Trump's time in office."

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

TIS THE SEASON — Advocates call for Rent Guidelines Board to freeze rents in 2018, by POLITICO's Janaki Chadha: Housing advocates rallied outside the New York City Rent Guidelines Board Thursday, launching a campaign to freeze rents on the city's nearly 1 million rent-stabilized apartments. The board, charged with deciding whether and by how much to increase allowable rents for one- and two-year leases on rent-stabilized units, held its first meeting of the year on Thursday. ... The meeting Thursday covered an analysis of rent-stabilized housing stock based on Real Property Income and Expense statements provided to the city Department of Finance by rent-stabilized buildings. Read the story here.

UP IN THE AIR — "The Fight to Overhaul JFK Airport," by The Wall Street Journal's Paul Berger: "A fierce competition between airlines, private equity, developers and terminal operators is nearing its climax as the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey advances a $10 billion plan to overhaul John F. Kennedy International Airport. Several companies, including private equity firm Oaktree Capital Management, developer RXR Realty and Spanish infrastructure group Ferrovial SA, are vying to partner with JetBlue Airways Corp. to expand the airline's operations beyond its hub at Terminal 5. Oaktree, RXR and Ferrovial declined to comment. The winner of that contest, which is expected to conclude in the coming weeks, must then wait as the Port Authority weighs bids from a handful of other airlines and private companies that submitted plans to expand their own cramped or outdated facilities. A decision is expected this summer." Read the story here.

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— Plans for a fund-raiser on Staten Island benefiting the NRA have been canceled.

— Howie Hawkins is looking to run for governor — again. 

— A juror in Joe Percoco’s trial got another jury summons.

— Cuomo is planning campaign fund-raisers this spring that include a Saratoga golf tournament and parties in Florida.

— A teacher at a Bronx Renewal School is alleging the principal changed hundreds of students’ grades. 

— Brooklyn city school students who join a national walkout to protest gun violence will also be able to register to vote. 

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

Nets 125, Hornets 111: Allen Crabbe scored 29, Caris LeVert added 22 and the Nets resumed playing surprisingly well with LeVert and Ronde Hollis-Jefferson healthy and contributing.

The St. John’s men’s basketball team lost to Xavier, 88-60. The Red Storm finished the year strong, though, and Year 4 of Chris Mullin holds a ton of promise.

Former Stony Brook star Jameel Warney signed a 10-day contract with the Dallas Mavericks.

Baseball season starts in 20 days, so watch Noah Syndergaard strike out seven Nationals in a row. 

The day ahead: Big East semifinal night at The Garden. The Knicks are in Milwaukee.

#UpstateAmerica: An Amherst pet store will let you rent a chick for Easter.

#ZooYork: A closer look at one of New York’s last remaining DVD rental stores

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC