
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

05/23/2018 07:19 AM EDT

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

The New York State Legislature, which, faced with a chance to elevate one of its own in a backroom deal based on power and politics to replace Eric Schneiderman as attorney general … actually nearly unanimously appointed Barbara Underwood as the state’s top lawyer. Underwood has worked in the office since 2007 and took its reins when Schneiderman resigned in disgrace. Her resume is spectacular, including a clerkship for Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall. She’s respected by the office staff and has a strong handle on its ongoing operations. She’s not going to seek election to the post in November, and will bring “stability to the office,” Assembly Speaker Carl Heastie said. The speaker from the Bronx, after a public interview process, has done exactly what newspaper editorial pages, faith leaders, career prosecutors and government reform groups have called for. They’ve picked quiet, competent government over political drama. It feels abnormal for Albany, where the lust for power almost always triumphs over virtue.


Story Continued Below

Instead, the politics of who will be appointed will play out over the next few days on Long Island and in Manhattan as political parties convene. On the Democratic side, the overwhelming favorite is New York City Public Advocate Letitia James, the charismatic former Council member and attorney, who is expected to win a slot on the primary ballot with a broad margin. “The party’s coalescence behind James’ candidacy was sudden but perhaps not surprising,” Laura and Gloria Pazmino write in a profile this morning. 

“As the city's public advocate, James has not been the most aggressive critic of other city officials — certainly not in the mold of her predecessor, Bill de Blasio, who used the office to propel himself to the mayoralty. She’s waged few memorable public campaigns against the mayor or Cuomo. In fact, many observers would be hard-pressed to recall when James, as public advocate, has taken a particularly controversial stance on anything. But it may be precisely that lack of controversy that has made James such an attractive candidate. Rather than just waging noisy public battles on behalf of the city’s voiceless and disadvantaged, James has been laying the groundwork for a run for higher office, shoring up support among power brokers and interest groups across the city and state. 

IT’S WEDNESDAY. Fleet Week has begun! The President of the U.S. is on Long Island today. Expect traffic. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? On Long Island, schmoozing this evening at a dinner for delegates to the Democratic State Convention.

WHERE’S BlLL? Visiting a 3-K For All Class, where he’s making an education-related announcement with Schools Chancellor Richard Carranza, and holding a press conference. 

WHERE’S CYNTHIA? Greeting voters at the Hempstead Transit Center and then heading to the Democratic convention at Hofstra University.

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “TOUGH SHOVE”— Daily News: “THIS COULD BE THE LAST STRAW”— See Them

More Tabloids: — Newsday: “HIGHEST GAS PRICES IN NEARLY 4 YEARS”— El Diario New York: “Hay que oir a los vecinos” —TRANSLATION: “You have to hear the neighbors”— See Them

Free Papers: — Metro New York: “NYC’S IRISH GO #HOMETOVOTE”— AM New York: “NEW ‘WAY FORWARD”— See Them

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 1 col., above the fold: “TRUMP BACKS OFF DEMAND THAT KIM DISARM INSTANTLY”— 1 col., above the fold: “Congress Eases Banking Curbs Set After Crisis”— 3 col., above the fold: “Unflinching, Prolific Giant of American Letters”— 1 col., above the fold: “Governor Race In South Sheds Racial Barriers”— Wall Street Journal:— 1 col., above the fold: “Congress Pushes Back Over China”— 4 col., above the fold: “Bill Eases Small-Bank Rules”— 3 col., below the fold: “Anger Over Tourist Hordes Sparks Global Backlash”— See Them

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— THE DEMOCRATS CONVENE — Jimmy’s dispatch from the bar of the Long Island Marriott in Uniondale: There will be noise, but little drama, as the Democratic State Committee kicks off its convention today to coronate Gov. Andrew Cuomo for a third term and nominate New York City Public Advocate Letitia James as attorney general. According to interviews with a dozen apparatchiks and operatives, gathered by the glass-enclosed gas fire in the lobby and munching sesame-fried chicken at an opening reception here, all the business of nominations will be conducted on Wednesday — with an afternoon timeout for a pep talk by Hillary Clinton. 

— Cynthia Nixon’s name will be placed in nomination, but even supporters like George Albro of the New York Progressive Action Network acknowledge they don’t expect her to get the 25 percent of delegates needed to win a spot on the gubernatorial primary ballot. The same is true of Zephyr Teachout, the law school professor seeking the attorney general nod. Leecia Eve, a Verizon executive and daughter of a prominent Buffalo political family, says she is considering a run but didn’t submit the required paperwork to be nominated. She could still be nominated from the floor — a maneuver which doesn’t come with the ability to make praising speeches — but, with support among even her Western New York base split, her allies were unclear late Tuesday if she would do so.

People acknowledged that the challenger with the greatest (but still small) chance of success is Councilman Jumaane Williams (D-Brooklyn), who is challenging Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul. Hochul spoke at an opening reception, and was introduced by Buffalo Mayor Byron Brown as the “hardest-working, most-effective lieutenant governor in history.” Hochul predicted a “blue tsunami” would sweep across the state, and worked the crowd for over an hour. The rest of Cuomo’s team was at its most charming, too: Melissa DeRosa, Bill Mulrow, Rich Azzopardi, Charlie King, Geoff Berman and Lis Smith mixed with delegates and reporters at the lobby bar for several hours. Nixon’s allies were not around.

There may also be some drama over party resolutions. Albro’s group is pushing a resolution that would allow non-party members to vote in Democratic primaries, and they held a press conference with Our Revolution President Nina Turner to make their point. The Progressive Caucus is offering several resolutions, including one to kick renegade Sen. Simcha Felder — a Brooklyn Democrat who caucuses with the chamber’s Republicans — out of the party. It’s a delicate topic, as both parties desire Felder’s vote in a closely divided Senate. But Dutchess County Democratic Chairman Elisa Sumner said she didn’t care: “Why should we worry about how he would react about my not wanting him to be on the Democratic ticket? He obviously doesn’t worry about the Democrats when he caucuses with the Republicans.”

— CUOMO PARDONS 24K PAROLEES — New York Post’s Carl Campanile: “Gov. Cuomo has issued conditional pardons restoring voting rights to more than 24,000 parolees — including cop killer Herman Bell, who was released from prison last month. The pardons cover 24,086 ex-cons who are currently under parole supervision, the governor’s office said Tuesday. Cuomo issued an executive order last month which gave him the authority to issue pardons so ex-cons could vote while on parole. Bell is among the among the felons whose voting rights were reinstated, records show. The state Department of Corrections and Community website lists Bell as being released to parole supervision on April 27. 

— Bell, 70, spent more than 40 years behind bars before walking out of the Shawangunk Correctional Facility in upstate Wallkill. The Parole Board’s decision to release Bell provoked protests from police unions, the widow of one of the victims and some lawmakers. Marcus Molinaro, the GOP candidate for governor, slammed Cuomo and pointed that even ultra-liberal Mayor de Blasio opposed Bell’s release. ‘What is Andrew Cuomo possibly thinking? Herman Bell murdered two New York City Police Officers in cold blood, never once showing remorse, and Cuomo gives him early release and voting rights?,’ said Molinaro.” Read more here 

— LEGISLATURE TO FOREGO MORE SEXUAL HARASSMENT REFORMS— POLITICO’s Marie J. French: Although sexual harassment and the #MeToo movement remain a staple of the news cycle, there's a sense in the Capitol that lawmakers will not address the issue again before the session ends next month, despite a push from victims and some Assembly Democrats. “I’m not sure, other than staking out positions on issues, how much will get done between both houses,” said Assemblywoman Helene Weinstein (D-Brooklyn), who chairs the Ways and Means Committee. Senate Republicans, Assembly Democrats and Gov. Andrew Cuomo agreed on a package of measures intended to fight sexual harassment in the workplace as part of the budget passed in March. The initiatives did not satisfy employment lawyers or victims of harassment by state lawmakers, who have called for further action. 

Several women who have experienced sexual harassment in Albany called for public hearings and additional protections for victims...The group has not released specific recommendations for new measures but has raised concerns that the law’s new limits on confidentiality clauses unless requested by a victim do not have safeguards against coercion. Read more here

— Marc Molinaro will be introduced by Pataki at Convention — Gannett’s Jon Campbell: “When Marc Molinaro takes the stage Wednesday to accept the Republican nomination for governor, he is expected to be introduced by another Hudson Valley politician with small-town roots. Former Gov. George Pataki, the last Republican to hold statewide office, is expected to introduce Molinaro to the crowd at the Ziegfeld Ballroom in Manhattan, where GOP leaders will meet Wednesday and Thursday to nominate their statewide candidates.

— For Republicans, Pataki's presence is symbolic. A former mayor of the Westchester County city of Peekskill, Pataki defeated then-Gov. Mario Cuomo in 1994 and went on to serve three terms in the governor's office. Twenty-four years later, the GOP is hoping for a similar fate: Molinaro, former mayor of the small Dutchess County village of Tivoli, is hoping to topple Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo, Mario's son.” Read more here 

ORTHODOX DEMANDS — Jewish Daily Forward’s Ben Fractenberg: “Cynthia Nixon will have to address some hot-button statewide issues like funding and oversight of yeshivas if she is to make inroads with more religiously conservative and Orthodox Jewish voters, leaders and experts told the Forward. Nixon, who is raising two Jewish sons and belongs to pro-LGBT synagogue Beit Simchat Torah, announced in March her surprise longshot bid against incumbent Gov. Andrew Cuomo, raising questions about how issues like her previous support of Israeli performers boycotting the settlement of Ariel may split the Jewish vote.” Read it here. 

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

MESS TRANSIT — "Head of NYC Transit Andy Byford planning aggressive, $37B subway overhaul," by the New York Daily News' Dan Rivoli: "NYC Transit President Andy Byford is proposing an overhaul of the subway that could cost up to $37 billion over the next decade, sources told the Daily News on Tuesday. The aggressive plan to improve transit and riders' lives — $19 billion in the first five years, plus $18 billion in the next five — would mean an accelerated effort to upgrade of signal technology on the busiest lines, including the Lexington Ave. corridor that is the busiest in the system." More here.

 — REALITY CHECK — New York Times’s Jim Dwyer: “Mr. Byford, who started work in January, proposes to do quickly over the next five to 10 years what was originally expected to take a half-century: replace signals, make stations accessible and modernize the way buses serve the public. He has compiled a list of items for which money is in hand that can be started and finished this year under the accelerated schedule. Now we will see if the governor — and the mayor, and the Legislature and the City Council — can get past the cheap political point-scoring to make sure this actually gets done. For people doing tough jobs, reliable allies in elected office are scarce. At the moment, Mr. Byford will have to hope for protection from Joseph J. Lhota, the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.” Read it here. 

 — "Subway improvement master plan focuses on quickly updating signal system, sources say," by AMNY's Vincent Barone. Read it here.

 — "A Sweeping Plan to Fix the Subways Comes With a $19 Billion Price Tag," by The New York Times' Emma Fitzsimmons: "A sweeping proposal to overhaul New York City's subway and improve the broader transit system is expected to cost more than $19 billion, according to two people who were briefed on Tuesday, and goes far beyond the emergency repair plan that was unveiled last summer after the subway fell into crisis. The proposal by the subway's new leader, Andy Byford, will be announced on Wednesday in a highly anticipated presentation before the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's board....Eric Phillips, a spokesman for Mr. de Blasio, said the city was not willing to help pay for Mr. Byford's plan. He said the authority should use its existing resources and the state should approve a new revenue source, like the millionaire's tax that Mr. de Blasio has proposed." More here.

 — "MTA plans decade of hell to finally fix subways," by the New York Post's Danielle Furfaro: "Welcome to the decade of hell. The MTA plans to massively disrupt the subways with frequent night and weekend closures so that it can install new signals in a huge chunk of the system within the next 10 years, transit sources told The Post on Tuesday." More here.

STRAW BAN — Daily News’s Erin Durkin: “Suck on this — plastic drinking straws could be banned in New York. Businesses in the city would be barred from using disposable plastic straws under a bill set to be introduced Wednesday in the City Council.Plastic coffee stirrers would be forbidden, too. Restaurants and take out spots would either have to forgo straws, or use paper or reusable metal ones instead.” Read more here

NOW, IN GRAPHIC FORM — NYPD Will Overhaul Marijuana Arrests in the Face of Continued Racial Disparities, by POLITICO's Brendan Cheney and Todd Lindeman. More here.

FUNNY GAMES — Time to play MTACountry! the video game where you’re Gregg T. Angelo, who saw something and said something, and you’re stuck in a train car with Bill de Blasio and Andrew Cuomo trying to dodge track fires and other nonsense as you attempt to ride the beleaguered New York City subway system. http://mtacountry.info/

JAMES PROPOSES A SCOTUS WORKAROUND — Daily News’s Erin Durkin: “Businesses that take advantage of a controversial Supreme Court ruling this week and bar workers from bringing class action lawsuits against their employer would have to disclose it in their job ads under legislation proposed by Public Advocate Letitia James. James, who is running for state attorney general, plans to introduce the bill in the wake of the high court ruling Monday that it's legal for employers to force would-be employees to sign mandatory arbitration clauses. Those clauses require the worker to settle any disputes outside of court, relying on the decision of a private arbitrator.” Read it here. 

TRUMP’S NEW YORK

THE PRESIDENT ARRIVES ON LONG ISLAND — Newsday’s Laura Figueroa Hernandez: “President Donald Trump will return to Long Island Wednesday afternoon to highlight the region’s spate of MS-13 gang-related deaths as part of his push for stricter immigration enforcement. Trump will lead a roundtable discussion on the gang’s impact, alongside Rep. Peter King (R-Seaford) at the Morrelly Homeland Security Center in Bethpage. The invitation-only event will feature federal and local law enforcement officials and victims of the transnational gang, said King, who has been coordinating the event with the White House. ‘Unfortunately, the reality is we are ground zero when it comes to MS-13,’ King said in a phone interview. ‘I think it’s vital to have the president come in and focus attention, because it causes the federal authorities to focus more attention.’” https://nwsdy.li/2IEgYiI

THE TAXI KING PLEADS GUILTY —New York Times’s Danny Hakim, William Rashbaum, and Vivian Wang: “A significant business partner of Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s personal lawyer, has quietly agreed to cooperate with the government as a potential witness, a development that could be used as leverage to pressure Mr. Cohen to work with the special counsel examining Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election. Under the agreement, the partner, Evgeny A. Freidman, a Russian immigrant who is known as the Taxi King, will avoid jail time, and will assist government prosecutors in state or federal investigations, according to a person briefed on the matter...The president’s lawyers are already resigned to the strong possibility that the inquiry into Mr. Cohen’s businesses could lead him to cooperate with federal prosecutors. That likelihood may now be greater, with Mr. Freidman potentially sharing what he knows with federal prosecutors in New York and the special counsel..” Read more here

FREIDMAN’S RESPONSE — Daily News: “Freidman denied the report. ‘It is shameful,’ he wrote the Daily News in a text. ‘I plead guilty to a felony, I am humbled and shamed! This is me taking responsibility for my actions, and has nothing to do w/ mc.’ His lawyer, Patrick Egan, was more measured in his response. ‘The NY Times report assumes facts that are not of record. My client entered a plea this morning in Albany. The plea agreement is not of record. I cannot comment on any speculation regarding what the entry of the plea indicates regarding any case other than my client's,’ Egan said…’Michael is a dear dear personal friend and a passive client! That's it!’ Friedman texted. ‘This is a very difficult day for myself and my family! I had been an officer of the court in excess of 20 years and now I am a felon!’” Read it here 

“Michael Cohen Bonded With Russia-Tied C.E.O., Though Deals Didn’t Pan Out” — New York Times’s Ben Protess, William K. Rashbaum, and Mike McIntire: “During an impromptu meeting at the Polo Bar in Midtown Manhattan just weeks before the 2016 election, Michael D. Cohen and Andrew Intrater struck up a conversation about investing in the taxi business. Mr. Cohen, President Trump’s personal lawyer and longtime fixer, had made millions from his ownership of taxi medallions and other ventures in that industry. Mr. Intrater, an American private equity executive whose cousin and largest client is a Russian oligarch, was looking for new investment opportunities.

— “‘It was really a pleasure to meet you last night,’ Mr. Intrater wrote in an email to Mr. Cohen the next day. ‘I learned a lot about the taxi business and the possibilities which are now out there. Maybe something interesting will emerge.’ Over the next year, the two men sat together at one of Mr. Trump’s inauguration dinners along with the oligarch, Viktor Vekselberg, one of the richest men in Russia; Mr. Intrater’s firm, Columbus Nova, signed Mr. Cohen to a $1 million consulting contract; and Mr. Cohen urged Mr. Intrater to attend Republican fund-raising events after the inauguration.”

MAYOR OF THE WORLD – per a tipster: “Mayor Michael Bloomberg released his annual letter on philanthropy ... as part of Bloomberg Philanthropies’ annual report. The letter points to mayors and their use of data as the antidote to Washington’s ‘direct assault on facts and data.’ He also announced a $42 million infusion into What Works Cities – part of the Bloomberg American Cities Initiative – to continue helping cities use data and facts to better define problems and improve decision-making.” Annual letter

SOCIAL DATA

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Election lawyer Jerry Goldfeder … Dan Weiller, spokesman for the New York State Bar Association

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone: 

— CHRIS CUOMO’S MOMENT — Hollywood Reporter’s Jeremy Barr: “The fast-talking, playfully combative morning show host is getting his own platform on June 4. There's something about Chris Cuomo, because even people who fight with him on television still seem to really like him. Anthony Scaramucci, a fellow Italian and reliable television combatant, considers him a friend. Kellyanne Conway, who has tussled with Cuomo on a regular basis for months now in off-the-rails interviews that get chopped up and shared all over the Internet, appeared genuinely excited for him when CNN announced in mid-March he would get his own primetime show...” Read it here. 

GIULIANI AS DE FACTO MUELLER SPOKESMAN: That's how Trump lawyer Rudy Giuliani has appeared lately, most notably (and controversially) in a Sunday night New York Times headline: "Mueller Hopes to Wrap Up Obstruction Inquiry Into Trump by Sept. 1, Giuliani Says." The problem with playing up Giuliani's claims, as POLITICO's Darren Samuelsohn notes , is that given special counsel Robert Mueller's "assiduous refusal to discuss his own work, Giuliani's comments are virtually impossible to fact-check."

- "There is some peril in an unrebutted narrative taking root in the public mind," Randall Samborn, a former senior Justice Department aide on the George W. Bush-era special counsel investigation into who leaked the identity of CIA operative Valerie Plame, told Samuelsohn. Samborn added: "By pounding it into the public conversation Giuliani is able to sort of draw a line in the sand that makes people think it should be done by then, whether it's done by then or not."

NEWSROOMS 'FAILING' AT DIVERSITY: Farai Chideya writes in a piece for CJR, adapted from her new report for the Shorenstein Center, how the news media hasn't reached staffing goals that more closely reflect the diversity of the country. She also notes how only four out of 15 major news organizations were willing to provide political staff make-up during the 2016 election. "Many reporters and editors would discuss the issue only on background or off the record," she wrote, "which is curious given the transparency journalists champion when it comes to other institutions."

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg:

— With suburban migration in decline, city begins to grapple with population boom, by POLITICO New York's Janaki Chadha: New York City planning officials are hoping to reverse a “lackluster history” of coordination across the metro region, as the city experiences record population and job growth while increases in surrounding suburbs lag. Fewer city dwellers are moving to the suburbs, and slower employment gains in surrounding areas are dampening the growth of entire metro region despite the city experiencing an economic boom. All of this points to a need for more robust regional planning structures, said Carolyn Grossman-Meagher, head of the regional planning division at the Department of City Planning. A new mapping tool released by the agency on Tuesday aims to help facilitate that by showcasing trends across the tri-state region and using data to gauge the state of the area. Read the story here

STORM SURGE — "State building codes not ready for another Sandy," by Crain's Joe Anuta: "As storm season approaches, New York's building codes are less equipped to prevent property damage caused by future hurricanes than other states along the eastern seaboard, a report released Tuesday showed. The state scored a 64 out of 100 points from the Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety, falling far behind top performers like Florida and New Jersey, which both scored above 90 on the scale. The institute, a nonprofit that researches storm resiliency, said that more stringent building codes are one of the best ways for state governments to help prevent pricey property damage and the economic destabilization that comes along with it. New York suffered $32 billion in property damage in the wake of Superstorm Sandy." Read the story here.

KUSHNER DEALS — “Kushner Cos. and LNR Negotiating Debt on Manhattan Skyscraper” — Wall Street Journal’s Peter Grant: “In 2007, when New York’s go-go commercial real-estate market was near its peak, Kushner Cos. purchased the office tower at 666 Fifth Ave. in Manhattan for what was then a record $1.8 billion using mostly debt. Now, that debt is moving to center stage as Kushner Cos. works to finalize a deal to bring in Brookfield Asset Management as a roughly 50% partner in the 39-story tower, according to people familiar with the matter. The deal would shore up 666 Fifth Ave.’s balance sheet and provide hundreds of millions of dollars for an overhaul of the building that has been a financial headache for Kushner Cos. for years, the people said. If the transaction succeeds, Kushner Cos. would maintain 50.5% stake in the property. Kushner Cos.’s partner in the property, Vornado Realty Trust, would exit and essentially be replaced by Brookfield. But before that deal can take place family-owned Kushner Cos. must reach an agreement with LNR Partners LLC, the special servicer of the debt on the building that totals more than $1.4 billion, which comes due in February.” Read more here. 

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams appointed Mayor Bill de Blasio’s Democratic primary opponent, former City Councilman Sal Albanese, to the Council’s Charter Review Commission

— Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is revoking Bill Cosby’s honorary degree. 

— President Donald Trump will not attend the state GOP convention despite being in town for his own fundraiser. 

— Cuomo has previously taken money from several prominent Republican donors.

— Crain’s rounds up what legislation New Yorkers can expect Albany to act on in the session’s final weeks

— Lawyer Aaron Schlossberg apologized for his racist rant in a sandwich shop last week, and said he’s “not racist”

THE HOME TEAMS — Howard Megdal:

The Jets traded Christian Hackenberg to Oakland for a 2019 conditional seventh round pick, so now he’ll never get those elusive first-team snaps in Jets practice.

Marlins 5, Mets 1: The Mets signed Jose Bautista, which would have been very exciting five years ago, and he doubled in his first game as a Met. But Caleb Smith outpitched Zack Wheeler, and New York’s four-game win streak is over.

Rangers 6, Yankees 4: Domingo German got knocked out in the fourth. But Gleyber Torres homered again. Pretty sure he’s ready to hit higher than ninth in the order.

The day ahead: the Mets host the Marlins. The Yankees are in Texas.

#UpstateAmerica: The maker of the bubble hockey arcade game is expanding its manufacturing plant in Clarence. 

#ZooYork: The Times answers that age-old question: How come you never see a baby pigeon? 

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

POLITICO and South China Morning Post Partner to Expand Coverage of US-China Relations. Read our note from POLITICO Editor-in-Chief John Harris and Editor Carrie Budoff Brown to learn more. 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew


                                            By Edward-Isaac Dovere

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC