Get news like this in your Facebook News Feed



The epidemic of “law enforcement” catering to illegal aliens continues with yet another case of a multi-time deported criminal going on another rape spree. Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian, of Guatemala, was previously deported in 2013 and again in 2014. After sneaking back into the USA again, he went on to rape and assault a 14-year-old girl in the sleepy town of Seaside, Oregon.


The Daily Astorian reports:

A Seaside man detained by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement outside Clatsop County Circuit Court earlier this month was deported twice before allegedly raping a teenage girl, according to the federal agency.

Anastacio Eugenio Lopez Fabian, 24, allegedly had sex with the girl several times beginning in 2016, when she was under 14 years old. Seaside police arrested him in February after he allegedly assaulted her. He was released the same day after posting $25,000 bail.

He has been charged with two counts of second-degree rape, three counts of third-degree rape, fourth-degree assault and harassment. A mandatory minimum sentence of more than six years in prison applies to second-degree rape convictions.

ICE detained him in the courthouse parking lot as he arrived for a hearing. He is in custody at the private Northwest Detention Center in Tacoma, Washington, according to the federal agency’s records. Fabian was deported to Guatemala in 2013 and 2014, according to a statement from ICE spokeswoman Carissa Cutrell, who also said the Clatsop County Sheriff’s Office did not alert the agency of his most recent arrest.

In the meantime, lawmakers — including U.S. Rep. Suzanne Bonamici, D-Oregon — have proposed legislation that would deter immigration arrests at courthouses, schools and health clinics. Some criminal justice officials have suggested the practice discourages immigrants from appearing in court either as witnesses or defendants.

Oregon blogger David Olen Cross writes:

On Wednesday, March 7, 2018 Anastacio Eugenio Lopez Fabian, age 24, was arrested outside of the Clatsop Circuit Courthouse in Astoria, Oregon by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) officers.

Locally, in Clatsop County Anastacio Eugenio Lopez Fabian (ID: 053988; DOB: 12/25/1993) was charged in late February 2018 with two counts of second-degree rape, three counts of third-degree rape, fourth-degree assault and harassment. His sex crimes are related to past incidences where he was purported to have had sex multiple times with a girl under the age of 16 years.

My research on March 14, 2018 indicated that Anastacio Eugenio Lopez Fabian is currently being incarcerated at Northern Oregon Region Correctional Facilities (NOCOR) in The Dalles, Oregon where ICE leases jail beds to hold detainees.

Wanting to know the actual current immigration status of Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian, I contacted via e-mail on Wednesday, March 14, 2018 U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) acting Western Region Communications Director Lori K. Haley.

Apparently on March 15th ICE Western Region Communications Director Haley assigned the task to ICE Public Affairs Officer/Spokesperson Carissa Cutrell to investigate the immigration status of Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian.

On the morning of Friday, March 16th, here is what ICE Public Affairs Officer/Spokesperson Carissa Cutrell had to say via e-mail in response to my inquiry for information on Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian:

“Here’s a statement from ICE which you can attribute to me as an ICE spokesperson:

Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian is a citizen of Guatemala illegally in the U.S. ICE deportation officers removed him to his home country on two prior occasions, once in April 2013 and another time in January 2014.

On Feb. 16, 2018, Lopez-Fabian was arrested for felony rape, among other charges, and booked and released from the Clatsop County Jail without the jail notifying ICE. Hours after his release, ICE deportation officers received information from federal databases about his prior immigration history and his most recent arrest. From there, they conducted an online review of jail and court records and determined that Lopez-Fabian did not have lawful status in the country, and subsequently, targeted him for immigration enforcement. They arrested Lopez-Fabian March 7 on immigration violations prior to his scheduled court appearance on the pending rape charges.

ICE focuses its enforcement resources on individuals who pose a threat to national security, public safety and border security.” – Carissa Cutrell

Analysis of the preceding information:

Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian is a twice deported Guatemalan illegal alien.

At some unknown time, after Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian’s removal from the United States in April 2013 and January 2014, he would once again illegally reenter the country.

Approximately four years after Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian’s illegal return to the country he would be charged in Clatsop County, Oregon with two counts of second-degree rape, three counts of third-degree rape, fourth-degree assault and harassment of a girl under the age of 16 years.

According to ICE Public Affairs Officer Cutrell the Clatsop County Jail released Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian without notifying ICE officers about his release from the jail.

A short period of time after Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian release from the jail, ICE deportation officers received information from federal databases about Lopez-Fabian’s prior immigration history and his most recent arrest. Next, ICE officer’s conducted an online review of jail and court records and determined that Lopez-Fabian did not have lawful status in the country, and subsequently, targeted him for immigration enforcement.

After confirming Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian not being legally present in the country, ICE officers would arrest Lopez-Fabian on March 7, 2018 outside the Clatsop County Circuit Courthouse.

At this time it is unclear on how U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers and Clatsop County law enforcement are going cooperate in bringing Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian to justice for multiple sex crimes against a young girl.

One last bit of information, I contacted the Clatsop County Jail on March 22nd and talked to Clatsop County Jail Commander Matt Phillips about Anastacio Eugenio Lopez-Fabian; the jail commander told me he received two e-mails from ICE officers but ICE had not placed an immigration detainer on Lopez-Fabian.

As a “sanctuary state”, Oregon has become home to any illegal alien who wishes to commit crimes, as it’s become clear that they get preferential treatment in the courts by the judges and what used to be law enforcement. You may recall the story of Sergio Jose Martinez, who had been deported twenty times before going on a rape and robbery spree in Portland last summer. Or Jonathan Alcantara Romero, who, after pleading to DUI and assault charges, was facing deportation and decided to rape a 14-year-old girl.

As a privately owned web site, we reserve the right to edit or remove comments that contain spam, advertising, vulgarity, threats of violence, racism, anti-Semitism, or personal/abusive attacks on other users. The same applies to trolling, the use of multiple aliases, or just generally being a jerk. Enforcement of this policy is at the sole discretion of the site administrators and repeat offenders may be blocked or permanently banned without warning. Guest posting is disabled for security reasons.


* Facebook is currently censoring conservative content. We hope they will reverse their policy and honor all voices in the near future. Until then please like our page on Facebook and PLEASE check the Gateway Pundit homepage for the latest stories.





    #mc_embed_signup{background:#fff; clear:left; font:14px Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif; }
    /* Add your own MailChimp form style overrides in your site stylesheet or in this style block.
       We recommend moving this block and the preceding CSS link to the HEAD of your HTML file. */




 



 

Your donations keep theGatewayPundit.com online.
Thank you for your support.













































var sc_project=9449268; 
var sc_invisible=0; 
var sc_security="3cc87ae0"; 
var scJsHost = (("https:" == document.location.protocol) ?
"https://secure." : "http://www.");
document.write("");






© 2018 The Gateway Pundit – All Rights Reserved.

© 2018 The Gateway Pundit – All Rights Reserved.

Send this to a friend
