
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

09/22/2017 07:20 AM EDT

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

When Puerto Rico was going bankrupt, New York officials rallied on the island for federal aid. Now, with the Caribbean territory devastated by Hurricane Maria, they’re trying to step in again with assistance. The island’s three million residents are without power, and the hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers with ties there — including some top political leaders — are struggling to contact loved ones. Mayor Bill de Blasio and City Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito encouraged people to make donations of time and supplies and said emergency crews were standing by. Gov. Andrew Cuomo leaves this morning, just as you’re reading this.


Story Continued Below

The storm will also affect the annual Somos El Futuro conference, a post-election mainstay on the political circuit. “We are committed to moving forward in a constructive manner consistent with the real needs on the ground. As we work out the details, we will continue to reach out to you and look forward to your support,” Somos organizers wrote in an email. “Please rest assured that every effort is being made for us to collectively have the greatest impact during our planned time in Puerto Rico. The island needs us now more than ever.”

— How to Help victims of Hurricane Maria.

IT’S FRIDAY. Fall starts today. Got a tip? Feedback? News to share? Let us know. By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? Talking to reporters at JFK before he flies to Puerto Rico.

WHERE’S BlLL? In New York City, with no announced public schedule. 

WHERE’S HILLARY? On the Brian Lehrer Show, at 10 a.m.

The Tabloids — Daily News: ”SICK MIND: NFL killer had severe brain damage at just 27; Hernandez kin sue for $20M, blame his suicide on league”— New York Post: “ISLE OF MISERY: P.R. in ruins after ‘cane, Crushing blow on top of fiscal crisis” — See Them

The Tabloids, cont.— Newsday: “FEDS ON LIRR, NJ TRANSIT WRECKS: ENGINEERS HAD SLEEP APNEA”—  El Diario: ”A levantar la isla” TRANSLATION: “Raising the island”—  See Them

The Free Papers — Metro New York: “CRUISIN FOR A CAUSE: A well dressed biker gang will be taking to the city’s streets this weekend to raise awareness for often-overlooked men’s health issues”— AM New York: “$HIP HAS COME IN: “Businesses in Red Hook, Rockaways enjoying ferry boost”— See Them

The Broadsheets — Wall Street Journal,—4 col., above the fold: “U.S. Steps Up North Korea Pressure”— New York Times,— 2 col., above the fold: “A Scramble to Help Puerto Rico, Already Isolated and Struggling” — 2 col., below the fold: “Black Detectives in New York Say Cronyism Cost Promotions” — See Them

WEEK IN REVIEW: Here’s a behind-the-scenes look at the policy news exclusives POLITICO New York Pro subscribers were reading this week. Get the stories here.

QUOTE OF THE DAY: "I have been using Facebook, every app in the world to reach out to them, and I have not been successful," Rep. Nydia Velazquez, on efforts to reach her family in Puerto Rico in the wake of devastating Hurricane Maria. 

OTHER QUOTE OF THE DAY: “To hacks who think after losing an abysmal turnout elex &amp; being outspent by millions I will go away, expect a vigorous campaign in General” — Sal Albanese, via Twitter. 

STAT OF THE DAY: Under the latest version of Obamacare repeal, the Graham-Cassidy bill, New York stands to see its federal Medicaid funding cut by 35 percent between the years 2020 and 2026, a loss of about $52 billion. 

OTHER STAT OF THE DAY: New York’s fashion runways are getting ever so slightly more diverse. An assessment of 2,601 runway appearances at more than 94 shows during Fashion Week found there were at least two nonwhite models in each show, and 90 plus size models. Via the New York Times. 

— STAY VIGILANT: New York City’s Office of Emergency Management is launching a Notify NYC app today, the city’s first emergency notification mobile app. 

WHAT ALBANY IS READING: 

— CUOMO’S FUNDRAISING PLANS — Wall Street Journal’s Erica Orden and Mike Vilensky: “Donors willing to shell out thousands to watch baseball or share breakfast with Cuomo will soon get the chance. Mr. Cuomo is planning an aggressive fundraising schedule through the end of the year as potential gubernatorial candidates—including a wealthy Republican businessman and a Democratic former Sex and the City star—weigh challenging him in 2018, according to an advisory his campaign sent supporters that was reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.” 

— “Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, already has a formidable war chest of $25 million in campaign cash for his anticipated run for a third term next year. But through December he has cross-country plans to raise at least hundreds of thousands more, the advisory shows. ‘The governor from the beginning has made it a priority to fill his coffers,’ said George Arzt, a longtime New York Democratic strategist. ‘The idea of a war chest is not just to spend money but to prevent other people from getting in the race.’ The governor is planning at least eight high-dollar fundraisers before 2018, according to the advisory.” Read more here. 

— THERE’S A BILL FOR THAT: Sen. Tony Avella has decided to introduce a bill that would prohibit your employer from making you get a microchip ID device implanted in your hand. "No employee should be forced to sacrifice their bodily autonomy as a prerequisite to obtaining or keeping their employment,” Avella declared.

— PAYING FOR LIBOUS: Gannett reports that taxpayers could be on the hook for $700,000 of legal fees incurred by the late Sen. Tom Libous, a Republican from Binghamton. Libous, you may recall, was convicted of lying to the FBI and died from cancer while serving a sentence of probation. But since Libous was unable to appeal his conviction, his lawyers posthumously had it thrown out. As such, Libous was never found guilty, and under state law, taxpayers will indemnify him. 

— D’AMATO, WEED LOBBYIST, EXPLAINS — Al D’Amato op-ed for the Daily News: “I grew up in a conservative, Italian-American home in a different era, when marijuana was nothing more than ‘reefer madness.’ I began my service in the U.S. Senate as Ronald Reagan became our President and First Lady Nancy Reagan led the charge to ‘just say no.’ Nobody was more anti-drugs than I was. However, as I have learned more about marijuana, particularly medical marijuana, over the last several years, my views — like the views of most Americans — have changed.” Read more here.

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING:

— POLICING WHILE BLACK — A federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission investigation in response to a complaint made by three black NYPD detectives found last year that the Department’s promotions process “systematically stymied black detectives in the Intelligence Division, leaving them with less pay, power and prestige than their similarly qualified white counterparts,” the New York Times reported last night. 

“Those findings, which have not previously been made public, failed to invigorate efforts within the department to fix a promotions process some police officials have conceded in sworn testimony is opaque and frustrating...The Justice Department, which has retreated from police oversight under President Trump, said in June that it would not sue the New York Police Department over the findings.”

Takeaway: “Civil rights lawyers said it put added pressure on New York City’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, to push to make detective promotions fairer. The detectives plan to sue the department in the coming days.” Read more here. 

— AMAZON FLIRTS WITH NEW YORK — You probably heard. But Amazon is opening a new, very very big office space in Manhattan. The e-tailer “signed a lease for 359,000 square feet at Brookfield’s 5 Manhattan West, where it intends to open in 2018,” the Post reports. 

The draw? Amazon’s getting “up to $20 million from the state in Excelsior Jobs Program tax credits and expects to hire 2,000 people.” Read more here. 

— BUT WE’RE PLAYING HARD TO GET— NYC thinks it doesn’t need to woo Amazon to site its new headquarters in New York City with subsidies, Deputy Mayor Alicia Glen told WNYC’s Ilya Marritz on Thursday: “The de Blasio administration is opposed to large subsidies. ‘Our view of this has been really for the past 20 years that New York City itself is the draw and we don’t need to put together discretionary incentive packages to lure a company like Amazon,’” Alicia Glen said. Read more here. 

— LAUNDRY SHOCK: “After a six-month investigation, Annie Hylton uncovers third-world working conditions and rampant sexual harassment at industrial laundry facilities serving Manhattan hospitals, hotels, and restaurants. At Dissent, she recounts how workers, who went without health and safety training and personal protective equipment, routinely handled linens contaminated by human blood, urine, vomit, and feces.” Read more here. 

—  INMATE ASSAULTS — A Bronx Juvenile Detention Center is being sued over reports of sexual assaults — Daily News’s Victoria Bekiempis: “A Bronx juvenile detention center has been marred by “countless” reports over nearly two decades that young inmates were sexually abused there, court papers allege. Horizon Juvenile Center is the subject of an Aug. 30 lawsuit alleging female guards got boys drunk and sexually assaulted them.” Read more here. 

— DO READ Jeff Mays’ excellent, in-depth profile of Councilman Robert Cornegy, on the Undefeated. 

— NOT THE TERROR SQUAD: At 10:30 p.m. tonight, NYPD Chief of Patrol Terence Monahan will appear on Lisa Evers’ Street Soldiers for a “special town hall meeting with Fat Joe and Council Member Jumaane Williams” on Fox 5 New York. 

TRUMP’S NEW YORK

— WHEN MUELLER CALLS — The Justice Department recently asked powerhouse New York law firm, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, for information and documents related to its work on behalf of Russian-allied Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych’s government, the New York Times reports. The firm had been hired by former Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort to draft the report used to justify the jailing of Yanukovych’s political rival. Read more here.  

SOCIAL DATA: 

BIRTHDAYS: TJ Ducklo is 29 … Jerald Watson of the NYC Economic Development Corporation ... BuzzFeed’s Dara Levy ...Bill Weitz...ACS Director of Communications Aja Worthy-Davis...NYC DOHMH spokesman Chris Miller...State Sen. Marty Golden...Assemblywoman Michele Titus...on Saturday, to...Law Department spokeswoman Kate O’Brien Ahlers...Karanja Augustin..and on Sunday to ...SKD’s Mike Morey...and Councilman Robert Cornegy. It’s also the 50th anniversary of the Freedom of Information Act ! (To Jimmy Pan, we’re sorry). 

Tom King of the New York State Rifle and Pistol Association … State Senate aide Carmella Mantello … Saturday — New York Now host Matt Ryan … Chris Baynes, an investigator for the Office of Attorney General … Sunday — Allison Jenkins of Parks &amp; Trails New York … Jennifer Muthig of the Multiple Sclerosis Society.

OUT AND ABOUT – Pool report: a “group gathered at an event in New York City on Thursday, organized by the Tent Foundation, to discuss a new report (http://bit.ly/2fEo7CT) that identifies how global businesses can play a key role and make a lasting impact in response to the refugee crisis. The study was conducted in partnership with the CDG. At the occasion, Tent also announced new partners including Ben &amp; Jerry’s, Generali, Masimo, HOMY and Taqanu, all of which committed to help refugees. These companies join nearly 75 others in the Tent partnership, including Airbnb, LinkedIn, MasterCard, IKEA, Starbucks and Unilever.”

SPOTTED: Hamdi Ulukaya, founder and CEO of Chobani and founder of Tent Foundation, Paul Polman, CEO of Unilever, David Miliband, president and CEO of the International Rescue Committee, Joe Gebbia, founder of Airbnb, Per Heggenes, CEO of the IKEA Foundation, Gideon Maltz, executive director of the Tent Foundation, Masood Ahmed, president of Center of Global Development, and Manuela Ferro of the World Bank.

SPOTTED: Steve Mnuchin at breakfast at Cafe Boulud Thursday morning in NYC

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Alex Weprin: 

— TIMES DRAMA: Vanity Fair’s Joe Pompeo has some juicy reporting from inside The New York Times, as he examines the fallout from Michelle Goldberg’s ill-fated review of a book by Vanessa Grigoriadis. “But the review of Blurred Lines has itself set off a drama within the halls of the Times,where the hand-wringing this week has been considerable, sources there told me. ‘It’s being talked about a whole lot,’ said one. Another said, ‘It’s sloppiness, and also a question of whether or not the public response was adequate. It’s a significant error.’ A third journalist described the fallout as ‘humiliating.’”

MUST WATCH:

—Here’s Jimmy Kimmel, dedicating much of his monologue to the Graham-Cassidy health care bill. This was the third night in a row Kimmel addressed the bill in the monologue.

You can read the full Morning Media column and sign up to receive it in your inbox by clicking here.

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Sally Goldenberg and Conor Skelding:

— "With Stores Closing, How Come Property Values — and Tax Assessments — Are Still Sky High?," by Commercial Observer's Lauren Elkies Schram: "In January 2007, Apple leased the 16,000-square foot three-floor store at 21-25 West 34th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas at a rent of $6 million a year. Then-Apple Chief Executive Officer Steve Jobs famously visited the site and deemed the block unworthy of an Apple store. ... 

“As landlords of prime retail space face greater challenges in leasing their spaces due to overinflated rents, excess supply and the Amazon effect, they are hoping the [city Department of Finance] will take these factors into account when assessing their properties. Since the city relies on old data — when perhaps the market was rosier — to calculate tax bills, commercial property owners are doubling down to prove that their properties were incorrectly assessed at inflated prices." Read the story here.

You can find the free version of Sally’s real estate newsletter here: http://politi.co/2a1DgJk

AROUND NEW YORK

— Nicole Malliotakis did a Reddit AMA, and redditors asked her about everything, from Donald Trump, to climate change, to New York’s specialized high schools and the city’s prep for hurricanes after Superstorm Sandy.

— A Manhattan Federal Court Judge ordered a Midtown construction company that had been accused of creating a fake business to dodge paying union wages and benefits to pay $76 million to the workers it had cheated. 

— Suffolk County lawmakers are trying to suspend red-light cameras. 

— A judge ruled two Black Lives Matter activists can proceed with their lawsuit against the NYPD over its handling of their arrests. 

— Democrats are hoping to capitalize on anti-Trump fervor among residents in Nassau and Westchester Counties in their efforts to win county executive races. 

— Rochester City Court Judge Leticia Astacio claims her work conditions have negatively impacted her health, and that’s why she won’t be showing up for work.

— An NYPD sergeant was arrested Thursday after he pulled a gun on a bicyclist, and later pushed the man to the ground. . 

— Prosecutors are asking whether Department of Corrections officers turned a blind eye to inmate sexual assaults among women at Rikers. 

— First Person: “How I Navigate the NYC subway system in a wheelchair” 

— One worker was killed and another injured in falls from a Midtown construction site. 

— Manslaughter charges were dropped against Khari Noerdlinger, the son of former de Blasio aide Rachel Noerdlinger. 

— A photographer lost his only copy of a couple’s wedding photos in a backpack on the subway, and he’s asking New Yorkers for help finding it. 

— There’s some social science behind why we love to tweet and gram about how terrible the subway has been recently. 

THE HOME TEAMS — POLITICO New York’s Howard Megdal: 

The day after a young girl was injured by a foul ball at Yankee Stadium, additional protective netting measures were announced by... the Cincinnati Reds.

The day ahead: the Mets host the Nationals. The Yankees are in Toronto.

#UpstateAmerica: The Tonawanda sub eater is back at it after a four-month absence.

#ZooYork: A community of bat watchers has formed on Staten Island. 

Can Brain Science Save Lives in Chicago?: Last year, 764 people were murdered in Chicago, almost one in five of them age 19 or younger. Most of these crimes were committed as an act of revenge or retaliation. In this month’s What Works package, POLITICO examines the “Becoming a Man program,” which seeks to prevent these crimes from happening. The approach is a result of growing awareness that many kids in high-crime, poor neighborhoods need help coping with the after-effects of witnessing traumatic violence. The program seeks to prevent the reflexive anger that claims so many young lives in Chicago by engaging teens and teaching impulse control, while working to develop the skills and instill values that will lead to productive lives after school. READ MORE: http://www.politico.com/magazine/what-works

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC