
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

12/19/2017 07:15 AM EST

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj) 

Mikie Sherrill was already the favorite in the crowded field to take on U.S. Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen next year. Now that's even more true.


Story Continued Below

The Democratic chairs of the four counties that make up the district — Essex, Morris, Passaic and Sussex — all endorsed Sherrill in a statement issued yesterday.

Essex County Democratic Chairman LeRoy Jones: “Mikie has shown through her hard work and determination that she has what it takes to lead the 11th district. For years, the constituents of West Essex have had no voice in Washington and it is time we change that, which is why the municipal chairs and I voted unanimously to support Mikie Sherrill for Congress.” 

These are more than just personal endorsements. Each chair’s endorsement goes a long way towards securing the county committee’s endorsement, which in most counties (correct me here if there’s an exception among these four) means the coveted “county line” in the primary. 

Sherill is one of four Democrats running in the district, but she’s left most of her rivals in the dust when it comes to fundraising. She reported taking in $744,000 on her most recent report. Rival Democrat Tamara Harris raised a little less than $460,000. The fundraising, combined with Sherrill’s resume as a former Navy helicopter pilot and federal prosecutor, has made her the most formidable contender. 

WHERE’S CHRISTIE? In Newark at 1 pm to speak at a NJ Hall of Fame event

WHERE’S MURPHY? In Trenton for a 12 pm personnel announcement

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Assemblywoman Pamela Lampitt, Former union leader Carla Katz

QUOTE OF THE DAY:  "That fine was not a slap on the wrist, it was a kiss on the ass” — State Sen. Richard Codey on Essex County Executive Joseph DiVincenzo’s ELEC fine

WHAT TRENTON MADE

PASSING THE TRASH — “Teachers accused of sexual misconduct keep getting jobs in N.J. Here's why,” by NJ Advance Media’s Adam Clark and Jessica Remo: “The little girls would hold his hand and sit on his lap. They would kiss their first-grade teacher, and he would kiss them back. Keep it a secret, he warned the 5- and 6-year olds. Otherwise, he said, they could get into trouble. This alarming behavior, according to court documents, was no secret to Montville Township school administrators, who warned the teacher, Jason Fennes, to stop having physical contact with the children. Fennes' 'inappropriate interactions with students' even cost him a raise. Five years after the first documented complaints, Montville suspended Fennes and he resigned. But when a private school 40 minutes away called to confirm Fennes' employment dates, Montville school officials were bound by a separation agreement. They could make no mention of the kisses, the hand-holding or parents' complaints that the first-grade teacher touched their little girls too often. With that agreement muting his former employer, Fennes got the new job — and subsequently sexually assaulted a first-grade girl less than a year after leaving Montville. It was the culmination of a string of sexual assaults he since admitted, including six victims in the Montville and Butler school districts and at Cedar Hill Preparatory School in Somerset ... How? It's called 'passing the trash,' a reckless cycle enabled by school administrators who fear litigation and shy away from controversy. The practice — eerily similar to scandals in the Boy Scouts and the Catholic Church — allows teachers suspected or accused of misconduct with students to move seamlessly from job to job.” Read the report

SILENCE FROM CHRISTIE ON THIS ONE — “Bill sweetening Camden mayor's retirement benefits speeds along,” by POLITICO's Matt Friedman: “Camden Mayor Dana Redd’s retirement benefits are on the verge of getting better. The state Senate on Monday passed a bill that would sweeten Redd’s pension — as well as some other elected officials' pensions — just as she’s about to leave office after eight years as mayor. She has many more years of service as a Camden council member, Camden city and county employee, assemblywoman and state senator. The bill also sailed through the Assembly Appropriations Committee, passing after just one minute by a vote of 8-2 with one abstention. It awaits a vote in the full Assembly before reaching Gov. Chris Christie’s desk.” Read the report

MORE LAME DUCKERY— “Bills to expand corporate incentive process move in lame duck,” by POLITICO's Katherine Landergan: “The Democratic-controlled state Legislature is moving several bills that would expand corporate subsidies in the final weeks before Gov. Chris Christie is set to leave office. At least four proposals that would bolster incentive programs were advanced by the Assembly Appropriations Committee on Monday, in the midst of the state’s lame-duck session. If they clear the Legislature before the end of the session, they will land on the desk of the Republican governor, who has long been a champion of the state’s incentive programs. Gov.-elect Phil Murphy, who spent much of his campaign criticizing Christie for showering large corporations with tax breaks, takes office in January. ‘Murphy might put his foot down and veto bills like this if he were governor today, so now would be the time to get as many through as possible,’ said Jon Whiten, vice president of the left-leaning think tank New Jersey Policy Perspective.” Read the report

I WANT YOU TO SHOW ME THE WAY — “Murphy taps Tahesha Way as secretary of state,” by POLITICOs Ryan Hutchins: “Gov.-elect Phil Murphy said on Monday he will nominate former Passaic County freeholder Tahesha Way as the state's next secretary of state, assigning her the task of overseeing an expansion of voting rights and fighting President Donald Trump’s voter-fraud investigation. Way, a 46-year-old Wayne resident and Bronx native, served as freeholder director in Passaic County, where she was on the board for several years. She also spent five years as an administrative law judge. Her case work included election issues. Way said she would work with Murphy “to make democracy real for all residents of New Jersey,” and to maintain and “strengthen voting rights and common ground efforts to modernize the voting process.” Murphy, a Democrat who has vowed to sign sweeping new laws meant to expand voting rights, said Way would help him implement such changes and also would fight back against a Trump-appointed commission looking into the integrity of elections.” Read the report 

—“Murphy slams Trump and his 'lunatic' pal over voting rights in naming secretary of state” Read the report

FISCAL CONSERVATISM IN ACTION — “Trenton state office buildings project, new Ewing juvenile jail approved by NJ,” by The Trentonian’s David Foster: “The state constitution. Who cares? An impact study. Who needs one? Public testimony. Forget about it. In true Jersey fashion, the State Leasing and Space Utilization Committee continued the state’s ramrodding ways on Monday by approving two controversial projects in Mercer County during Gov. Chris Christie’s final days in office. The three-member board — comprised of State Sen. Nicholas Scutari (D-Union), Assemblyman Raj Mukherji (D-Hudson) and assistant state Treasurer Robert Shaughnessy — unanimously approved the state office buildings project in Trenton and the new juvenile jail in Ewing despite warnings their actions were violating the state constitution.” Read the report

—"Legal bid to stop $200M state bonds for controversial Trenton construction,” by NJ Spotlight’s John Reitmeyer: “A group of Trenton residents that includes a top city official, a sitting state lawmaker and the city’s former mayor is suing Gov. Chris Christie’s administration in a bid to block the state from issuing more than $200 million in new debt to finance the construction of government office buildings in Trenton. The suit was filed in Superior Court in Mercer County yesterday, just as the building project was getting a final sign-off inside the State House from a little-watched panel of lawmakers and executive-branch officials.” Read the report

MAYBE THEY VOTED ABSENTEE IN ATLANTIC COUNTY AND THEY JUST DON’T KNOW IT — “More people than ever are registered to vote, but fewer actually do,” by The Record’s Catherine Carrera: “Voter turnout for governor's races in New Jersey has been dwindling since 2001 and hit an all-time low this year, but some political analysts and election officials say there may be ways to flip that trend – starting with a forgotten bill likely to go nowhere before the end of this year. “We can’t keep running elections like the state is still made up of farms,” said Bergen County Clerk John S. Hogan, whose county, like the rest of the state, has seen a dramatic uptick in the number of people registering to vote while the number of people actually voting has nosedived. A bill re-introduced at the start of the 2016-2017 session, A-2002, after getting vetoed by Gov. Chris Christie in 2015, aimed to revamp New Jersey’s voting rights laws and address low turnout by making voting more convenient. The bill hasn’t seen any action since it was reintroduced.” Read the report

WAR ON DRUGS — “Why do some N.J. lawmakers want to increase prison terms for heroin possession?” by WHYY’s Joe Hernandez: “In an era of growing tolerance toward people struggling with drug addiction, four New Jersey lawmakers want to impose tougher penalties on those caught with heroin or fentanyl, a powerful opioid. A bill in the New Jersey Legislature would increase possible prison terms for defendants convicted of possessing, selling, or manufacturing the drugs — in some cases quadrupling the amount of time they could spend behind bars ... the proposed legislation seems to run counter to recent efforts by Gov. Chris Christie, a Republican, to fight the opioid scourge in New Jersey by connecting drug users with resources to get clean … The legislation would reduce that amount for first-, second-, and third-degree charges, effectively upping penalties for the same quantity of the drug. For example, the punishment for possessing 5 grams of heroin would go from a three- to five-year prison term to a five- to 10-year sentence. Instead of three to five years behind bars for carrying 10 grams, a defendant could face 10 to 20 years in prison under the proposal. The three Democratic sponsors of the Assembly bill — John McKeon, Annette Quijano, and Valerie Vainieri Huttle — declined interview requests Friday.” Read the report

DON’T BET ON IT — “No referendum on casino near NYC soon 'if ever',” by The AP’s Wayne Parry: “New Jersey's Senate president says he doesn't see the state asking voters again whether to authorize a casino near New York City "anytime soon, if ever." Steve Sweeney tells The Associated Press he doesn't think the state Legislature will put a second referendum before voters in 2018 or 2019. And the owner of the Meadowlands Racetrack, where the new casino would go, says he's prepared to wait five years or more to let voters approve the project. Jeff Gural tells the AP that if the referendum is defeated a second time, it will never be approved.” Read the report

FISCAL CONSERVATISM — "State to borrow $228 million for new taxation and health department buildings," by The Record's James Nash: “New Jersey plans to borrow $228 million and build offices to house the departments of taxation, agriculture and health, despite objections from downtown Trenton residents and businesses to the plan and concerns about state debt. The Legislature's Joint State Leasing and Space Utilization Committee approved plans for the departments to move to two new buildings on state-owned land in downtown Trenton, which is the linchpin of Gov. Chris Christie's plan to redevelop the neighborhood by demolishing the existing buildings. Critics, including many downtown Trenton residents and business owners, have called on the Christie administration to delay the project until Gov.-elect Phil Murphy takes office in January. They have expressed concerns that Christie's proposed buildings would not be close to the Trenton Transit Center and would not accommodate mixed residential and commercial uses, making them government fortresses in a struggling commercial area.” Read the report 

—“Press, friend or foe? My thoughts on the press and our relationships with them,” by Port Authority Chairman Kevin O’Toole Read the column

—“DJ Pauly D digging the new NJ gov” Read the report

—“Bill to abolish waterfront commission poised for final passage in New Jersey” Read the report

— “Senate votes to strip NJSPCA of responsibilities” Read the report

—“LD36 Agony: The pratfalls of a volatile and politically thorny district” Read the report

—"Weinberg falls 6 votes short of overriding Christie's oil-train bill veto” Read the report

—“Meet the families tormented by N.J.'s dysfunctional medical examiner system” Read the report

— “Legislators move to revamp medical examiner office after report of 'disturbing cases” Read the report

—“Vitale says elective angioplasty bill won't move as hospitals brace for coming figh” Read the report 

—“What 2 ex-N.J. governors say about GOP's tax bill; #MeToo in politics; raising the minimum wage” Read the report

—“Ex-treasurer knows challenges Muoio will face” Read the report

THE TRUMP ERA

RODNEY IN DANGEROUS FIELD — “Rebelling Republican suburbs offer Democrats path to House control,” by The New York Times’ Jonathan Martin and Alexander Burns: “The mounting backlash to President Trump that is threatening his party’s control of Congress is no longer confined just to swing districts on either coast. Officials in both parties believe that Republican control of the House is now in grave jeopardy because a group of districts that are historically Republican or had been trending that way before the 2016 election are slipping away. Much attention has been paid to the handful of seats in New York, New Jersey and California that are represented by Republicans but voted for Hillary Clinton last year. But even with district lines drawn to favor Republicans in many states, the swelling antipathy toward Mr. Trump threatens to breach the party’s defenses and stretch the congressional battlefield beyond the dimensions Republicans and Democrats anticipated a year ago. ‘There’s no illusion about the storm that’s coming,’ said Representative Tom Cole, Republican of Oklahoma, invoking last month’s governor’s races and last week’s Senate special election. ‘If you had any doubts, they were wiped away after New Jersey, Virginia and Alabama.’” Read the report

FRELINGHUYSEN’S DISTRICT — “In one New Jersey town, pending tax changes create anxiety,” by The New York Times’ Patrick McGeehan: “Politically speaking, Livingston is not the bluest of the suburbs surrounding New York City. But there are few places where people are feeling any more anxious about the potential impact of the federal tax bill proposed by Republican leaders in Washington. ‘They’re crippling us,’ said Walter Levine, who has lived in this New Jersey community since 1976. As Mr. Levine sees it, Livingston, a fairly affluent town with a population of about 30,000, could become even less affordable as residents face rising tax bills and falling home values. They could be left with less disposable income to spend in the local stores, setting off a ‘domino effect’ that could derail the town’s economy. It is a dire forecast, but not a radical one. Livingston sits on the western edge of Essex County, which Moody’s Analytics, a company that provides economic research, placed at the top of its list of places whose housing markets would suffer the most under the Republicans’ plan. According to Moody’s, the tax proposal could carve as much as 10.5 percent off the projected value of homes in Essex County in two years. Six other New Jersey counties made the top 10 on Moody’s list. Livingston’s Republican representative in Congress, Rodney Frelinghuysen, voted against the House version of the tax bill because, he said, of the ‘very negative impacts it would have on so many of my fellow New Jerseyans.’” Read the report

—“N.J. tech CEO: Cutting my taxes won't help the economy. Here's why | Opinion” Read the report

IMMIGRATION — “Immigration enforcement targets a wide swath of N.J.” by NJ Advance Media’s Ted Sherman: “In a series of New Jersey raids announced last week, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement took into custody 101 foreign nationals they said were in this county illegally--a sweep that stretched across much of the state. Experts say the targeted areas underscored the wide landscape where immigrants live in the state. While most of those arrested were in Essex, Hudson, Camden and Middlesex counties, ICE said others were taken into custody in Atlantic, Bergen, Burlington, Cumberland, Mercer, Monmouth, Morris, Passaic, Somerset and Union counties. Lori Nessel, director of the Seton Hall University School of Law Center for Social Justice, said while the largest numbers of immigrants facing deportation are found in New Jersey's largest cities, ‘it is notable that there are now immigrants facing deportation in even the smallest towns and boroughs.’” Read the report 

—“Warren County freeholders endorse Lonegan in 5th District” Read the report

INFOGRAPHIC – How States Are Fighting the Opioid Epidemic: New Jersey and other states are working to prevent opioid abuse through prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMP). Download our infographic for a state-level look at PDMP, including how quickly doctors and pharmacists are required to report dispensing the drug.

LOCAL

WHERE DID YOU GO, JOE DIVINCENZO? — “Joe D's sins, and why top Democrats look away,” by The Star-Ledger’s Tom Moran: “DiVincenzo is a talented and tireless county executive, give him that. But he taints that by grabbing money for himself at the same time. He earns a generous salary of $168,000, about what the governor makes. But on top, he collects a public pension of $69,000 a year, for his job as county executive. You may wonder: How can he collect a fat pension for a job he still holds? Aren't pensions supposed to be for retirement? Yes, but the rules in Jersey are creative that way. And Joe D, as he's known, is not strict about following the rules anyway. He just paid a $20,000 fine for using campaign funds to fatten up his personal lifestyle a bit more. He bought a gym membership, tickets to Devils games, a tuxedo, and so on. He even paid parking tickets. But my personal favorite is the repeated use of this money for trips to Puerto Rico, timed just right for Super Bowl weekend. "I didn't do anything wrong," he tells me. How far would he go if someone didn't stop him? Would it be okay to hold next year's meeting in the South of France? Perhaps Thailand?” Read the report

0.005 MASTROS — “Paterson school district spends $36K in suit over primates in Black History display,” by The Record’s Joe Malinconico: “A discrimination lawsuit over a Black History Month student art display that allegedly included images of primates has cost the Paterson school district almost $36,000. Christopher Eutsey, who was a teacher at School 28 at the time of the art display in February 2015, claimed in his lawsuit that he lost his job because he complained that having the primate images adjacent to photos of African-American students was “offensive and discriminatory.” The Board of Education approved a $17,000 settlement in the lawsuit at its meeting last month. The district did not release the documents in the case until this week. In addition to the settlement payment, Paterson Public School spent $18,892 on legal fees for the private law firm that represented the district, according to spokeswoman Terry Corallo.” Read ther report

SATANCON — “Hoboken may banish rowdy SantaCon to the North Pole,” by The Jersey Journal’s Caitlin Mota: “An event that is supposed to raise money for local charities brought chaos to the Mile Square City on Saturday. One cop was assaulted, another officer was spit on during processing at headquarters, and 17 people were arrested during this year's annual SantaCon. The popular bar crawl is known to bring issues to Hoboken, but after Saturday's mayhem it could be the last time thousands of people dressed as Santa descend on the city. Police Chief Ken Ferrante called Saturday's SantaCon the busiest day for the department in five years. Police issued 52 tickets for drinking and urinating in public and other disorderly persons offenses. Another 32 moving violations were written for motorists driving erratically throughout the city, the chief said on Twitter.” Read the report

—“Paterson sees gains in preschool enrollment” Read the report

—“South Jersey residents report higher rate of opioid scripts, new poll shows” Read the report

—“Ras Baraka, celebrities feed 300 homeless in Newark” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

TIME FOR SOME BOAT TRAFFIC PROBLEMS ON THE DELAWARE — “Low levels in Delaware River could keep re-enactors on land,” by The AP’s Bruce Shipkowski: “The annual re-enactment of George Washington's daring 1776 crossing of the Delaware River draws large crowds of families and history fans to both sides of the river in Pennsylvania and New Jersey each year on Christmas. But the re-enactors may be kept out of the water this year unless Mother Nature provides some help. Organizers say a ‘pretty significant amount’ of precipitation will have to fall in the coming days to raise the river's water levels in time for the event, adding that where and when any snow or rain occurs are also important factors. But they stress that all other events planned at the park on the day of the crossing — including Washington rallying the troops and other historical speeches and processions — will still take place.” Read the report

—“One in 10 students are chronically absent in New Jersey” Read the report

—“In NJ, Electric Vehicles Could Be Key to Economic, Environmental Progress” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC