“Bone Tomahawk” filmmaker S. Craig Zahler turns in another viscous blend of low-key character study and violent low-art pulp

All along “Brawl in Cell Block 99,” S. Craig Zahler’s road-to-perdition follow-up to his similarly descent-tinged debut feature “Bone Tomahawk,” you can feel just as much what the writer-director is railing against in his genre choices as what he’s flexing.

Action heroes are too cheeky and boyish, so Vince Vaughn’s cornered bruiser is grown-ass, dedicated to his family, and stoic. Fights have become quick-cut messes, so these scraps will be in long takes, and you’ll be able to tell Vaughn is performing them. The stakes in these scenarios tend to be glib and empty, so this one will curdle your blood with the threat to the hero before dropping you into a medieval hell from which there appears no escape.

If it’s been a while since you’ve felt the cold blast and hard crunch of midnight-movie meanness, Zahler’s shaping up to be your guy — the one selling illicit thrills out of the trunk of a well-restored, vinyl-topped LTD — and with “Brawl,” he sets himself further apart from his more schlock-minded contemporaries in cult cinema.

Also Read: Lionsgate Will Be 'Dragged Across Concrete' for US Rights to Mel Gibson, Vince Vaughn Thriller

Vaughn, shorn of hair and sporting a thick cross tattoo on the back of his head, plays Bradley, a well-spoken former boxer who in his first scene, getting fired from his auto repair job, looks ready to do damage. (Asked how he’s feeling, his response is the tartly pithy, “South of OK, north of cancer.” He also corrects anyone who calls him “Brad.”)


It’s when he comes to their rundown home and learns that his wife Lauren (Jennifer Carpenter, “Dexter”) has been cheating on him that we get the violence appetizer, or amuse-bash: Bradley taking it out on their car with his bare hands. But then he and Lauren — each acknowledging a history of substance abuse, and circumstances that have been tough on the relationship — calmly talk it out and decide to give it another go, along with the risky decision of Bradley returning to work as a drug runner for old friend Gil (Marc Blucas).

See Vince Vaughn's latest POWER MOVE.

PowerRank: 

Within two years, though, they’ve moved to a swankier house, and the couple is closer: Lauren is happily pregnant and Bradley, who manages a smile referring to their forthcoming baby as “the koala,” is looking forward to paternity leave. A shipment pickup at the docks for a Mexican kingpin (Dion Mucciacito), however, devolves into a police shootout, albeit one in which Bradley, recognizing a no-win scenario, cuts down his own trigger-happy crew members (whom his instincts initially pegged as bad news) to prevent further cop bloodshed. Refusing to name names, Bradley gets seven years in a medium-security center, but he accepts his fate, knowing he’ll have a loving wife and kid to see on the flip side.


Zahler’s vibe until now, when his anti-hero is entering prison, is droll yet charged, a patient accumulation of heroic qualities and archly amusing, Elmore Leonard-like exchanges, although the conversational enjoyment “Bone Tomahawk” offered among its eccentric posse members was richer than the build-up here. But you at least know something’s coming to test Bradley’s zen-methodical aura of serene, principled masculinity beyond prison guard jokes about his height and one officer’s nagging attempts to get Bradley to join the boxing program.

Watch Video: Stephen Colbert Morphs Into Steven Seagal on NFL Protests: You Have Fans 'Under Siege'

And that pivot into grindhouse territory, when it arrives, is a chilling one-two punch: a nervy home invasion scene with Lauren, and a prison visit by cartel envoy Udo Kier, who creepily explains — as if Kier had any other delivery mode — what will happen to Bradley’s wife and unborn child if he doesn’t rectify the botched smuggling operation by getting transferred to a certain maximum-security penitentiary and killing a specified inmate.

“Brawl” enters its mano-a-mano third act in the dungeon-like Red Leaf prison with a steady, serious cascade of Bradley-engineered aggression, in fights choreographed by Drew Leary for maximum pain and minimum style. Zahler and cinematographer Benji Bakshi, reteaming after “Bone Tomahawk,” eschew that western’s more textured frontier hues for the increasingly sickly, washed-out tones of a worsening nightmare.

Also Read: Here's the First Meal OJ Simpson Wanted After His Release

Vaughn, whose only worthy dialogue sparring partner in these scenes is Don Johnson’s cigar-chomping warden/torturer — a man fond of a shock-administering stun belt — fulfills the early promise of his imposing frame by bringing a vicious sense of righteous purpose to Bradley’s every body blow, limb snap, and pulverizing stomp. It’s like being scared and exhilarated at the same time, even if the aftertaste isn’t what you’d call pleasant. But it’s safe to say the motormouth rake of countless forgettable comedies is gone, and Vaughn has a bright Neeson-esque future cracking heads if he so chooses.

At over two hours, “Brawl in Cell Block 99” could test the mayhem anticipation levels of more attention-starved exploitation fans. But the fact that Zahler marches to the beat of his own pummeling fist, going so far as to get the O’Jays and Butch Tavares to expressively croon his own ’70s-inspired soul compositions, is part of the low-down, nasty, self-satisfied magnetism of this two-fisted exercise.



We all thought Michael Scofield's many escapes in "Prison Break" were too good to be plausible. But here are nine convicts who pulled off equally unbelievable breakouts. Some were more creative than others.

Ted Bundy

The notorious serial killer escaped imprisonment twice. In 1977, he was at Pitkin County Courthouse in Aspen for a preliminary trial when he asked to visit the courthouse library during recess. Once there, he jumped out of a window and was on the run for a few days before being caught. 

When his trial was moved to Colorado Springs, Bundy used a saw to create a hole in the cell's ceiling and climbed out of it during Christmas break when most of the prison's staff were gone. 

Once out, he didn't try to remain inconspicuous, but instead continued his murder spree. He was captured in Florida in 1978 and executed in 1989.

El Chapo

Joaquín "El Chapo" Guzman, an infamous drug lord, also escaped from prison twice.

Guzman was imprisoned in Mexico but was indicted in San Diego. Authorities believe that to avoid extradition, he bribed a guard to dismantle cameras, open his cell and smuggle him out in a laundry cart on Jan. 19, 2001, the Daily News reported.

After being imprisoned again, El Chapo escaped again from a maximum-security Mexican prison. He left through a tunnel from his cell that led to a neighborhood almost a mile away. He was arrested again last year.

Alcatraz Escape

Frank Morris, Clarence Anglin and John Anglin may be the only three men to ever successfully escape from Alcatraz.

In 1962, the three inmates escaped after picking away at ventilation ducts for six months. They then climbed through and assembled a makeshift raft and left the prison.

They had made paper mâché dummy heads to look like them so they could avoid detection during rounds.

Assata Shakur

The first woman to be listed on the FBI's most wanted terrorist list escaped from Clinton Correctional Facility for Women in 1979. 

Authorities say the former Black Panther Party and Black Liberation Army member escaped with the help of three BLA members who held prison guards hostage and took over a prison van that took Shakur to another location.

She fled to Cuba, where she is believed to have political asylum. 

David Sweat and Richard Matt

David Sweat and Richard Matt  are the only two prisoners to have ever escaped from Clinton Correctional Facility in New York.

The duo cut through steel walls with hacksaw blades that were smuggled in through frozen hamburger meat. 

After almost two weeks on the run, the two were shot by police. Matt died and Sweat lived. 

John Dillinger

This Depression-era gangster, one of the FBI's earliest Most Wanted, also escaped from prison twice.

He first escaped from jail in Ohio with the help of three former prisoners who escaped from the same jail.

Dillinger was caught again about a year later and sequestered to a county jail in Crown Point, Indiana which officials bragged was escape-proof. Dillinger then whittled a fake gun and used it to force the guards to open his cell and free him. 

He was finally shot and killed by the special agents on July 22, 1934.

Brian Bo Larsen

This might be the real life Michael Scofield. Brian Bo Larsen has broken out of prison 22 times.

The Danish convict most recently broke out of his jail cell in 2014 and was found ten days later after he crashed a car while high on drugs, according to authorities.

James Robert Jones

James Robert Jones eluded capture and was on the run and eluded capture for almost 40 years.

He escaped in 1977 from a maximum-security military prison in Kansas. 

Although details of Jones' escape are unknown, the convict had created a new life for himself in Florida, getting married and working for an air-conditioning company. He was arrested again in 2014.

Frank Abagnale Jr.

The real con-man who inspired Leonardo DiCaprio's "Catch Me If You Can" had a crafty way of breaking out of jail.

In one of several escapes, he escaped the Federal Detention Center in Georgia by posing as a prison inspector. 

He was eventually recaptured, then released on the condition that he help the U.S. government solve crimes.

Turns out, “Prison Break” isn’t just a TV show

We all thought Michael Scofield's many escapes in "Prison Break" were too good to be plausible. But here are nine convicts who pulled off equally unbelievable breakouts. Some were more creative than others.