The latest

The Pentagon has been ordered to build tent camps at two U.S. military bases in Texas to temporarily house migrants who cross the southern border, the Defense Department said. The camps will be built at Fort Bliss, an Army base in El Paso near the U.S.-Mexico border, and at Goodfellow Air Force Base, which is near San Angelo in central Texas. The facility at Fort Bliss will hold families with adults who face criminal charges, while Good­fellow will be used to hold children who arrive on the U.S. border without a parent.

Immigrant parents separated from their children and detained are being given a choice: If they want to see their children, they must withdraw their asylum claims and agree to be deported, the Los Angeles Times reported. "They went in and told the parents if you sign this, you can get your kids back," said Jodi Goodwin, an attorney coordinating a "rapid response team" of about 10 volunteer lawyers aiding immigrants at Port Isabel Detention Center in Texas's Rio Grande Valley.

The administration is developing a plan that would give parents who are caught crossing the border illegally a difficult choice: remain detained with their child in a large tent city or give up custody of their child, at least temporarily, McClatchy reported. The proposal is being considered as part of a hastily crafted solution to the problem of complying with President Donald Trump's executive order last week that ended his administration's policy of separating parents and children arrested at the border. The idea is a way to sidestep a major legal roadblock that prevents Trump from fully implementing his executive order to keep parents and children detained during their court proceedings. Current law prohibits the federal government from keeping children detained, even with their parents, in immigration detention for more than 20 days.

More than 200 protesters blocked a busy road near where Attorney General Jeff Sessions was speaking at a school-safety conference. The coalition of civil rights, religious and union activists staged the demonstration outside a hotel-casino in downtown Reno. Several people held a banner saying "No human is illegal" to call attention to the separation of children and families at the U.S.-Mexico border. Nearly two dozen Nevada groups tried unsuccessfully last week to persuade the national school law enforcement group hosting the conference to withdraw its invitation to Sessions.

News services

StarTribune.com welcomes and encourages readers to comment and engage in substantive, mutually
                        respectful exchanges over news topics. Commenters must follow our Terms of Use.

Comments will be reviewed before being published.

© 2018 StarTribune. All rights reserved.