
                                                            Politico

Your daily speed read on employment and immigration policy 

Get the Morning Shift Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.


            By TED HESSON

06/19/2018 10:00 AM EDT

With help from Andrew Hanna

TRUMP PLAYS DEFENSE: President Donald Trump will huddle with House Republicans this evening amid an outcry over family separations at the border now emanating from a growing number of Republicans, all four living former first ladies, influential Christians leaders, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, and the United Nations’ human rights chief. A Quinnipiac poll released Monday found 66 percent of Americans opposed the Trump administration’s decision to ramp up family separations, with 27 percent in favor. 


Story Continued Below

Despite the opposition, Trump and top officials show no sign of dropping the administration’s “zero tolerance” policy, which calls for all suspected border crossers to be referred for prosecution — a move that necessarily means separating parents from children, since children aren’t permitted in criminal detention centers. Under the strategy, 2,342 children were separated from adults at the border between May 5 and June 9, according to DHS statistics released Monday by the office of Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.). The president of the American Academy of Pediatrics warned the separations may cause “irreparable harm” to children. 

The president continued to blame you-know-who. “It is the Democrats fault for being weak and ineffective with Boarder [sic] Security and Crime,” Trump tweeted Monday. “Tell them to start thinking about the people devastated by Crime coming from illegal immigration. Change the laws!” The administration delayed a press briefing several times Monday while it tried to hone a plausible immigration message, CNN senior White House correspondent Jeff Zeleny reported. Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen eventually took the podium and cited the need to close legal “loopholes” that allow asylum seekers to enter and remain in the U.S., saying they “create a functionally open border.”

A growing number of congressional Republicans have spoken out against family separations, but the solution on the table so far worries immigrant advocates. A pair of immigration bills that House Speaker Paul Ryan will bring to the floor for a vote this week would roll back protections for child migrants and permit them to be detained criminally alongside their parents. In addition, the measures would allow for the swift deportation of unaccompanied minors from Central America and other countries. Even Trump appears to struggle with the family separations — he called the practice “so sad” on Monday, as if his administration hadn’t precipitated the crisis — but that same Quinnipiac poll found 55 percent of Republicans back the separations. 

What is means for Rs: “‘The Republicans’ new Katrina’: GOP fears backlash to splitting families,” from POLITICO’s Burgess Everett, John Bresnahan and Rachael Bade. Find it here.

Pull quote: "This is insane. You're getting mixed signals from different people in the administration, whether it be [Homeland Security] or the Justice Department. Nobody seems to know what the hell is going on,” said a House Republican lawmaker. “Democratic lawmakers are going down to these detention centers: It's bad."

What is means for Ds: “‘Really an evil policy’: Dems seize offensive in migrant fight,” from POLITICO’s Elana Schor. Find it here.

Pull quote: “This is really an evil policy. And no matter how Trump tries to change the topic to something else, it is not okay to hurt children to send a message,” Sen. Jeff Merkley (D-Ore.) told POLITICO. “And it is not okay to hurt children in order to gain what Trump said was legislative leverage.”

GOOD MORNING! It's Tuesday, June 19, and this is Morning Shift, POLITICO's daily tipsheet on employment and immigration policy. Send tips, exclusives and suggestions to thesson@politico.com, ikullgren@politico.com, ahanna@politico.com, and tnoah@politico.com. Follow us on Twitter at @tedhesson, @AndrewBHanna, @IanKullgren and @TimothyNoah1.

Join POLITICO Playbook co-authors Anna Palmer and Jake Sherman and Playbook Florida author Marc Caputo for a special Playbook Elections event in the battleground state of Florida to discuss the 2018 midterm cycle and issues shaping the races. Part of the POLITICO-AARP Deciders series, this event will feature exclusive interviews with Debbie Mucarsel-Powell, David Richardson and Donna Shalala about their candidacies and campaign efforts to address the issues that matter most to voters. The event will take place Friday, June 29 at InterContinental Miami. Doors will open at 8 a.m. RSVP here.

IMMIGRATION ON THE HORIZON: The Trump White House may only be warming up on pre-midterms immigration restrictions, POLITICO’s Nancy Cook reports. Stephen Miller and other Trump administration officials “have been quietly meeting for months to find ways to use executive authority and under-the-radar rule changes to strengthen hard-line U.S. immigration policies,” she writes. Cook mentions some proposals that will be familiar to Morning Shift readers, such as the so-called “public charge” rule, which could block immigrants who used welfare or public benefits from obtaining a green card.

Another planned move is more surprising: the administration wants to limit visas for temporary agricultural workers, according to Cook. The H-2A program for agricultural workers is uncapped, which means there’s no annual limit on visas. Republican immigration bills, including even hard-liner Rep. Bob Goodlatte’s (R-Va.) H.R. 4760 (115), typically try to make it easier for farmers to bring in guest workers. Trump appeared to promise farmers better access to workers during an April rally in Detroit. "For the farmers, OK, it's going to get good," he said. "We're going to let your guest workers come in." But will he? Read more from POLITICO here.

NIELSEN ON THE HOT SEAT: Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) on Monday called on DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen to step down over the family separation controversy. “DHS Sec. Nielsen's record of misleading statements — including yesterday’s denial that the Administration even had a policy of separating children at the border — are disqualifying,” Harris wrote. “She should resign immediately.” House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi also told reporters Monday that Nielsen should resign.

Nielsen, who for weeks left the defense of the “zero tolerance” policy largely to Attorney General Jeff Sessions, attempted Sunday to deflect scrutiny for splitting up families. “We do not have a policy of separating families at the border,” she tweeted. “Period.” Nielsen has walked a semantic tightrope, on one hand stressing that the department didn’t technically enact a family separation policy (family separation was merely the consequence of its “zero tolerance” strategy), but also arguing that she “will not stand by while our immigration system continues to deteriorate.”

Nielsen is a favorite Trump scapegoat on illegal immigration — he chewed her out during a Cabinet meeting in May — and now she appears to have exhausted any remaining goodwill from Harris, who sits on the Senate Homeland Security Committee. “It's time for Secretary Nielsen to resign,” Harris tweeted. “The government should be in the business of keeping families together, not tearing them apart. And the government should have a commitment to transparency and accountability. Under her tenure, DHS does not have a track record of either.”

Related read: “Nielsen becomes face of Trump’s border separations,” from POLITICO’s Eliana Johnson and Annie Karni. Find it here.

AUDIO CAPTURES CHILDREN SOBBING: ProPublica’s Ginger Thompson obtained audio of Central American children sobbing in a CBP facility after being separated from their parents last week. “Many of them sound like they’re crying so hard, they can barely breathe,” writes Thompson. “They scream ‘Mami’ and ‘Papá’ over and over again, as if those are the only words they know.” The audio recording also captures the voice of a Border Patrol agent: “Well, we have an orchestra here,” he jokes. “What’s missing is a conductor.” More here.

TESLA DETERS WORKER SAFETY COMPLAINTS: Severance agreements given to Tesla employees included measures that would deter employees from going public about safety concerns, Josh Eidelson and Dana Hull report in Bloomberg News. The pair obtained a proposed severance agreement given to a worker who was among 3,000 laid off last week. The agreement said the employee “had the opportunity to raise any safety concerns, safety complaints, or whistleblower activities against the company, and that if any safety concerns, safety complaints, or whistleblower activities were raised during your employment, they were addressed to your satisfaction,” according to Bloomberg News. More here.

BOEING WON’T RECOGNIZE UNION WIN: “Boeing Co. says it won't negotiate with the union that a group of North Charleston workers voted to join in May until its appeal of the election is decided, a move that could spark retaliation by the International Association of Machinists,” David Wren reports in the Post and Courier. “Flight-line employees at the 787 Dreamliner campus voted 104-65 to have the IAM represent them in collective bargaining with the aerospace giant. The [NLRB] certified the election last week, but Boeing said it plans to appeal an earlier NLRB decision that let the voting proceed in the first place.” More here.

DEFENDING KENTUCKY ‘RIGHT-TO-WORK’: The National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation filed a legal brief in a case that challenges Kentucky’s right-to-work laws. Union leaders sued Gov. Matt Bevin (R) after he signed the law last year, arguing its provisions violated the state’s constitution. A county court upheld the law earlier this year. The state’s Supreme Court will hear the case on August 10.

NFL SEEK ARBITRATION FOR EAGLE’S INJURY: “The NFL and the Houston Texans want a court to send to arbitration claims that a pocked and scored field at NRG Stadium gave a former Philadelphia Eagles player a career-ending injury, saying the players' union agreed that injury claims like this can only be decided in arbitration,” Cara Salvatore reports in Law360. The Houston Texans “asked the Harris County district court Thursday to send to arbitration the claims of former linebacker DeMeco Ryans, who had played for the Texans before he joined the Eagles in 2012.” More here.

SCOTUS CONSIDERS ‘SANCTUARY’ PLEA: “The Trump administration asked the Supreme Court to lift the bulk of an order preventing the Justice Department from implementing a policy to limit federal grants to cities, counties and states that don't cooperate with federal immigration enforcement,” POLITICO’s Josh Gerstein reports. “The Justice Department filed an emergency application with the high court Monday, asking it to stay a nationwide injunction that a federal judge in Chicago issued in September blocking the new policy.” Attorney General Jeff Sessions threatened last week to ask the high court to intervene if the 7th Circuit didn’t swiftly address the DOJ’s request for a stay, but the appellate court declined. More here.

COFFEE BREAK: 

— “How anti-immigration passion was inflamed from the fringe,” from The New York Times

— Report: “The U.S. Refugee Resettlement Program — A Return to First Principles: How Refugees Help to Define, Strengthen, and Revitalize the United States,” from the Center for Migration Studies

— “‘I wanted to stop her crying’: The image of a migrant child that broke a photographer’s heart,” from The Washington Post

— “‘Hopefully, they’ll get you to her’: Texas judge can’t promise migrant families they’ll be reunited,” from POLITICO

— “Judge slams Kobach for flouting court rules,” from POLITICO

— “Reddit co-founder highlights importance of paternity leave,” from CNN

— “Sessions says family separation is ‘necessary’ to keep the country from being ‘overwhelmed.’ Federal immigration data says otherwise,” from The Washington Post

— “French executives to stand trial for ‘moral harassment’ a decade after employee suicides,” from The Washington Post

THAT’S ALL FOR MORNING SHIFT.



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC