Welcome to MLB.com, the official site of Major League Baseball

Bienvenido a LasMayores.com, el sitio oficial de Las Grandes Ligas de Béisbol.

Major League Baseball オフィシャルサイト、MLB.comへようこそ

Major League Baseball 의 공식 사이트, MLB.com에 오신 것을 환영합니다

PITTSBURGH -- The Pirates on Sunday designated right-hander Shane Carle and infielder Engelb Vielma for assignment, finalizing the corresponding roster moves following Saturday's trade of right-hander Gerrit Cole to the Astros.


The Bucs acquired three players from Houston who required roster spots -- right-handers Joe Musgrove and Michael Feliz and third baseman Colin Moran -- but traded only one from their full 40-man roster. They made room for the other two by designating Carle and Vielma, a pair of players they recently claimed off waivers.

PITTSBURGH -- The Pirates on Sunday designated right-hander Shane Carle and infielder Engelb Vielma for assignment, finalizing the corresponding roster moves following Saturday's trade of right-hander Gerrit Cole to the Astros.


The Bucs acquired three players from Houston who required roster spots -- right-handers Joe Musgrove and Michael Feliz and third baseman Colin Moran -- but traded only one from their full 40-man roster. They made room for the other two by designating Carle and Vielma, a pair of players they recently claimed off waivers.


Outfielder Jason Martin, the other prospect acquired in the trade, does not require a spot on the 40-man roster.


The Pirates claimed Carle, their 10th-round selection in the 2013 Draft, from the Rockies on Jan. 4. Carle had Minor League options remaining. He began his career in Pittsburgh's system, reaching Class A Advanced Bradenton in 2014, and spent most of the last two years with Triple-A Albuquerque. Carle is 27-29 with two saves, a 4.10 ERA and 367 strikeouts over 131 outings (76 starts) in the Minors.


Carle posted a 6.75 ERA in four innings over three relief appearances while making his Major League debut for the Rockies last season. He was used mostly as a reliever in Triple-A, with 33 of his 36 outings coming out of the bullpen.


The Pirates claimed Vielma, a slick-fielding shortstop, off waivers from the Phillies during the Winter Meetings last month. Since September, he has been claimed and dropped by San Francisco, Philadelphia and now Pittsburgh. Vielma, 23, was projected to hold down a utility infield spot for Triple-A Indianapolis and would claim that role if he clears waivers and remains with the Bucs.


Vielma owns a career .256/.316/.302 slash line in the Minors. After claiming him, general manager Neal Huntington said Vielma was "an interesting player to take a chance on" given his glove and athleticism.

Adam Berry has covered the Pirates for MLB.com since 2015. Follow him on Twitter and Facebook and read his blog.