




EurekAlert! provides embargoed and breaking science news you can't afford to miss.


EurekAlert! offers a one-stop science news distribution service you can trust.


EurekAlert! is a service of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.



American Heart Association

ANAHEIM, California, Nov. 13 - The American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology presented its James B. Herrick Award for Outstanding Achievement in Clinical Cardiology to Arthur J. Moss, M.D., of the University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, N.Y., "in recognition of his wide-ranging scientific achievements elevating understanding of critical aspects of coronary disease, thereby positively impacting cardiology patient care." 

Moss received the award during the Clinical Cardiology Council's Business and Awards Dinner in Anaheim, held in conjunction with American Heart Association Scientific Sessions 2017, a premier global exchange of the latest advances in cardiovascular science for researchers and clinicians. Council Chair Randal J. Thomas, M.D., presented the award, a medallion and citation. Moss also delivered the Herrick Lecture.

"In a remarkably productive career spanning nearly six decades, Dr. Moss has made some of the most important advances in cardiac electrophysiology," Thomas said. "His most significant contributions include transformative observations regarding the heart abnormality Long QT Syndrome. In addition, his leadership of clinical trials involving implantable cardiac rhythm-regulating devices has revolutionized our understanding and treatment of heart failure and sudden death."

In 1985, Moss started the International Long QT Syndrome Registry, and his studies defined many of the key electrocardiographic features of Long QT Syndrome, Thomas said. "He established the role of left cardiac sympathetic denervation in therapy for congenital Long QT, and he defined the role of cardiac pacing in this syndrome, which saved many lives."

Thomas said the Rochester cardiologist's work "provided the most comprehensive analysis of the risk of cardiac events among family members with Long QT. He also led a landmark series of implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) studies that helped establish the role of ICD therapy for primary prevention of sudden cardiac death."

"Very few individuals have made such enormous contributions to clinical cardiology as Arthur Moss," Thomas said. "He has led in transforming the care of hundreds of thousands of patients."

###

Additional Resources:

* For more news at AHA Scientific Sessions 2017, follow us on Twitter @HeartNews  #AHA17.

Statements and conclusions of study authors that are presented at American Heart Association scientific meetings are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect association policy or position. The association makes no representation or warranty as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations are available at http://www.heart.org/corporatefunding.

About the American Heart Association 

The American Heart Association is devoted to saving people from heart disease and stroke - the two leading causes of death in the world. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat these diseases. The Dallas-based association is the nation's oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke. To learn more or to get involved, call 1-800-AHA-USA1, visit heart.org or call any of our offices around the country. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.


Disclaimer: AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert system.

Media Contact

Carrie Thacker
carrie.thacker@heart.org
214-706-1173

 @HeartNews





http://www.heart.org 

American Heart Association






Copyright © 2018 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)

Copyright © 2018 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)