Welcome! 

Subscribe to Business Wire:
    Email Alerts
    Get Business Wire via: Homepage
    Mobile
    RSS
    Facebook
    Twitter
    LinkedIn
    

News Feed Item




      Qosina is excited to announce it has added the award-winning, single-use PenBlade® 
      safety scalpels to its product line.
    



This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: 
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180201005849/en/



Qosina adds PenBlade® safety scalpels to its product line. (Photo: Business Wire)  


      Qosina offers the PenBlade® in surgical blade sizes #10, 
      #11P and #15. The rigid body is constructed of medical-grade ABS, 
      and the blade is high-quality British stainless steel for improved 
      sharpness and durability. The ergonomically designed PenBlade® 
      is tapered for blade visibility. The pen-style activation is intuitive, 
      using existing muscle memory (clicking an ink pen). The release button 
      is positioned near the front of the scalpel, where it can be pressed 
      without looking or repositioning the hand. When the blade is retracted, 
      the end of the PenBlade® forms a suture-trimming groove, 
      which encourages the user to finish a procedure in a safe position. This 
      unique patented feature is not available on any other surgical scalpel.
    


      Qosina will be showcasing the PenBlade®, in addition to 
      thousands of stock components, at MD&amp;M West, February 6-8, at the 
      Anaheim Convention Center in Anaheim, CA.
    



      Founded in 1980, Qosina is a leading global supplier of OEM single-use 
      components to the medical and pharmaceutical industries. Qosina’s 
      philosophy is to address its customers’ need to reduce time-to-market by 
      providing thousands of stock components. The company’s vast catalog 
      features more than 5,000 products shown in full-scale illustrations on a 
      one-centimeter grid. Qosina offers free samples of most items, low 
      minimum order requirements, just-in-time delivery, modification of 
      existing molds, and new product design and development. Qosina is ISO 
      9001, ISO 13485 and ISO 14001 registered, and operates in a 95,000 
      square-foot facility with an ISO Class 8 Clean Room. To learn about 
      Qosina’s full component offering, which includes the newest 
      products, visit www.qosina.com 
      or call +1 (631) 242-3000.
    



    





View source version on businesswire.com: http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180201005849/en/


                  Published February 1, 2018                                    
                  Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.
                  
                  Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.
                

Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.

Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©2018 DXWorldEXPO, LLC.All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC.
Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO is prohibited.