John Reitz plays the national anthem on his trumpet during the 66th Infantry Division's final reunion and site dedication, held at Camp Blanding Joint Training Center's museum on June 15, 2018.

CHRISTOPHER VANN/U.S. ARMY
									

By MATT SOERGEL | The Florida Times-Union, Jacksonville | Published: June 16, 2018


	STARKE, Fla. (Tribune News Service) — They were 18 when they met at Camp Blanding in the spring of 1943, a couple of kids who didn't have much while growing up, who had lived through the Great Depression and now were pretty satisfied being in the Army. You had to hike a lot and take orders, but you got three meals and some pay — that seemed more than a square deal.


	They were part of Company A, 263rd Regiment in the newly formed 66th Infantry Division, which would become known as the Black Panther Division. The 66th was activated that year at Blanding, the huge training camp in Clay County, to help fill the need for fighting men in a war that was consuming much of the globe.


	Jerome Roettger — they called him Jerry, or Red, for his hair — was from Cincinnati, and became a squad leader.


	Frank Bertino, from coal-mining country in western Pennsylvania, was nicknamed Cue Ball on account of his military haircut. He became a mess sergeant, overseeing a kitchen for men who liked to gripe about the chow he made.


	Jerry laughs, all these years later: "Frank, I guess because he was Italian, they said, 'You go in the kitchen.' Which was good because he was a wonderful cook. He always said, 'I made you little skinny boys into big fat boys.' "


	The two became staff sergeants, buddies, partners in many an adventure, but as the war wound down they'd been split up: Jerry was going home after being freed from a POW camp, and Frank was down in southern France with the 66th, overseeing German prisoners in his kitchen as they fed American men getting ready to go to the Pacific.


	Life went on, and they each got married and had kids and grandkids, and lost track of each other until a Black Panther reunion in Norfolk, Va. That was in 1989. Someone told Jerry that Frank was there, so he called Frank's room and yelled into the phone: "Cue Ball! Get your ass down here."


	Jerry laughs again. "From then on — buddies."


	Frank turned 94 in April; Jerry will follow in July.


	In Florida last week for a Black Panther reunion, Franks asks: "How many years we had together now?"


	"Seventy-five," Jerry tells him.


	"Seventy-five years. Isn't that something?" Frank says.


	They say they'd do anything for each other, even now. They've visited each other's homes, their families have become friends. And Jerry says that after he was captured, in France, Frank the mess sergeant insisted on grabbing a rifle and going looking for him.


	They've got stories. "We always say, little German boy meets little Italian boy," Jerry says.


	Nowadays, he does most of the talking for them, and he's about as sharp as he was 75 years ago. Frank has slowed down some. He pats his heart. "Pacemaker here. Two total knees. Three back operations. But we've had our fun."


	As Jerry tells about the Black Panther Division, about its journey from sweaty Camp Blanding to the snowstorms of France, Frank pipes up: "You want to tell him 'bout the time you got chewed out by the general?" Then he gives a big guffaw.


	That's a story Jerry gets to later. They've got lots of stories.


	"There was fun," Jerry said, "and there was not fun. But ..." And here his voice trails off.


	THE FINAL GATHERING


	The Black Panther vets have been getting together in various cities, every couple years, since 1969. Those early reunions, there would be a couple of thousand of the guys.


	This past week, 12 were able to make the trip to Florida, where they went to the the beach, the Anheuser-Busch plant, St. Augustine and then, on Friday, back to Camp Blanding for a remembrance ceremony and tour.


	Frank Bertino. Homer Bryant. Harold Gibbens. Seymour Gloger. Edwin Kinnen. John Reitz. Cyril Reshetiloff. Jerome Roettgers. Kenneth Sink. Andy Staruch. Pat Tropea. George Lavoie came as well, but by the time of the trip to Blanding he wasn't feeling well and had gone to a hospital in Jacksonville.


	Frank's daughter, Lenore Angelo, has been organizing the gatherings for years, helped by her husband, Dave, and toward the end of the ceremony the vets and their families — some of them four generations deep — give her a long standing ovation. Fourteen of Frank's extended family are there, and 25 of Jerry's came.


	Lenore is already in tears as Black Panther John Reitz plays taps on his trumpet to end it all.


	This will be the final reunion, Lenore says. They mean so much, but it's unfair, she says, to ask the men to make such a grueling trip again. Not three-quarters of a century since they first gathered as a group, there at Blanding.


	BOOM!


	On Christmas Eve 1944, more than 2,000 soldiers from the Black Panther Division boarded the SS Leopoldville in Southampton, England, bound for the war in Europe. Many didn't make it: Five miles from France, a U-boat torpedoed the ship, a converted Belgian passenger liner, killing almost 800 soldiers.


	Frank and Jerry, still in England, left on a ship the next day, Christmas, in darkness. The Army was keeping the sinking quiet, but the men had heard rumors, so it made for a tense crossing. Even so, they passed the time playing cards: What else could you do? Jerry says.


	They made it safely to France, but after the Leopoldville sinking the Black Panthers mission was changed. Instead of joining the Battle of the Bulge, they would stay in coastal France. Their job: harassing and containing about 100,000 German soldiers who had been left behind on the shores of Brittany after Germany retreated following the D-Day invasion.


	It settled into a routine, Frank in his kitchen, Jerry making patrols, skirmishing with the Germans.


	Frank's kitchen was well behind the lines, but in the early days he still wanted to take food up to the men up at the front lines. The second or third day in France, Frank made his run to the front in a Jeep. The Germans were ready for him.


	"Boom!" Frank says. "They dropped I don't know how many shells on me."


	Jerry laughs at how the Jeep must have bobbed and weaved to get past the bombs, and how scared Frank must have been. But he completed that mission.


	"Needless to say, our food was kinda mixed up," Jerry says.


	Jerry was captured in January 1945 while patrolling with five others behind German lines, following a heavy snowfall. They walked into a trap: He remembers seeing German soldiers ambushing them and the radioman next to him going down, injured by three bullets.


	Jerry was right next to him but somehow he wasn't hit. And somehow he wasn't killed after a grenade was thrown at them.


	He remembers the snow in his face, and coming to and seeing a German solider, perhaps even younger than he, holding his rifle inches from his face.


	When Jerry didn't return, Frank and a first sergeant both grabbed rifles and went out to look for them. It was in vain: Jerry was imprisoned for the rest of the war, which he spent in an aircraft hangar in St. Nazaire with other POWs.


	He remembers being hungry all the time, getting a slice of bread in the morning and rutabaga soup that was occasionally fortified by a suspicious chunk of meat or two. Was it from the swaybacked horse he saw getting led toward camp, just past the fence?


	His captors, penned up against the Atlantic a long way from home, were barely better off. "The Germans, they never had nothing to eat either," he says.


	THE BONDS YOU MAKE


	The Black Panthers trained at Blanding from March to September, 75 years ago. Jerry remembers the heat, and how good the cooling 4 p.m. rainstorms felt.


	They were among the more than 800,000 men who trained there during World War II, where a bustling city formed in a remote corner of Clay County.


	After Blanding, the Black Panthers trained at Camp Joseph Robinson in Arkansas and Fort Rucker in Alabama before sailing from New Jersey to the war in Europe.


	The bonds they made along the way?


	Jerry chokes back tears as tells how decades can go by, you grow old, but you still have the friendships you started forming on those hot North Florida days. "You think about all of them. I don't know how to to explain it, but you don't lose the friendship we had. It's like a band of brothers."


	After the war Frank went back to Windber, Penn., and worked in a steel mill. Jerry went back to Cincinnati and got into the lumber business. He still works most mornings at the company he ran.


	Jerry says times were different back then, when everyone you knew was joining up to fight a threat that was clear-cut and real, how you could love the idea of your country so much, even if you'd only seen your little corner of it.


	Three-quarters of the guys in the 66th had never been more 50 miles from their house, Jerry figures, yet here they were, in Florida, England, France. Sitting next to his friend, all this time later, Jerry nods his head toward Frank.


	"If they called us back again," he says, "I think we'd all go back."


	©2018 The Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville, Fla.)
	Visit The Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville, Fla.) at www.jacksonville.com
	Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
	 

Soldiers of the 66th Infantry Division pose for a group photo during the 66th Infantry Division's final reunion and site dedication, held at Camp Blanding Joint Training Center's museum, June 15, 2018. The 66th ID was activated in 1943 at Camp Blanding, Fla., conducted their initial training and then they traveled to England where they encountered resistance from the German forces before finally settling in Koblenz, Germany in 1945. While in Germany, the conducted occupation duty and provided security at German POW camps.
									CHRISTOPHER VANN/U.S. ARMY
												

article continues below 