This installment of Curbed Comparisons shall examine two comparable, decadent, big-money homes in the Mount Paran/Northside community. Because sometimes it’s fun to dream big, especially if large-scale traditionals from the early and mid-aughts are your thing. 

Both listings boast of the homes’ locations within the “coveted” Jackson Elementary School district, as well as their privacy, with one on a cul-de-sac and the other with “an incredibly private view of ‘forest’ at the end of a quiet street.”

Given their size and price tags, it’s not surprising these homes also serve up such features as a wine cellar, media room, recreation room, and even an outdoor pizza oven. 

Interestingly enough, despite its many arched doorways, large columns, and traditional French architecture, the Irma Court home is much more contemporary inside than the Glen Devon property. But that’s not everyone’s cup of tea. 

So let’s take a closer look. 

…

^ 4220 Glen Devon Drive N.W.  

Bedrooms: 6

Bathrooms: 7

Square footage: 8,882

Price: $2,450,000

Neighborhood: Mount Paran/Northside  

The work of builder Stuart Grubb and architect William T. Baker, this 2006 traditional home contains “all the space you’ll ever need” for relaxing and/or entertaining.  

From the recreation room to the massive kitchen to the fireside patio out back, there’s no shortage of rooms for both family and friends. 

Built-ins, vaulted ceilings, and “lots of light” from the many windows do their part to increase the spacious feel throughout. 

Outside, there’s even a professionally designed English rose garden, terrace with fire pit, and a flat backyard with “room for a pool.” 

…

^ 4263 Irma Court

Bedrooms: 5 

Bathrooms: 8

Square footage: 9,800

Price: $2,575,000

Neighborhood: Mount Paran/Northside

Built in 2002 and last remodeled in 2010, this French traditional home brings an impressive array of extras.  

The home theater, wine cellar, and home gym reside inside, while a patio, heated saltwater swimming pool, and not one, not two, but three outdoor grills (plus a pizza oven) hold court outside.  

Also impressive is the expansive bar that rivals many found throughout Atlanta’s restaurants and taverns. 

Diehard hardwood adherents will no doubt love the carpet in the bedrooms, especially the purple reigning in the master. 

This poll is closed.

Dual-tower development with retail and offices is expected to arrive on Roswell Road in 2021.

Amid World Cup frenzy, Seattle, Orlando, and others are picked over the home of Atlanta United by Trulia analysis.

Both offer much in terms of space, architectural details, and curb appeal, yet buyers haven’t bitten.

What makes a warning both attractive and useful?

Built in the 1920s, the pale white villa commanded a pretty penny—for the land.

Near Piedmont Park, the main dwelling counts Houzz’s "Kitchen of the Week."