


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A 2-year-old who was denied a kidney transplant after his father was arrested was rushed to the emergency room Sunday with an abdominal infection.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Two-year-old A.J. Dickerson, with his parents Anthony Dickerson and Carmellia Burgess. He was born without kidneys.
(Photo: GoFundMe.com)

A young Atlanta boy who was denied a kidney transplant after his father violated parole was rushed to the emergency room Sunday with an abdominal infection.


Two-year-old A.J. Burgess was born without kidneys.


He has been waiting to have a transplant surgery since earlier this month. The toddler has a willing kidney donor who is a perfect match — his father.


However, Anthony Dickerson cannot donate his healthy kidney until he shows evidence  he complied with his parole officer for several months.


Emory University Hospital says they will reevaluate the situation in January 2018, according to a letter obtained by the Atlantic Journal-Constitution.


But the family fears that may be too late.


JUST IN: Boy rushed to emergency room after kidney transplant from father denied https://t.co/wdmWzs4khopic.twitter.com/k0u06o3yqu

A.J. was admitted to the hospital Sunday with peritonitis, according to the family's attorney Mawuli Davis.


Peritonitis is inflammation of the tissue that lines the inner wall of the abdomen, according to Mayo Clinic. It is caused by a bacterial or fungal infection.


"The family is asking people of all faith traditions to be in prayer today for Baby A.J. His spirit is strong but his body is weakening," Davis said in a statement Sunday.


Dickerson was arrested on suspicion of possession of a firearm and eluding police days before he was scheduled to donate his kidney to his son, according to authorities.


The family told the Journal-Constitution that medical officials sent a letter to Gwinnett County Jail, requesting Dickerson be escorted to Emory to continue with the surgery.


Police say Dickerson was released from jail Oct. 2, a day before the kidney transplant was scheduled.


"Our staff worked diligently with court personnel and the District Attorney’s Office to make arrangements for Mr. (Anthony) Dickerson’s early release so that he could follow through on his scheduled kidney donation for his young son, AJ," Gwinnett County Sheriff’s Deputy Shannon Volkodav said in a statement.  


But Davis said the hospital’s transplant center put the surgery on hold following Dickerson’s release.


In a letter to the family, Emory Hospital officials said Dickerson would have to show evidence of good behavior for the next three to four months before being allowed to donate a kidney to his son.


"The hospital has required his father's parole officer to report three months before they will reconsider the surgery," according to a GoFundMe page set up for A.J.


Community members, including U.S. Reps. John Lewis and Hank Johnson, held a prayer vigil for A.J. after he was admitted to the hospital Sunday.


#HelpBabyAJpic.twitter.com/J0Q7o74Gzw

"They’re making this about Dad," the child’s mother, Carmellia Burgess told 11 Alive News. "It’s about our two-year-old son."


The hospital's decision has prompted outcry in Atlanta and on social media.


THIS IS HEARTBREAKING: WHY WOULD EMORY HOSPITAL HERE IN ATLANTA GA. ALLOW A 2YEAR OLD BABY TO DIE BECAUSE OF SOMETHING HIS DAD DID? CRIMINAL

Seriously, #EmoryHospital? What happened to "first do no harm?" This is a child's life in the balance. https://t.co/av8DuT32y3

The family is looking into other options to save A.J.'s life.


"We are trying every option possible so that our son can get the kidney he needs so he can begin to live a normal healthy life as a 2-year-old should," Burgess wrote on the GoFundMe page.


That includes looking for another hospital that will re-approve Dickerson and perform the transplant.


Vincent Dollard, an Emory spokesman, said the hospital is committed to the highest quality of care for its patients.


"Guidelines for organ transplantation are designed to maximize the chance of success for organ recipients and minimize risk for living donors," Dollard told the Washington Post. "Transplant decisions regarding donors are made based on many medical, social, and psychological factors."


They refused to comment further because of patient confidentiality.


Follow us on Facebook by 'liking' our page at Facebook.com/azcentral.
