Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

“We believe Downtown and Midtown generates the personality of our city. If we can grow in ways that doesn’t sell it out it will benefit us. It differentiates us,” said Jennifer Oswalt, interim CEO of the Downtown commission.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Jennifer Oswalt, Interim President of the Downtown Memphis Commission, feels the building blocks are being put in place to attract more retail downtown once an influx of new jobs creates demand for shops and stores.
    Mark Weber/The Commercial Appeal

Jennifer Oswalt, Interim President of the Downtown Memphis Commission, feels the building blocks are being put in place to attract more retail downtown once an influx of new jobs creates demand for shops and stores.
(Photo: Mark Weber/The Commercial Appeal)Buy Photo

It is a late Friday afternoon and the Main Street Mall looks almost deserted as Andria Shoe prepares to close her store.


On the street, two women stroll by in office clothes. Then comes a young woman in athletic shorts. She walks a small leashed dog and ignores the weathered man in a wrinkled T-shirt standing near the papered-over windows of a vacant storefront. He asks for money.


Shoe’s gift shop – named TN Sounds Good, a play on Tennessee’s music heritage – stocks  jewelry and apparel at 88 N. Main.


 Her shop window resembles a stylish storefront four decades ago, when going shopping meant going Downtown, although her craft store is part of Memphis' modern experiment.


North Main is a street of big-city buildings. But look in the windows –  empty storefronts are common. 


If the experiment launched by city officials in July works, retailers like Shoe could take root, lease the empty storefronts, pay taxes and bring vitality Downtown.


Artist Siphne Aaye instructs volunteers gathered to paint mural on a barricade around 100 North Main. (Photo: Wayne Risher/The Commercial Appeal)

“There’s not a lot of foot traffic,” Shoe said. “Once they get to Court Square people stop and turn around.”


There’s not much she can do about that.


A week ago, the Downtown Memphis Commission opened a national search for a new chief executive.


The commission is a public agency, funded by $12 million in Downtown fees and assessments, created to stem the central business district's decay. It has also taken on the temporary job managing Beale Street’s entertainment district, while its regular role continues on signature projects such as the Pinch District's proposed renovation.


Perhaps its smallest chore is the Main Street experiment, called Open on Main.


Although the city has hammered at Downtown decline for almost 50 years, Memphis never has recovered what was lost – Main Street’s grand department stores and the accompanying boutiques and specialty shops. As the city’s middle-class moved farther east in the 1970s and 1980s, offices moved out of the center city and retail sales collapsed Downtown.


The scene at Bry's on March 2, 1951 as the store was making preparations for the store's upcoming opening on March 6. (Photo: The Commercial Appeal)

 While managing the signature projects and Beale Street will absorb the energy of the Downtown commission's staff of 24, this little experiment on Main bears watching. It is set to expire this year. It ought to become a benchmark for measuring the new CEO's ability.


If Open on Main can succeed, storefronts could flourish again, not with long ago merchants like Bry’s and Gerber’s, but small artisans.


Much of what comes next is bound to happen near TN Sounds Good, located on one of the city’s oldest streets – North Main between The Pyramid and Court Square, a Victorian-era park set in what once was the city’s commercial heart.


On this day, the leafy trees planted on the Main Street Mall sigh in the steady wind like a country woods, but North Main otherwise is quiet. Its’ dominant building, a vacant 38-story skyscraper named 100 North Main, is devoid of functioning elevators or regular human enterprise other than security guards alert for vagrants. On March 22, firefighters tread the stairs to the 34th floor to put out flames in the then-unguarded tower.


November 9, 2016 - 100 North Main photographed from a helicopter. (Photo: (Brad Vest/The Commercial Appeal)

Cars are barred on this part of Main. Buses, trolleys and pedestrians travel unimpeded. Memphis built the pedestrian mall precisely to save retail. Walk through at noon and when the offices let out and a fair amount of people are visible. Main has the ambiance of a small town. Other times, the mall on North Main is nearly deserted.


Andria Shoe opened TN Sounds Good anyway.


She knew what happened one mile away on South Main, once a warren of warehouses and wholesalers near the railroad station, lately renovated into condos and apartments, bars and restaurants, museums and galleries.


September 21, 2016 - The Memphis College of Art at 477 South Main is moving out and the building will be turned into a boutique hotel. (Mark Weber/The Commercial Appeal) (Photo: Mark Weber, The Commercial Appeal)

Shoe, an interior designer for 13 years, had sold crafts online but never had her own physical store. She thought a North Main shop could give her a glimpse at what it’s like.


Holding forth in about 800 square feet, a space the size of a generous living room, the Delta State University graduate opened next door to 100 North Main for the entire month of September. Hers’ is called a pop-up shop – pop up, stay open for 30 days, close down. It's not meant to be permanent.


More than 20 small, local businesses have been booked to sell wares at pop-up shops on Main Street. (Photo: Wayne Risher/The Commercial Appeal)

The idea for it came up off hand. She had displayed her work at a craft fair near the University of Memphis campus. An unknown woman admired the display, told her about the pop-up initiative, invited her to apply.


The woman was Jennifer Oswalt, the chief financial officer of the Downtown Memphis Commission.


“It kind of fell on my plate,” Shoe said. “I applied and interviewed and got it. I’d do it again. This was a great experience.”


The Downtown commission makes the lease and utility payments. Merchants taste the complexity of managing their own store. Known as Open on Main, the initiative was started in July with capacity for 20 merchants rotating through four storefronts at 7 and 9 N. Main and 86 and 88 N. Main.


TN Sounds Good sells items online on Facebook and Etsy. Shoe still would have liked more business advice, she said. And she thought more events are needed to draw people to her part of the street.


March 31, 2016 - Lunches featuring everything from empanadas to sushi, and fresh seafood to barbecue are available every Thursday at the Food Truck Rodeo at Court Square Park downtown. (Brandon Dill/Special to The Commercial Appeal) (Photo: Brandon Dill)

While the Downtown commission promotes regular activities, such as having a weekly Memphis Farmer's Market in Court Square through September, she said she found many shoppers walked in after hearing customers and friends mention the store. To bring in crowds, though, big events are needed, she said.


“It has to be an event to get someone to drive down and look for a parking spot and pay for parking,” Shoe said. “If we’re going to bring people in from the rest of Memphis we have to figure out the parking and we have to have special events.”


Closer to Court Square, and the four small hotels nearby, Michelle Sesley ran her own pop up in September, selling fashion apparel and shoes.


Angelique Sloan, owner of the Shop Mucho online store, sells her wares from a free pop-up shop in a vacant downtown storefront. In August, The Downtown Memphis Commission expanded its Open on Main initiative, a program designed to boost shopping on Main Street. (Photo: Mark Weber/The Commercial Appeal)

“Yes, absolutely, I’d do this again. I’m very sad that it’s ending,” Sesley said. “It’s been very steady. A lot of Downtown workers came in and they brought their friends.”


Once a lead cashier at a Bed Bath and Beyond store, Sesley had started an online business, msshoetique.com, and never had an actual shop. “I love shoes. I have a passion for shoes,” she said. That led her and a partner to apply for a pop up. Their shop's name: J Lykey’s Boutique meets M.S. Shoetique.


“We’re trying to get our own permanent storefront Downtown,” Sesley said.


Memphis years ago constructed the Main Street Mall and the Mud Island River Park, spending what would exceed $120 million in today's money, expressly to bring people Downtown and save the retail stores. Merchants closed anyway.


Visitors walk along the model Mississippi River as staff cleans the facility at Mud Island River Park.  (Photo: Brandon Dill)

Downtown probably will never attract a full-line department store like the behemoth Goldsmith’s. But Todd Walker, an architect located on South Main, said Downtown could become a shopping destination again.


“Craft stores and boutiques could revive retail,” Walker said.


There’s already an example just east of Midtown on Broad Avenue. It’s part of the buy-local trend favored particularly among Americans in their 20s and 30s longing for what market researchers call authenticity.


February 4, 2016 — Casting artist Dan Spector pulls a cast from the corner to set out for display in his studio Archicast at 2527 Broad Avenue. Spector has occupied the building since 1991 and moved last year  to make way for renovations. (Mike Brown/The Commercial Appeal) (Photo: MIKE BROWN)

Broad Avenue, spanning an old railroad warehouse district, drew artists looking for low-cost rent. Shoppers followed for hand-designed merchandise not mass produced in factories.


Today, Broad’s a small shopping destination. Downtown could become one too.


One success has already appeared among the Open on Main merchants. Buff City Soap is securing permanent space on South Main after a pop-up stint at 86 N. Main. 


“We feel we’re building the base for hyper retail,” said Jennifer Oswalt, currently the interim chief executive of the Downtown Memphis Commission. “Our focus is to get retail ready for the population.”


The riverfront home at 750 Island Drive on Mud Island offers three bedrooms and three-and-a-half baths for $675,000. (Photo: Memphis Media Company)

Despite the condos, night clubs and nearly 12,000 people living Downtown and nearby on Mud Island, a four-mile-long Mississippi River sand bar whose northern half was developed to resemble a resort town, a full slate of retailers hasn’t come back. Incomes are high, but there aren’t enough people.


Boutiques and artisans – what Oswalt calls hyper local – cost less to run than a chain store, and could attract shoppers from across the 1.34-million population metro area. Oswalt's agency provides facade improvement grants and loans up to $150,000 to prepare old buildings for permanent retail shops. 


Memphis set out a year ago to brew a citywide artisan industry with the Made By Project. Its advisers included City of Memphis grants coordinator Maria Fuhrmann and Leslie Lynn Smith, head of EPICenter, the small business development arm of Bioworks Foundation, a Memphis economic development initiative.


June 21, 2016 — Jewelry makers Ashley Parrish (left) and Sarah Brubaker take a selfie at their booth outside of City Hall during the Memphis Maker Fair featuring wares from local artists and artisans sponsored by the organization Made By Project. (Jim Weber/The Commercial Appeal) (Photo: Jim Weber)

At the same time, more good jobs are coming into the center city for the first time in years. Many of those workers are expected to move their homes Downtown and in turn support retail stores. 


Where are the jobs coming from? Several places. First Tennessee Bank has concentrated some scattered operations in its Downtown tower. Medical District workers and vendors are encouraged with incentives to move Downtown, Midtown and into the Medical District area. It includes six hospitals and four colleges employing 17,000 workers between Downtown and Midtown.


Meritan, SouthernSun Asset Management and Wunderlich Securities are relocating their head offices from East Memphis, bringing several hundred jobs among them Downtown. And there’s the big corporate move.


ServiceMaster Global Holdings is moving its headquarters and 1,200 employees from East Memphis into the renovated Peabody Place Mall located a block off Beale Street. The mall was the last grasp at traditional retail Downtown before various problems forced its closing in 2012.


The Hickman Building, vacant since 1971, will house 5,000 square feet of retail on the ground floor, 40 apartments on the middle floors and the offices of investment management firm SouthernSun Asset Management on the top two floors. Connected parking also will be built. (Photo: Nikki Boertman, The Commercial Appeal)

“We’ll take another look after ServiceMaster employees settle in, and see what pops up,” Oswalt said, referring to demand for housing spurring interest in more shopping. “We’ll look for more opportunities for restaurants, convenience stores and gift shops serving tourists and local residents with Memphis-centric gifts.”


Is there enough arts and crafts demand to fill the vast empty space on Main and its side streets with productive retail shops?


You have to say no. Commercial real estate brokers estimate the office vacancy rate Downtown at about 20 percent, but that counts only the best buildings like One Commerce Square.


Add in the lesser and neglected structures like the Sterick at 8 B.B. King Boulevard, once the South's tallest building at 29 stories, and 100 North Main, now the city's tallest building, and the vacancy rate soars.


November 9, 2016 - Sterick Building. (Photo: (Brad Vest/The Commercial Appeal))

You might wonder why all these buildings even stand. Construction surged in the 1910s and 1920s. This was then the central business district of a premier Southern city with few peers. Atlanta, Charlotte, Dallas, Houston, Miami and Nashville eventually pulled ahead, but the old footprint shows the importance of what once was here.


It is too big for Memphis today, particularly since a new city was built in East Memphis. Yet no one seriously talks of razing many buildings Downtown or concentrating the commercial core around the vitality created on Beale and South Main.


Instead, Memphis is intent on restoring what it has. And what it has on North Main is a street of big-city buildings.


March 8, 1951 - Cotton men jam the Memphis Cotton Exchange on March 8, 1951, as the New York and New Orleans futures markets, controlled by ceiling prices, reopened after being closed since January 26. Opening prices were in line with what most traders had expected. The Memphis market remained closed in protest of OPS regulations. OPS, the Office of Price Stabilization, was established to stabilize prices. The office operated through 14 regional offices and 90 district offices. The program was abolished in April 1953. (Photo: Rudolph Vetter/The Commercial Appeal files)

Even though some are half empty, others completely vacant, they appear steadfast in the way old American cities built to last convey a sense that serious work was performed here once by men and women in a time long past.


Walker, the architect, said you look at all this and it provides a sense of place. Nothing else looks quite like Memphis. It’s exactly what those millennials longing for authenticity want to see, and what many boom cities have given up.


Todd Walker (left) and Barry Yoakum, principals with the architectural firm archimania purchased the old Steelworkers buildings on Cooper and plan to renovate the buildings to house its future headquarters. The firm's vision for the property centers on making Cooper a more appealing and walkable street, building a stronger connection with both Overton Square and Cooper-Young. (Photo: Jim Weber/The Commercial Appeal)

Out-of-town real estate developers have poured into Nashville, bringing national chains with them, tearing down what’s old, putting up hotels, retail strips and apartment towers.


“Development in Nashville has been focused on condos and apartments. They’ve focused on one thing,’’ said Walker, co-founder of archimania, an architectural firm.  “That’s why Nashville has lost a lot of its sense of place over the last 8 or 10 years.’’


Oswalt said it’s important for Memphis to hold on to this past – with ideas like converting 100 North Main into a hotel rather than tearing it down. 


A view of the downtown Nashville skyline from 505. (Photo: Chad Wohlers)

“We believe Downtown and Midtown generates the personality of our city,” Oswalt said. “If we can grow in ways that doesn’t sell it out it will benefit us. It differentiates us.”


Walk out of a Nashville hotel and you can soon find a national name brand like Mellow Mushroom, Panera Bread or Starbuck’s just like you can in Indianapolis, San Francisco and Seattle.


Walk out of The Peabody or the Hotel Napoleon, and you’ll find few national brands.


July 28, 2016 &amp;#8212; Gustavo Barron puts the finishing touch to a lunch order at the Majestic Grill, which offers waiters and other line workers paid leave. (photo by Stan Carroll/The Commercial Appeal) (Photo: Stan Carroll)

Yet you can easily find Automatic Slims, Huey’s and the Rendezvous, and reach Alcenia's, Belle Tavern, Felicia Suzanne’s, Kooky Canuck, Majestic Grille, Tamp and Tap, Willie Moore's and more than a dozen others.


Each is the unique work of a local restaurant entrepreneur, in most cases a family who renovated and cares for an old structure.


What they have done is put their own Memphis stamp on the oldest part of the city, the blocks along the river.


And if the buy-local trend ever blossoms on North Main, what we'll have is local artisans like Andria Shoe recasting this old street with their own authenticity.


Ted Evanoff, business columnist of The Commercial Appeal, can be reached at evanoff@commercialappeal.com and (901) 529-2292.


 


 


 
