Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Sunny. High 94F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low 71F. Winds E at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:53 pm

EDGEWOOD, Md. • A gunman opened fire at a Maryland office park on Wednesday morning, killing three co-workers and wounding two others, authorities and the business owner said.

A manhunt was underway for 37-year-old Radee Labeeb Prince, who was considered armed and dangerous.

Harford County Sheriff Jeffrey Gahler said Prince shot his victims with a handgun and fled the Emmorton Business Park in Edgewood, which is about 25 miles (40 kilometers) northeast of Baltimore. The sheriff did not release a motive for the shooting.

The victims and the suspect worked for Advanced Granite Solutions, the owner of the home improvement company told The Associated Press. Prince has been an employee for four months, working as a machine operator, owner Barak Caba told AP in a brief telephone interview. Caba was shaken and would not provide additional details.

The wounded were in critical condition, according to a spokeswoman for the University of Maryland Medical Center's R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center in Baltimore.

Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, speaking during a break from a meeting of a state board, said the survivors had gunshot wounds to the head.

He said authorities had helicopters in the air and police on the ground looking for Prince, who may be driving a black 2008 GMC Acadia with the Delaware license tag PC 064273.

"The killer remains on the loose," Hogan said.

The FBI is assisting local authorities. Investigators were treating the shooting as a case of workplace violence and didn't see ties to terrorism, said Dave Fitz, a spokesman for the Baltimore FBI field office.

Nearby schools and businesses were locked down as a precaution.

The business park is just south of the Interstate 95 interchange with Maryland 24.

The sheriff said Prince had a criminal record, but he didn't know the extent of it. According to online court records, Prince lived in Elkton — about 35 miles (56 kilometers) from the shooting scene — as recently as last month.

The sheriff said authorities checked an Elkton home after the shooting, but Prince was not there.

___

Associated Press writers Denise Lavoie in Richmond, Virginia; Brian Witte in Annapolis, Maryland; Matthew Barakat in McLean, Virginia, and Eric Tucker in Washington contributed to this report.



Get breaking news delivered to your inbox as it develops.