Never miss a great news story!Get instant notifications from Economic TimesAllowNot now


Facebook, the world's largest social network with more than 2 billion users, cre...

Let's get smarter about money

The technology tailored to fit your small and medium-sized business.

Digilogue - Your guide to digitally transforming your business

Touching lives of many

Join the smart city revolution

ET Family Business Awards

The awards that put you on top of the world

TransUnion Cibil

Hunt for the brightest engineers in India

A one stop platform that caters to the pulse of the pulsating energy.

You are here: ET Home» 404 page


03:59 PM | 11 Jul


SENSEX


36,26626.31

NIFTY 50


10,9481.05

GOLD (MCX) (Rs/10g.)


30,306-222.00

USD/INR


68.77-0.05

Unleash the power of SIP - Invest in Mutual funds

Class:


Category:


NAV


₹46.91

Portfolio


CHOOSE LANGUAGE


ENG


You can search EconomicTimes.com for similar content, browse our most read articles, or go to our Home Page

The text that accompanied an anti-kidnapping ad from Pak is now a grim reality in India, where a modified version of it is leading to widespread lynching.

India muscles past France in World Bank ranking

2 Maharashtrians behind an impossible rescue

RIP Nano. World's cheapest car up in smoke

Axis has three names for Shikha Sharma's post

Are you an avid Instagrammer? Your profile may soon be verified

Apple's iOS update fixes bug that crashed iPhones when typing 'Taiwan'

Paint me a rainbow: Google assigns random colours to 8 new voices of AI assistant

Facebook slapped with fine of $662,501 over Cambridge Analytica data leak in UK

Google Pay now has peer-to-peer payments service; becomes one-stop destination to send and ask for money

Facebook testing feature which will identify malicious accounts sending unwanted messages

WhatsApp starts new feature to let users identify forwarded messages

Ex-Apple worker, who wanted to work for Chinese startup, charged with stealing self-driving car trade secrets

Now iPhone 'USB Restricted Mode' can be bypassed after Apple rolls out iOS update

Nikon launches new camera to enhance your wildlife photography experience

Motorola unveils E5 and E5 Plus to woo the budget smartphone user

Snapchat may soon let you scan objects, barcodes and shop on Amazon

Microsoft unveils smaller, cheaper Surface Go tablet at $399 taking on Apple's iPad

YouTube aims to crack down on fake news, will make 'authoritative' sources more prominent

Amazon users can buy OnePlus 6's 'midnight black' variant with 256GB storage tomorrow

Amazon India prepares for its most anticipated event yet

Flipkart, Amazon plan online sale next week

Tata Motors picks up 26% stake in TruckEasy

One97 Communications forays into forex service

Amit Jain to now independently handle APAC region of Uber

Zomato launches loyalty rewards program PiggyBank; Move to aid delivery order volume growth

VC market is on pace for strongest year since dot-com era

Jack Ma allies with Chinese VC fund Ganesh for $250 million India fund

Healthcare startup NirogStreet acquihires Brahm Ayurved

Will Amazon Prime Day click with grocery shoppers?

To groom new hires, startups throw a 100-day challenge

E-commerce firms line up sops to retain delivery staff

'UPI 2.0 will miss a point if it omits recurring payments'

"Firms need transparency to navigate the dark side of AI"

The question that changed the face of tech firm Sulekha

The strengths of both exchanges makes such a merger expedient, according to industry experts.


The HRD ministry had decided to pick only six institutes — three each in public and private categories — to ensure an ‘equal’ treatment.


Not all of the amount received as salary is fully taxable. A part of it will be fully exempt from tax and a part of it will be partially exempt.


Torrential rains unleashed floods and landslides in western Japan last week, which at one point forced several million from their homes.


India is ranked 5th in the lower middle income group. It is the most innovative country in its region of central and southern Asia.


The Nano’s death was confirmed by production numbers: Tata Motors Ltd. produced just 1 unit in June, down from 275 in the same month last year.


The stock of TCS has been trading at a record level in the past few weeks. A positive factor is the turnaround shown by the BFSI segment.



The largest fan zone is in Zagreb's main square, where thousands are expected to watch the game on a giant screen. 


Financial services has long been institution-driven due to strict regulations. But many former bankers have taken the plunge. 


The commission has given an elaborate reply to the Law Commission which had forwarded the law ministry’s queries on the issue.


At least five to six banks are expected to arrange the offshore credit for the telco which is involved in a brutal fight for subscribers with Jio.


Xi Jinping’s flagship Belt and Road Initiative is dealing with ever-greater resistance, slowing a momentum that once seemed unstoppable.


Copyright © 2018 Bennett, Coleman &amp; Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication Service