

2/28/2018

by


Carl Lamarre
 


Despite blossoming into a burgeoning act on the hip-hop front, 18-year-old rapper YoungBoy Never Broke Again has sullied his career early on because of his legal issues. After dropping out of high school in 9th grade and being placed in a juvenile detention center for committing robbery, the mercurial star has struggled to gain the proper footing needed to stay out of trouble. 


Last Saturday (Feb. 24), YoungBoy found himself barricaded in another legal dispute, stemming from an alleged report made by TMZ about a physical altercation between he and his girlfriend, Jania Jackson. Video conveyed the rapper allegedly putting his hands on Jackson and tossing her to the ground. Before his show in Tallahassee, Florida, he was arrested and later extradited to Georgia.


Billboard constructed a timeline based on YoungBoy's recent legal woes. Take a look below. 






November 2016 


YoungBoy was arrested before his show in Austin, Texas, by U.S. Marshals for two counts of attempted first degree murder dating back to an incident in his hometown of Louisiana. According to police reports, YoungBoy allegedly opened fire on a group of people at South Baton Rouge Street. He was extradited to another jurisdiction and was held on $200,000 bond. While he was inside jail, XXL spoke to the embattled rapper on a myriad of topics ranging from being a target in his hometown, to what he learned from his ordeals.


"I don’t think they really target, but if you got a name, they know who you is," he told the hip-hop publication. "You do something, they gonna come get you, and whoever you’re with and whatever they do, you’re accountable for it just because you got the biggest name. That’s how that shit go." During his stint in jail, YoungBoy released including "Win or Lose" and "Don't Matter."


May 2017 


After accepting a plea deal, which included lesser charges, mainly one count of assault with a firearm, YoungBoy was liberated from his jail stint as Parish Prison. A week after his release, YoungBoy returned on the music scene with his comeback single, "Untouchable." 


August 2017


District Judge Bonnie Jackson showed mercy on YoungBoy by suspending his 10-year prison sentence and gave him three-year probation for his involvement in the non-fatal 2016 drive-by in Louisiana. "I take full responsibility for what happened. I'm sorry," Gaulden said. "It wasn't supposed to go that way." He continued to show regret and remorse for his involvement, vowing to become a better person and take responsibility for his three children. "I promise to do right," he said. "I'm committed to my family."






Feb. 24, 2018


Before stepping onstage for his scheduled performance in Tallahassee, Florida, YoungBoy was again arrested for allegedly committing acts of assault, kidnapping and a weapons violation. The charges stemmed from an alleged altercation with his 18-year-old girlfriend, Jania Jackson. Hotel surveillance allegedly displayed the couple engaged in a heated tussle, with YoungBoy throwing Jackson down to the ground.


After the video surfaced, Jackson went on social media and vehemently denied the charges against her boyfriend. "Kidnapped? Fuck no. Has he ever put his hands on me? Fuck no," she explained. 


Feb. 27, 2018


Days after being arrested for allegedly committing assault and kidnapping, TMZ reported that YoungBoy was transferred over to Ware County Jail in Georgia. Billboard obtained documents confirming the rapper's custody, which included two felonies, most notably notably kidnapping and aggravated assault (Family violence). YoungBoy is currently in jail and being held without bail.

The online extension of Billboard Magazine, billboard.biz is the essential online destination for the music business.

Learn More

© 2018 Billboard. All Rights Reserved.


Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
About Our Ads
Advertising



Billboard.com is a member of Billboard Music, a division of Billboard-Hollywood Reporter Media Group
