By

Louise Boyle For Dailymail.com


and 
John Paul Vranesevich  For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  11:09 EDT, 12 June 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  11:39 EDT, 12 June 2018







           1

View  comments

A handwritten letter, allegedly containing eyewitness details of school teacher Rachael DelTondo's murder, has been discovered, DailyMail.com and Beaver Countian, a local website,  have learned exclusively in a joint investigation.


DelTondo, 33, was gunned down on the driveway of her Aliquippa, Pennsylvania, home on May 13. No one has been arrested or named a suspect in her murder.


Days after DelTondo's death,  an inmate at Beaver County Jail claimed to have received a letter containing details of the crime, allegedly written and signed by an individual who was interviewed as part of the murder investigation.


The letter, in part, reads: 'I heard the gunshots and seen her fall… I don't want to be part of this. They won't send me [to jail] if I tell them what really happened.'


Days after Rachael DelTondo's murder in Aliquippa, Pennsylvania, an inmate at Beaver County Jail claimed to have received a letter containing details of the crime.

That individual who supposedly wrote the letter could not be reached for comment by either DailyMail.com or the Beaver Countian, a news website in Beaver County with a focus on uncovering corruption in local government. Nor could the authenticity of the letter be independently verified.


But sources familiar with the investigation told the Beaver Countian that the letter is currently a major focus of the investigation into the death of Pennsylvania Cyber Charter School teacher DelTondo. 


DelTondo had been suspended from her job at the time of her murder and had received death threats after a leaked February 2016 police report revealed she had been found in a car, in the earlier hours of the morning in a secluded spot, with a then 17-year-old boy, Sheldon Jeter Jr, reclined in the passenger seat.


DelTondo told the officers that Jeter Jr, who was not her student, needed someone to talk to.


According to the police report, 'the windows were steamed over and the engine was not running'. The police found no wrongdoing.


Her mother, Lisa DelTondo, 64, told the Beaver Countian that she believes possible Aliquippa Police corruption led to the report's leak - and put her daughter in the difficult position of cooperating with state police investigating city corruption.


The mother said: 'Rachael was afraid of the Aliquippa police. We knew it was dirty. That police department has been dirty for 50 years. That night my baby was laying on concrete, I called them all out.'


Since the murder investigation has begun, Aliquippa Sgt Kenneth Watkins has been placed on paid administrative leave after his daughter, aged 17, was interviewed by investigators.


The teen was one of the last people to see DelTondo alive after going for ice-cream with her and Tyrie Jeter, brother of Sheldon Jeter Jr, before she was murdered.


DelTondo, 33, had been seeing Rashawn Bolton (left), 31, for about six months. Her murder came six months after she was suspended from her job when a 2016 police report was leaked, revealing she had been found in a parked car with Bolton's brother, Sheldon Jeter Jr (right)

Watkins was also accused by a ranking officer of making unauthorized entry into the DelTondo crime scene on the night of the murder.


Last week, Aliquippa Police Chief Donald Couch was placed on paid administrative leave by the city council. 


According to Councilman Matthew Mottes: 'Council members are fully aware of a criminal investigation [by State Police] being conducted into the City and the police department, including Police Chief Donald Couch.'


Couch was replaced by acting Chief Joseph Perciavalle.


Days later, Perciavalle was arrested by Beaver County Detectives and charged with felony distribution of sexually explicit material to a minor, felony unlawful contact with a minor for sending obscene material, and misdemeanor corruption of minors.


He allegedly distributed a lewd text message to a minor, who law enforcement sources say is the 17-year-old daughter of Sgt Watkins. 


The smartphone where the messages were allegedly found was confiscated from Watkins' daughter by law enforcement as part of the DelTondo murder investigation.


The letter claiming to hold details about the murder further complicates an already muddied investigation.


The letter was allegedly sent to Beaver County Jail inmate Wayne Cordes by Kayle Hill, 22, his ex-girlfriend and mother of his son, on behalf of someone else.


Inside the envelope was a letter from Hill and a second letter, handwritten in red ink, and allegedly signed by a friend of the inmate, who claimed to be a witness to DelTondo's murder.


Kayle Hill told the Beaver Countian that a friend of her ex-boyfriend gave her the letter in the days following DelTondo's murder.


DelTondo's mother, Lisa DelTondo, 64, told the Beaver Countian that she believes possible Aliquippa Police corruption led to the report's leak - and put her daughter in the difficult position of cooperating with state police investigating city corruption

DelTondo (pictured left) was standing on her mother's Buchanan Street driveway, in Aliquippa, Beaver County, on Sunday when she was killed in a hail of gunfire. It came six months after she was suspended from her job when a February 2016 police report was leaked, revealing she had been found in a parked car with Jeter Jr (center in right photo)

Ms Hill said: 'I was at working at Circle K… The friend came inside and gave me folded up paper and asked me if I could send it to Wayne.'


Ms Hill said she put the friend's letter in an envelope along with a letter she wrote and mailed them together to Wayne Cordes at the Beaver County Jail.


She declined to answer further questions about the letter's authenticity.


Wayne Cordes, 21, who is awaiting trial on felony aggravated assault and burglary at Beaver County Jail, told the Beaver Countian he had received the letter.


On the monitored phone call from the jail on May 26, Cordes told the Beaver Countian that after receiving the letter, he had been interviewed by Beaver County Detectives but is unclear how they learned about the letter's existence.


'I was going to give them this letter when [the Beaver County detectives] came to see me but… I didn't trust [them].'


Cordes told Beaver County Detectives he didn't know anything about a letter.


Cordes said on the call: 'I am not worried about myself. I can handle myself,' but added that he was concerned for the safety of others associated with the letter.


The inmate's mother, Beth Cordes, told the Beaver Countian that her son had told her about the letter during a prison visit on May 25.


'The letter detailed some things about the DelTondo murder,' Beth Cordes said.


'My son ripped it [the letter] in half… He gave his cell mate half of the letter and he kept half of the letter because he is afraid it is going to go missing.'


Beth Cordes told the Beaver Countian that she informed Pennsylvania State Police about the letter on May 26 because she did not trust Beaver County Detectives or Aliquippa Police Department.


Mrs Cordes said two state police investigators told her they intended to 'tread as carefully as possible as to not put anyone in harm's way'.


On May 30, Wayne Cordes' jail cell was raided.


The letter was allegedly sent to Beaver County Jail inmate Wayne Cordes by Kayle Hill, 22, his ex-girlfriend and mother of his son, on behalf of someone else. On May 30, Cordes' jail cell was raided and half of the letter was taken. Cordes is now represented by defense attorney, Gerald Benyo

When asked about the raid on Cordes' cell and the letter, District Attorney David Lozier told DailyMail.com that the search warrant was sealed

'The [Beaver] County Detectives executed a search warrant on Wayne's cell last night based on information received about the letter,' his former attorney, Steven Valsamidis, said.


Valsamidis has since recused himself from Cordes' case.


When asked about the raid on Cordes' cell and the letter, District Attorney David Lozier told DailyMail.com: 'The search warrant was sealed so I can't talk about it. The court order ordered the warrant to be sealed so I'm not allowed to discuss it.'


Wayne Cordes is now represented by defense attorney, Gerald Benyo.


Beth Cordes told the Beaver Countian that Wayne gave Benyo the bottom half of the letter - including the signature of its alleged author – before his jail cell was raided on May 30. 


On June 5, Benyo told the Beaver Countian: 'I can confirm that I was retained by Mr Cordes to represent him in his pending criminal case that is scheduled for trial in July, as well as what I believe to be the subject matter of the District Attorney's Office's search of Mr Cordes' jail cell.'


Benyo also told the Beaver Countian that he believed the raid of his client's cell has violated attorney-client privilege because legal documents were also seized along with the top half of the letter.


On June 8, Benyo's law offices were allegedly raided by Beaver County Detectives, according to a source with knowledge of the District Attorney David Lozier's actions.


DA Lozier told DailyMail.com: 'The search warrants in this case are sealed, I'm not allowed to talk about them.'


Benyo confirmed he was placed under a gag order by a Beaver County Judge on June 8. 


Benyo said in a statement: 'As of June 8 2018 I have been instructed by the court not to discuss issues which may relate to the DelTondo homicide investigation.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group