Gallery: Man pleads guilty in 2014 fatal hit-and-run, Jan. 3, 2018


    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY - A 41-year-old Guatemala native was sentenced to 15 years in prison today for the aggravated manslaughter of a 20-year-old man in a 2014 North Bergen hit-and-run and the aggravated assault of the victim's 11-year-old brother.

In January, Rogelio Chavix-Tacen admitted that on Nov. 14, 2014 he went to a local bar and drank to the point of intoxication before getting into his vehicle and driving at a high rate of speed on Kennedy Boulevard.



As he sped along Kennedy Boulevard, his vehicle jumped the curb between 31st and 32nd streets, striking Michael Viruet, 20, and his then-11-year-old brother, Adrian. The brothers and their sister, Mileen, 15, had just seen a movie and were walking toward the pedestrian bridge, officials said.

At today's hearing, Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Karen Kazanchy said the victims' family members were still too distraught to attend the sentencing.

Chavix-Tacen was arrested Dec. 4, 2014 in Annapolis, Maryland, where he was found hiding under a bed. His arrest came a half hour before Michael Viruet's death. Authorities said that Chavix-Tacen had purchased plane tickets and planned to leave the country.

At today's hearing, defense attorney Keith Hirschorn argued that the two sentences should be served concurrently and Karen Kazanchy argued that they should be served consecutively.

In the end, Hudson County Superior Court Judge John Young sided with the prosecution and ordered the terms served consecutively. Chavix-Tacen must serve 85 percent of each term before becoming eligible for parole.

Chavix-Tacen, who is not a United States Citizen, is expected to be deported after he if released from prison. He has 1,249 days of jail credit that will be applied to his sentence.

The sentencing was in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        