
              Janoris jenkins' brother, William Jenkins is being charged with aggravated manslaughter in the death of Roosevelt Rene.
            
            

Janoris Jenkins' brother, William Jenkins, has been charged with the aggravated manslaughter of Roosevelt Rene, chief of detectives Robert Anzilotti of the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office tells ESPN's Josina Anderson.

The body of Rene, who is a family friend of Jenkins and who had been living at the Fair Lawn, N.J. residence, was found on Tuesday. Rene, 25, was a music producer living in Janoris Jenkins' home while the player was in Florida.

The cause of Rene's death is being looked at as "highly suspicious," and police were treating the incident as a homicide investigation.

William Jenkins was in policy custody on Wedesday morning in Geneva, New York and is being held in Ontario county jail. William Jenkins is on parole for prior convictions of criminal sale and possession of controlled substances.

Jenkins has been in Florida since the team's minicamp ended earlier this month.



Please enter your email address associated with the account so we can help reset your password.

 


            Stay up-to-date with the latest news and scores from your favorite teams anywhere and
             get customized notifications, special offers and much more
          




              By signing up, I agree to the Sports Illustrated Terms of Use. I acknowledge that I have read the Privacy Policy. 
            


            For further information, please contact customer service at 1-888-806-4833 or write to Sports Illustrated Customer Service | Attention: Consumer Affairs | 3000 University Center Drive Tampa, FL 33612-6408.
            

You have successfully created your Sports Illustrated Account.

You currently have no favorite teams.

You currently have no favorite writers.


                Sports Illustrated treats this information with care and respect. For details, review Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
              

Remove or add teams to and from your list of favorites


                Add more favorite teams from the list below based on your geolocation

Remove or add writers to and from your list of favorites





 The most trusted voice in sports delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up now to receive Sports Illustrated's best content, special offers and much more.

By signing up I agree to the Sports Illustrated Terms of Use. I acknowledge that I have read the
                Privacy Policy. You may unsubscribe from email communication at anytime.
                


                For further information, please contact customer service at 1-888-806-4833 or write to Sports Illustrated Customer Service | Attention: Consumer Affairs | 3000 University Center Drive Tampa, FL 33612-6408.
                


              Thank you for signing up!
              Please check your inbox to confirm your email
              address and start receiving newsletters.
            