Naiyya Saggi, founder, BabyChakra



Mumbai, September 21


BabyChakra, a social-discovery and commerce platform for maternity and childcare, is pivoting to become a one-stop destination for pregnant women, infants and new parents through its marketplace model. For this, the company is also busy strengthening its key leadership position with two new appointments.

BabyChakra, founded by Naiyya Saggi in 2015, has recently hired Rachita Choudhary, former Director of Engineering at FreeCharge, as Head of Engineering, and Samarth Sawhney, founding member of Jabong and Hopscotch, as its Head of Growth.

Choudhary, with her a decade of experience in e-commerce, will be building the marketplace model by assembling a strong parenting community product and driving growth. Sawhney will be responsible for driving the product, marketing and strategising the business as it transitions from a content-based networking platform to a full-fledged online marketplace for products and services.

Talking to BusinessLine, Saggi said the marketplace is still in the beta phase and will be soon available for users across the country. The company has already tied up with 1,500 Indian and international brands across categories such as baby food products, apparels, personal care, health and nutrition. Many of the products are already available on the platform.

“Ever since we launched our app in 2015, we have witnessed a 300 per cent increase in our conversations with our users. This also gave us enough confidence to extend our business from just being a content-driven community for parents to become a platform that serves and addresses all their needs,” Saggi said, adding that the platform also has services such as online consultations, events, celebrations, and maternity and baby photoshoots.

The firm, which has raised funds from Mumbai Angels, Arihant Patni’s family office and Singapore Angel Network, is not in a hurry to raise fresh funds at present, but focus on building the business.

According to Saggi, the babycare segment in India is as big as $40 billion and is growing exponentially. “This is one market that not been impacted by recession. Besides, with incomes rising and increasing awareness about babycare, we are witnessing massive growth in small towns, too. Our marketplace model will help address the needs of the people in this market that doesn’t have access to good products, brands and services.”

She added that BabyChakra plans to bring on board advanced technologies such as machine learning and natural language processing to help reach out to more parents in a highly personalised way. The platform already has over 2 million mothers with customised pages for themselves.

Previous Story
E-furniture firms assemble their omni-channel presence before IKEA’s entry


Next Story
Tata Tech plans to hit $500 m in revenues


Get more of your favourite news delivered to your inbox

Please enter a valid email address. Thank You.

Dr Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd has launched hydroxychloroquine sulfate ...

Dr Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd has launched hydroxychloroquine sulfate ...

Dr Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd has launched hydroxychloroquine sulfate ...

The Mumbai High Court on Monday restrained Mumbai Port Trust from invoking ...

Onida has launched 20 new washing machine models to strengthen its product ...

Food regulator urges companies to reformulate products voluntarily 

To double cash recovery from NPAs; willsell non-core real estate assets ...

Auto components manufacturer, JTEKT India (formerly known as Sona Koyo ...

Toyota-Kirloskar Motor (TKM) is set to recall 2,628 units of its ...

Leading multiplex chain PVR Ltd on Tuesday said that it has signed a ...

 Products, network and dealer training have contributed to the turnaround

Jaguar Land Rover India today reported a 66 per cent increase in sales at ...

Dr Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd has launched hydroxychloroquine sulfate ...

The Mumbai High Court on Monday restrained Mumbai Port Trust from invoking ...

Onida has launched 20 new washing machine models to strengthen its product ...

Food regulator urges companies to reformulate products voluntarily 

To double cash recovery from NPAs; willsell non-core real estate assets ...

Auto components manufacturer, JTEKT India (formerly known as Sona Koyo ...

Toyota-Kirloskar Motor (TKM) is set to recall 2,628 units of its ...

Leading multiplex chain PVR Ltd on Tuesday said that it has signed a ...

 Products, network and dealer training have contributed to the turnaround

Jaguar Land Rover India today reported a 66 per cent increase in sales at ...

FlightPlan offers a new column on the milestone moments in the life of aviation stalwarts. Here’s the first ...

The ability of CEOs to make tough calls and avoid feel-good short-term decisions often decides their legacies, ...

As the SC verdict on Wednesday gives the Delhi government more teeth, a look at the power struggle in the ...

For the last six years, Sudhanshu Vats, Group CEO, Viacom 18 Media Pvt Ltd, has been busy turning the ...

The company’s efforts to grow capacity and improve product offering are positives

Long-standing customer relationship and efficient execution strategies are catalysts

The Tata Steel-thyssenkrupp AG JV will benefit the former by way of paring losses

Investors with a short-term perspective can buy the stock of NIIT at current levels. The stock gained 5.8 per ...

As trees stand on shaky ground in our cities, a shave away from the axe of development, a meditation on their ...

In keeping with the rest of the issue, this week’s quiz is all about trees. 

Last week’s visit to Boston with my sister Su was built around my trial-by-visa at the Spanish Consulate. All ...

The World Cup upsets show that Messi and Ronaldo, the greats of their time, can thrive only with an able ...

The explosively growing food delivery business in India is going upmarket, getting specialised and dishing out ...

Cashing in on the popularity of videos, Facebook’s Instagram has launched IGTV, a platform where videos can ...

The extent of impact and scalability were at the centre of conversations

There will be $24 billion in net new advertising investment this year, the best annual increment since the ...

In this concluding series on jobs, BusinessLine finds that while small units have been hit all over the ...

The pejorative jokes on pakoda sellers apart, the Centre has been keen on pushing self-employment in a country ...

TeamLease Services, a recruitment and consultancy concern, has been an observer-participant in India’s labour ...

In the first of a two-part series on skills and jobs, BusinessLine examines the angst and aspirations of ...

Click allow to get news alerts from The Hindu BusinessLine

You can manage the notifications any time from your browser settings.