
                                HANNAH MARTIN
                            


                            
                            Last updated 15:49, October 20 2017
                            

Auckland Kindergarten Association chief executive Tanya Harvey said they look forward to parent representation on the board. 

Parents of Auckland kindergarten children say they are battling to have their voices heard.


In March, the Auckland Kindergarten Association (AKA) announced a series of proposed changes in response to growing demand from parents for more all-day childcare, increased hours and abolishing term breaks.


However, some parents say the nature of the changes was "undemocratic" and conducted without consultation, with one lobbyist saying parents are being "systematically" excluded from the process.

Parents are joining forces to take their concerns to the top after recent changes made by the Auckland Kindergarten Association were deemed to be "undemocratic". (FILE)

Now, groups of parents are rallying together — with some forming committees to present a lobbying force at the upcoming annual general meeting (AGM) in November. 


READ MORE:  * Kindergartens becoming 'daycare by stealth', parents say * ECE sector unites to call for more Government funding for services * Auckland early education manager warns small centres 'dying breed'​ * How the childcare system works


AKA is a government-funded organisation that operates as a charitable trust.


As of the September 30 deadline, 50 kindergartens had committees or elected representative chairs.


They own and operate 107 kindergartens, five KiNZ all-day early learning centres and five playgroups across greater Auckland. 


Parents have also questioned aspects of the AGM and board election processes, including that the board appoints its own members, the chief executive has voting rights, and there is no constitutional requirement for teacher or parent representation.


The AKA constitution also states there is a possibility that the chief executive can appoint a member from AKA staff if a kindergarten fails to elect a parent/whanau support group.


Even if there were a parent chair, AKA guidelines state they are responsible for ensuring that no member speak against or "undertake any action that brings the Association's reputation into disrepute". 


Committee chair at Owairaka Kindergarten Marnie Wilton said the lack of representation prevented "healthy, robust debate".


Regardless of what parents' views are on the changes it's the process that has been the issue, she said. 


"It really is a sad state of affairs when parents, far from being encouraged and helped to form committees to help and have a say in their local kindergartens, actually feel as if we are battling the odds to have our voices heard."


Former kindergarten teacher and chief executive of lobby group Child Forum Dr Sarah Alexander said the "systematic exclusion" of parents had been most evident at recent AGMs. 


In recent years the AGM was changed to be held in the morning rather than the evening, preventing many working parents or parents with young children from attending, she said.


The 2016 minutes are not available, but only four board members and general manager (now chief executive) Tanya Harvey attended the 2015 AGM – no parents representatives were involved.


This year's AGM is set to be held in the evening to allow kindergarten representatives to attend which was a "small win," she said. 


In a statement, Auckland Kindergarten Association chief executive Tanya Harvey said the AKA looks forward to the prospect of parent representation on the board.


She said the nomination, election &amp; re-election of board members will be part of the AGM as it is every year.  


"It is encouraging to see more and more parents keen to be involved in the association in a range of ways."


"Our teachers, support staff, management and our current board are all passionate about kindergarten and early education - it is heartwarming to see that passion echoed in our community."'


Ministry of Education deputy secretary Katrina Casey said that although AKA receives government funding, the Ministry has no say on how they operate, their management structure or their board appointments.



                
                     - Stuff
            

Under-threat Salisbury School takes heart from change of government

National Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Nurses' negotiations not over
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Tenants too fearful to take action
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Which plastics are really green?
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        How Deloitte closed its pay gap
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Miners permitted in Māui dolphin sanctuary
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Nurses walk off the job
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        House fire 'suspicious'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Workers evacuated after chemical spill
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Gynaecologic Oncologists arrive with a purpose
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Businesses tackle climate change
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Barber shares dam gossip
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        A tale of two nurses
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Blazing truck on highway
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Celebrating a century of science
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Computers rank our endangered species
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            