
    
        
            By Brad Schmidt

bschmidt@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

Gov. Kate Brown has quietly ordered regulators to make child care facilities test for lead in drinking water, reversing an earlier decision by her own appointed policy board on early childhood education.

The move represents the first noticeable step toward increased oversight by Oregon's top elected official in response to lapses in child safety regulations.

Brown has directed Miriam Calderon, Oregon's new Early Learning System director, to make safety the top priority. And Calderon said her immediate focus is strengthening the state's child care licensing program.

Oregon must "accelerate enforcement action to ensure safety and quality" in day care facilities, Calderon said in a statement. Calderon also pledged to increase the number of licensing specialists who perform safety inspections and said Oregon must conduct more unannounced inspections.

The declarations from Brown and Calderon follow months of reporting by The Oregonian/OregonLive examining gaps and failures in the state's regulation of childcare facilities.

But state officials did not trumpet their newfound pronouncements of improved safety. Instead, Calderon announced the news in an Oct. 12 press release with limited distribution and posted the information to her agency's obscure website.

In the announcement, Calderon also highlighted the death of an infant in a childcare setting but provided no details, other than to say the provider's license had been suspended on an emergency basis.

"This baby and their family are at the center of my thoughts and the beginning of my prayers, but we owe them more than that," Calderon said. "Every Oregon family deserves immediate action and change."

Calderon did not immediately respond to an interview request Thursday morning.

Calderon has kept a relatively low profile since Brown appointed her to lead Oregon's Early Learning Division this summer. Calderon's division includes the Office of Child Care, which is responsible for regulating upwards of 4,000 day cares watching over more than 100,000 kids.

The Oregonian/OregonLive has highlighted a variety of problems with childcare oversight, including slow responses from regulators.

In May, the news organization told the story of children who were sickened after being exposed to a powerful insecticide at a Coos Bay day care, and the state's failure to immediately investigate what went wrong. The next month, news coverage highlighted a Keizer day care that amassed more than 100 health and safety violations before being shut down.

Meanwhile, a previously undisclosed internal state audit issued dire warnings. The childcare oversight system "functions outside the zone of safe operations," the audit read, and the system poses an "elevated risk for major incidents of child harm."

In September, The Oregonian/OregonLive wrote about a marijuana entrepreneur who was allowed to own a day care inside his personal home.

And last month, Calderon raised no public objections when Oregon's Early Learning Council, which sets policy, unanimously voted not to require day cares to test drinking water for lead. Lead is a neurotoxin that is especially dangerous for children younger than 6.

The council's chairwoman, Sue Miller, told The Oregonian/OregonLive that the decision not to require testing was "in the best interests of children and families." Water testing would present a "huge burden" for day cares and could force some to close, she said.

The state of Washington dismissed such logic, calling the costs "relatively inexpensive considering the risk to children that it may reveal."

Oregon's decision stood for just two weeks before Brown intervened, according to Calderon's news release.

Calderon's agency last month also hired a $200-an-hour public relations consultant from Washington, D.C., to craft "persuasive messages" and help deal with inquiries from reporters.

But days after The Oregonian/OregonLive highlighted the arrangement, the state's chief education officer, Lindsey Capps, terminated the contract Oct. 9.

Capps has now filled an in-house public-relations position and tasked that person, Lisa Morawski, with fielding media requests about childcare.

-- Brad Schmidt

bschmidt@oregonian.com

503-294-7628

@_brad_schmidt


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        