A Downtown Eastside daycare is following through on plans to shut down despite hopes from parents — and the B.C. government — that it would remain open.


The Phil Bouvier Centre — a daycare for Indigenous children run by the Vancouver Native Health Society — has sent termination letters to staff indicating its intentions to close by July 31, according to documents obtained by CBC News.


The move has sent some parents in a panic, and comes just months after federal-provincial funding of $153 million for B.C. childcare programs was announced at the Bouvier Centre in February.


"Parents are scrambling, the stress level is [high]," said Angela Giannoulis​, whose three-year-old son Nikolas has been attending the centre for two years.


Last week, a joint statement released by the province and the City of Vancouver emphasized that efforts would be made to keep the space open. Both parties said they were hopeful an agreement could be reached with the Vancouver Native Health Society


Just days later, a notice was posted on the door of the facility, warning parents that children could be turned away at the door due to staff shortages


The notice also doubled down on the group's decision to give up its child care licence.


In a previous statement, the group's chief operating officer attributed the closure to strained funding, declaring "the daycare has proved to be incapable of running at a sustainable financial level."


B.C.'s Ministry of Children and Family Development says it has reached out to the centre's governing board to outline its recent investments in B.C. childcare, according to an e-mailed statement to CBC News.


According to the ministry, the space could benefit from more financial supports, however, the continued operation is ultimately up to the daycare's board of directors.


Parents are hoping another organization will take over the space and take over the 49 child care spaces. The Vancouver Native Health Society plans to run a drop-in centre instead of a daycare.


"Vancouver Native Health Society clearly doesn't want to run the daycare, so lets find another operator — and move fast," said Giannoulis.




Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 


Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636


TTY/Teletype writer:  1-866-220-6045


It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.


Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC-TV shows offered on CBC Watch.
