
                                MATTHEW CATTIN
                            


                            
                            Last updated 14:10, November 17 2017
                            

Temporary gates cut off access to Paprika in August 2017.

Stanmore Bay's historic cottage, now infamously linked with corrupt curry chain Masala, may have a new life as a day care centre.


Auckland Council has confirmed it has received a resource consent application from Cottontails Childcare Ltd. for the establishment of a new centre.


The application for the 1783sqm property at 195 Brightside Rd indicates it will cater for 85 children and 10 staff within the existing buildings on site.

The property at 195 Brightside Rd.

READ MORE *Seized Masala properties net $8m after tax evasion settlement *North Auckland has influx of daycare consents


The car park area will also be reconfigured to accommodate two portacabins for an office, staff room and kitchen, and operating hours will be Monday to Friday, 7am - 6.30pm.


The application follows a recent influx of new day care centres consented in Auckland between July 2016 and July 2017, including seven within the Hibiscus and Bays Local Board area.


Prior to being fenced off in August, the historic homestead villa was most recently home to Paprika restaurant, run by Bob and Anu Konar.


The couple claimed the property was sold out from under them in June for $1.73 million, before it was locked and fenced off with their property still inside.


Auckland Council is currently processing Cottontails Childcare Ltd's resource consent application.



                
                     - Rodney Times
            

Piano injures person in Orewa 

Auckland Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Nurses walk off the job
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        How Deloitte closed its pay gap
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Nurses' negotiations not over
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Largest alpine resort to be built
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Complaints over racist Trade Me ad
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Businesses tackle climate change
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        'Good Samaritan' mourned
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Tarragon and chicken made for each other
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        People freed from car
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Woman seriously injured after fire
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Peak rail? Slowing numbers
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Māngere death 'very complex'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Mars is bigger, brighter
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        No legal action against baker
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Business can set you free
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            