Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Ed Prindle served as Boone County Jailler since 2002, and worked at the jail since 1985.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Ed Prindle is retiring as Boone County Jailer at noon Wednesday.
(Photo: Provided)

BURLINGTON – Longtime Boone County Jailer Ed Prindle announced his retirement the morning of Feb. 28, passing keys to the 500-bed lockup to his successor at noon that day.


Taking over the 500-bed facility was Jason Maydak, appointed that morning by Boone County Judge-executive Gary W. Moore to fill the remainder of Prindle's unexpired term.


While the timing of Prindle's retirement was a surprise, it was no secret that he didn't intend to seek re-election in 2018.


“I’ve been at it 33 years. That’s probably enough in the criminal justice system. It was time for me to go,” Prindle told The Enquirer about an hour after his retirement went into effect.


“I told everybody that I was not going to run ahead of time  ... maybe in August," he said.


Maydak was the lone Republican to file for jailer on the May primary ballot in Boone County. No Democrat at all filed for the four-year position.


Since November’s winner was known, Prindle decided it would be best to retire in the spring, ahead of warm weather activities and before his daughter gets married this summer.


Prindle has been critical on social media in past months as Kentucky reforms its employee pension system. Yet he said that was not a factor in his retirement.


“Honestly no, because being in the system for 33 years I’m in that Tier 1 and nothing that’s been discussed would have impacted my retirement one way or another,” Prindle said.


Prindle began his career at the county jail in 1985 and on March 22, 2002, was appointed jailer by Moore to fill the unexpired term of former Jailer John Schickel, now state senator. Prindle has been re-elected four times.


As he leaves office, though, he admits he’s frustrated about a number of issues facing jailers, chief among them: “It’s hard to hang onto employees.”


Ed Prindle has announced his retirement as Jailer effective 12pm. Mr. Prindle began his career at the county jail in 1985 &amp; in 2002 was appointed Jailer to fill the unexpired term of former Jailer John Schickel. He has been re-elected in that capacity on 4 successive occasions. pic.twitter.com/KqQN1OZ92M

Dealing with inmates 24 hours a day is rough, he says. His employees work with convicted or accused murderers every shift.


“The bottom line is these guys work hard,” Prindle said.


Overcrowding is a problem, as is cost shifting from the state. Prindle sees a disconnect in treating addicted inmates, sometimes repeatedly, when people on the "outside" of jail can't afford drug treatment.


"We keep seeing the same failures over and over," he said. Boone County Jail houses county, state and federal inmates.


Nevertheless, Prindle has confidence Maydak can deal with issues left on his plate.


Maydak began his career at the jail in 1997 and has received multiple promotions throughout his tenure. He is now a captain. He obtained a Bachelor of Science in criminal justice from the University of Cincinnati.


Maydak and his wife, Michaelene, live in Boone County and have four children.  


Jason Maydak has been appointed as Boone County jailer effective 12:01 p.m. Wednesday, Feb. 28. (Photo: Provdied)

Prindle believes he’s left things in good shape for Maydak.


A key, he says, is the jail’s “good working relationships” with courts, law enforcement and government.


“My 33 years have been really great and all the cooperation between the court system, the Fiscal Court, they’ve been really helpful in giving us the funding that we need in having a safe operation.”


Before he left his last day to tend to his family and fruit trees, Prindle said more than anything he wanted to thank his staff.


“It’s a great staff,” he said. Uncertainties about retirement and health insurance benefits may worry him for the employees coming up.


And by its very nature, “It’s not a safe place to work. It's tough,” he said.


That's why he is especially grateful to his now-former employees.


“I wouldn't have done it that long without them,” he said.
