By

Daily Mail Online Reporter






  Published:
  19:03 EDT, 2 March 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  19:14 EDT, 2 March 2018







          82

View  comments

Deputy Jacob Pickett (Pictured), 33,  was pronounced dead at nearby Witham Hospital after suffering from a gun shot wound that left him in critical condition

An Indiana police officer who was shot and killed while attempting to apprehend a fleeing suspect on Friday is  the first cop to die in the line of duty for the Boone County Sheriff's office in more than 80 years.


Deeputy Jacob Pickett was pronounced dead at nearby Witham Hospital after suffering from a gun shot wound that left him in critical condition.


Pickett, 33, is the first officer to be killed while serving in blue for the Boone County Sheriff's office since 1935.


The incident unfolded after officers with the Lebanon Police Department attempted to serve an unidentified woman a warrant for her arrest. 


After arriving to the residence, they spotted a second suspect with an outstanding arrest warrant later identified as 28-year-old John D. Baldwin Jr.


After spotting the police officers, Baldwin Jr. ignored orders to stop and instead fled the scene in a silver Ford Focus with two other people.


John D. Baldwin Jr., 28 (L), is accused of shooting and killing Deputy Jacob Pickett. He was arrested along with his father, John Baldwin Sr., 55 (M), and Anthony Baumgarht, 21 (R)

The Brownsburg Indiana native was the head K9 handler for the Boone County Sheriff's office and worked with his canine partner, Brick (Pictured)

They were later identified as his father, John Baldwin Sr., 55, and Anthony Baumgarht, 21, according to Fox News. 


After a short car chase, the men exited the vehicle and attempted to escape on foot. 


'While chasing one of the suspects the Boone County Deputy was shot,' police said in a statement, adding he 'was later apprehended by officers on I-65 after another pursuit.'


Baumgarht was also shot and wounded in the incident with his condition remaining unclear. 


The Brownsburg Indiana native was the head K9 handler for the Boone County Sheriff's office and worked with his canine partner, Brick.  


'Prior to his work with BCSO he served as a deputy for the Tipton County Sheriff's Department from November of 2013 until July of 2015. Deputy Pickett also served as a jailer at the Marion County Jail from 2010 until 2013,' the department said in a statement.  


Police investigate the scene of a shooting, Friday, March 2, 2018 in Lebanon, Ind, Jacob Pickett, a central Indiana sheriff's deputy

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group