Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Sunny. High near 95F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low 71F. Winds E at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Bernie Squitieri founded, then sold, Express Medical Transporters. He's back in business with a new company called Transportation Solution Services, which will focus on taking kids to schools after they've been displaced from their home districts. Submitted photo

Bernie Squitieri founded, then sold, Express Medical Transporters. He's back in business with a new company called Transportation Solution Services, which will focus on taking kids to schools after they've been displaced from their home districts. Submitted photo

When Bernie Squitieri sold Express Medical Transporters, the business he founded in his basement that specialized in nonemergency medical transportation, the 2014 agreement included a five-year noncompete clause.

Then he said he found out last month that a $1.3 million payment owed to him as part of the sale wasn’t going to be made.

“I said, I’ll walk away from the note if you give me the right to compete,” Squitieri said.

That’s what happened, he said, and he then formed Transportation Solution Services LLC. He incorporated the new venture on Jan. 1 and is signing a lease in north St. Louis County for its headquarters.

Efforts to reach current management of Express Medical Transporters were not successful. The company did not respond to a phone message or to a message sent through its website by the Post-Dispatch on Wednesday.

“I value the ability to compete more than the $1.3 million. It gives me the opportunity to grow a company again,” Squitieri said.

He started his first business in 1996 with one car, and it grew to 10 locations in 11 states with more than 300 vehicles doing $14 million a year in sales, he said.

With his new company, he’ll still do some medical-related transportation, but he’ll focus primarily on ferrying students to school through the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act.

The federal law states that if a student is displaced from his or her home, the school district must pay to transport that student to the school where he had been attending.

Its goal is to eliminate academic setbacks that come with frequently switching schools.

A report released in December by the National Center for Homeless Education stated that Missouri had more than 32,000 students considered homeless under the program during the 2015-16 school year, the most recent data available. That number was more than 50,000 in Illinois. Breakdowns for the St. Louis region were not immediately available Thursday.

Squitieri said he has signed three contracts with local schools, but he would not disclose which districts because they hadn’t given notice to the current companies they are using. And he said he’ll hire from 40 to 50 people.

Squitieri — who made news in 2016 when his wife accidentally threw away a 12.5-carat diamond ring that was found by a garbage worker — is trying to buy a St. Louis-area transportation company in hopes of merging it with his new venture. He would not identify that company, but said he hopes to close on the deal by the end of February.

His plan is to start Transportation Solution Services with 25 to 30 vehicles, with the goal of expanding to Kansas City this year and into Springfield, Mo., in early 2019.

He’ll incorporate technology he compared to Uber’s, which will include apps allowing parents to track vehicles’ locations through a login that will give estimated arrival times.

Squitieri said it will be strange to compete against the company he created — Express Medical Transporters also serves school districts, according to its website.

“The need here is huge,” he said. “And the demand is big for school transportation.”

Make it your business. Get twice-daily updates on what the St. Louis business community is talking about. 

Leah Thorsen is a regional reporter for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Email her at lthorsen@post-dispatch.com and follow her on Twitter: @leahthorsen


                                    
                                        Whenever Leah Thorsen posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.