Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

We need to bring our federal tax dollars back to our state by expanding Medicaid.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Want to submit your letter to the editor? Here is how.
    Wochit


Tennessee has seen hospital cutbacks and partial closures attributed to the rejection of Medicaid expansion, laying off hundreds of workers.

(Photo: 
John Partipilo / File / The Tennessean
)Buy Photo

When Congress passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010, we had reason to believe that it would be a game changer for safety net hospitals, which bear the brunt of uncompensated care in our country.


Their mostly indigent patients would finally have healthcare coverage and the hospitals would be reimbursed for the vital services they provide. 


But the reimbursements never came -- not for any safety net hospitals in our state. 


In 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that states could choose not to expand Medicaid eligibility, and that’s exactly what our Tennessee legislature did. It was a terrible decision that cost the state roughly $3.5 billion in federal funds and left over 300,000 Tennesseans uninsured. And the hospitals serving them were left operating in the red rather than the black. 


The Decatur County Commission just voted to close its public hospital, bringing the total number of recent public hospital closures in Tennessee to 10 -- the second highest number of any state.


All of this is a direct result of our legislature’s decision not to expand Medicaid. 


Most of the hospitals that are now closed served rural communities, and many other not-for-profit hospitals have cut emergency services to save costs. Patients and communities that were depending on those hospitals must now travel long distances to access emergency care, and in some cases, any type of care at all. 


This has had dire consequences. Tennesseans are losing their lives. Last August, I was heartbroken to read a national news story about Whitney Brown in McMinnville who died from an amniotic fluid embolism shortly after giving birth to her first child. 


Lack of access to doctors who can help in a childbirth emergency is now a widespread problem in Tennessee. As the Wall Street Journal article put it, “Many rural hospitals have eliminated labor and delivery services, creating maternity deserts where women must travel, sometimes hours, for prenatal care and to give birth.”


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The healthcare debate that we witnessed in Washington over the last year did not produce a single viable solution to these very real problems affecting Tennesseans. In fact, the health care bill that passed in the House but fortunately failed in the Senate would have left states suffering from the opioid epidemic like ours worse off. 


And so, we cannot afford to wait for Washington to get its act together. It is up to states and individual communities to figure out how to make the current structure of healthcare in our country work. 


Robertson County did it. With leadership from Mayor Howard Bradley, NorthCrest Medical Center in Springfield was bolstered by a combination of public and private support that came out of thinking creatively and being solutions oriented. 


Without NorthCrest Medical Center, not only would Springfield residents have to drive 40 minutes to Hendersonville to reach a hospital, the community would be left without a major economic engine. The hospital has more than 800 full- and part-time employees and spends over $42 million a year on payroll. 


Former Nashville Mayor Karl Dean (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

Robertson County is now sharing what it’s learned with the struggling public hospital in Houston County. This type of creativity and collaboration is our local solution. But the burden shouldn’t be borne by local governments alone. 


We need to bring our federal tax dollars back to Tennessee by expanding Medicaid. If elected governor, I will work with our state legislature to get this done. And if they once again refuse to do their job, my administration will spend our time working to give Tennessee voters the opportunity to decide by assisting in efforts to get Medicaid expansion on the ballot.


We have to stop thinking about healthcare as just a policy debate and recognize the real people who are being hurt by our state's inaction. It's time for us to work together to give Tennesseans better healthcare.


Karl Dean is the former mayor of Nashville and a Democratic candidate for governor.


 


 
