Please log in, sign up for a new account and purchase a subscription to continue reading.

Thank you for reading 11 free articles on our site. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 11 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you need help, please contact our office at 276-669-2181.




 

Add digital to current active 7 day print subscription 

Get home delivery of the newspaper every day. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition.

Get home delivery of the newspaper Monday - Saturday. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition.  

Get home delivery of the newspaper Friday - Sunday. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition. 

Get home delivery of the Sunday newspaper. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition. 

Receive unlimited web and mobile web access to HeraldCourier.com and get an electronic replica edition every day. 13 week intro rate will convert to $7.95

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Get home delivery of the newspaper every day.

Get home delivery of the newspaper Monday - Saturday. 

Get home delivery of the newspaper Friday - Sunday.

Get home delivery of the Sunday newspaper.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy early. Thunderstorms developing this afternoon. High 86F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 80%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 66F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 60%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 7:55 am

The Hog Wild Saloon remained closed.

The Hog Wild Saloon remained closed.

The owners of the Hog Wild Saloon, which has remained closed since a fatal shooting in March, have agreed to surrender its liquor-by-the-drink license.

Zack Blair, assistant director of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission, said Tuesday the agency has entered into an agreed order with the bar, which is on Stone Drive in Kingsport.

The state liquor board began investigating the business after a 20-year-old man, Brett Rodgers II, of Kingsport, was shot and killed on March 2 inside the bar. A subsequent Kingsport Police Department investigation resulted in the arrest of William Newkirk Jr., a 16-year-old from Bristol, Virginia.

Blair said the license was voluntarily surrendered for 10 months. The voluntary surrender is treated in the same way as a revocation, he added.

“At the end of the 10-month period, they will be permitted to reapply, and our agency will complete the review process to determine eligibility as we would with any new applicant for licensure,” Blair said.

A TABC order says a notice was given to Hog Wild in March regarding multiple violations related to a failure to provide adequate security and maintain the licensed establishment.

Blair said limited service restaurants are required to provide adequate security. He added that the TABC must determine whether adequate security is being provided.

Depending on the location, it may be appropriate to simply have individuals verifying identification, Blair said. In other circumstances, a licensed security provider could be necessary.

“It is really dependent on the particular establishment, and certain activity, like what occurred at Hog Wild Saloon, could demonstrate a failure to maintain adequate security,” Blair said.

Hog Wild representatives could not be reached for comment Tuesday.

From March 3, 2013, to March 2, 2018, Kingsport police responded to the bar 729 times, including 42 disturbances, 54 fights and 28 public drunk calls. One rape, one stabbing, one robbery and one shooting were also reported, according to a Police Department report on the location’s history.

The order also states that no license will be issued to any family member or associate of the business at the same location or within close proximity to the Hog Wild Saloon.

City officials have also investigated the site and identified a number of code violations. As a result, Hog Wild was ordered to make repairs before it could reopen.

Fire Marshal Robert Sluss said Tuesday he wasn’t aware if any permits have been obtained for the necessary repairs.

“From what I’ve seen, no work has been done,” Sluss said.

The Bristol teenager, Newkirk, remains held without bail at a juvenile detention center in Johnson City. He faces a first-degree murder charge in the 2 a.m. shooting. A bond reduction hearing is scheduled for Friday in Sullivan County juvenile court in Kingsport. Sullivan County District Attorney General Barry Staubus also recently filed a request to try Newkirk as an adult.

rsorrell@bristolnews.com | 276-645-2531 | Twitter: @RSorrellBHC | Facebook.com/robertsorrelltn


                                    
                                        Whenever Robert Sorrell posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
