By

Mary Kekatos For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  17:59 EDT, 24 October 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  21:34 EDT, 24 October 2017







         133

View  comments

A Florida woman has been charged after she reportedly crashed a wedding, poured a drink on her ex-boyfriend and punched a woman in the face.


Shelby McDowell, 20, of Lake Butler, told authorities that Darby Johns - who she identified as her current boyfriend - was attending a wedding at Hammock Beach Resort as a guest on Saturday and she went to spy on him.


McDowell said she saw her 26-year-old boyfriend dancing and kissing another woman, 25-year-old Crystal Munoz, on the dance floor, according to Flagler Live.


Shelby McDowell, 20 (left and right), of Lake Butler, Florida, has been charged after she reportedly crashed a wedding, poured a drink on her ex-boyfriend and punched a woman in the face. She told authorities that  her boyfriend, Darby Johns, was attending a wedding at Hammock Beach Resort as a guest on Saturday and she went to spy on him

McDowell said she saw her 26-year-old boyfriend (pictured together, January 2017) dancing and kissing another woman, 25-year-old Crystal Munoz, on the dance floor. She allegedly threw a drink on both of them and punched Munoz in the left eye. She then ran to the women's restroom to hide in a stall

She subsequently walked up to them and allegedly threw a drink on both of them and punched Munoz in the left eye. She then ran to the women's restroom to hide in a stall.


However, several bridesmaids 'pulled her out of the stall by her feet and they began to punch her', according to her arrest report.  


Resort manager Kevin Amico said he and Hammock resort security entered the bathroom and saw McDowell allegedly on top of Munoz. 


Amico said McDowell was punching Munoz, and Munoz was covering her face to protect herself. In security officer Pasquale Vallone's description, he saw 'two women grabbing and swinging fists at each other.'


Other guests and Hammock resort security broke up the fight.


After McDowell (pictured) went to hide in the bathroom, several bridesmaids 'pulled her out of the stall by her feet and they began to punch her', according to her arrest report. Other guests and Hammock resort security broke up the fight

Munoz (left) told a deputy that she and Johns were walking to the ballroom when 'someone' threw a drink at them and punched her in the left eye. Johns (right) told deputies that McDowell wasn't his girlfriend and that he hadn't been kissing Munoz

McDowell was booked at Flagler County Jail on a misdemeanor battery charge early Sunday morning and released on her own recognizance 12 hours later (Pictured, Hammock Beach Resort)

Munoz told a deputy that she and Johns were walking to the ballroom when 'someone' threw a drink at them. She says she was then 'punched in her left eye twice and when she turned around, she saw a woman running away'.


She was among the bridesmaids who went to the women's restroom where she recognized McDowell by looking under the stall door, reported Flagler Live.





Johns told deputies that McDowell wasn't his girlfriend and that she wasn't invited to the wedding. He also said that he hadn't been kissing Munoz and that they were walking to the dance floor when McDowell attacked them.


McDowell was booked at Flagler County Jail on a misdemeanor battery charge early Sunday morning and released on her own recognizance 12 hours later.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group