By

Associated Press


and 
Dailymail.com Reporter






  Published:
  11:19 EDT, 18 December 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  11:19 EDT, 18 December 2017







           9

View  comments

Christopher Wayne Kilpatrick, 43, escaped from Lauderdale County Detention Center on Saturday night




An Alabama inmate awaiting trial for the attempted murder of a police officer has escaped for the second time this year.


Officials discovered around 11pm Saturday that Christopher Wayne Kilpatrick, 43, had escaped, Lauderdale County Detention Center administrator Jason Butler said. 


Kilpatrick had previously escaped the facility on April 8 and was taken into custody again on April 15 following a standoff.


Lauderdale County Sheriff Rick Singleton said Kilpatrick escaped using the same method as in April, and cited 'faulty design on the jail'.


Kilpatrick apparently was able to remove a covering to access a plumbing chase, through which he was then able to get into the facility's attic,AL.com reports.


From there, he could access the roof and climb over the Center's razor wiring to escape.


Regarding his removal of the covering, Singleton told Al.com: 'He worked on it a while and loosened up the hinges and got them off.'


Authorities say he was able to remove a covering to access a plumbing chase, through which he accessed the attic and then the roof, from which he climbed over the Center's razor wiring. Regarding his removal of the covering, Singleton told Al.com: 'He worked on it a while and loosened up the hinges and got them off.' Pictured are two general views of the Center

Authorities said he escaped around 9pm and was reportedly last seen around 12.30am on Sunday near the intersection of Highway 72 and Sky Park Road in Florence, Alabama, the Times Daily reports.


The intersection is about seven miles from Lauderdale County Detention Center, which is also in Florence in northern Alabama.


Kilpatrick was originally indicted in December on multiple charges in connection with the attempted August 2016 shooting of Florence Detective Michael Price. 


Price was trying to apprehend Kilpatrick, who had walked off a work-release detail.


Kilpatrick has been accused of attempted murder, stemming from an August 2016 stand-off with Detective Michael Price (pictured)

He allegedly tried to steal a truck and then fled into a woodland when caught by Price.


He allegedly pointed a gun at Price, who then shot him.


A work release is where a prisoner who has garnered enough trust may go off-site by day to work a non-prison job.


He was indicted on additional charges after his first escape.


Kilpatrick had been due to face a jury trial in February. He was being held without bail.


He is described as a 6-foot-tall, 160-pound white male.


Authorities warn that he is likely to be armed and dangerous.  




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group