Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Dynus Corp. founder Orlando Carter has filed a federal lawsuit against Butler County politicians, John Boehner and PNC Bank executives.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


CARTER BIZ Orlando Carter an email photo"Orlando Carter Joins Fifth Third Bank Community Advisory Forum"Orlando Carter, President of CBS Technologies, was recently appointed to theFifth Third Bank Community Advisory Forum (CAF). Created in November 1992,CAF is comprised of not-for-profit, small business and communityrepresentatives that help meet the diverse needs of Greater Cincinnati andButler County. Cincinnati-based CBS Technologies is a leading provider oftelecommunications products and network services with customers throughoutthe United States and Canada.  Mr. Carter's professional experience includes over 15 years intelecommunications and banking. He began his career on the commercialplatform for NationsBank, known today as Bank of America, managingcommercial loan and treasury management products. His telecommunicationsresume includes management roles for General Cable Corporation and BICCGeneral Corporation; he also served as President &amp; CEO of North AmericanInterconnect. Mr. Carter holds undergraduate degrees in Computer Scienceand Electrical Engineering from North Carolina State University and a Masterof Business Administration degree from Duke University's Fuqua School ofBusiness.
(Photo: Provided)

Dynus Corp. founder Orlando Carter has filed a federal lawsuit against Butler County politicians, John Boehner, Fifth Third Bank and PNC Bank executives. He wants $500 million in damages.


Carter, 52, alleges that the accusation that landed him in jail – that he took out a $4 million loan in the Butler County's name without county approval – is a lie. 


The Dynus Corp. scandal in Butler County dates back over a decade. In 2005, then-Butler County Commissioner Charles Furmon asked the FBI to investigate the loan and how it came about.


There were lawsuits filed by Dynus, a now-defunct fiber optics company, and the county against each other. Half a dozen elected officials were implicated.


Former County Auditor Kay Rogers pleaded guilty to bank fraud, mail fraud and tax evasion and received a two-year prison sentence. Former County Commissioner Michael Fox was sent to prison for four years for wire fraud and filing a false tax return.


More: Mike Fox died. Then, the former Butler County politico was brought back to life to face a crumbling legacy.


Carter was sentenced to 15 years on five counts of bank fraud, and one count each of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail and wire fraud, conspiracy to commit bank fraud, making false statements to the Small Business Administration, bankruptcy fraud, and making false oaths in a bankruptcy proceeding.


Court documents said Carter has always maintained his innocence. In the lawsuit, he says he has been forced to resort to litigation because of his accusers' "outright lies, fraudulent concealment, fraud, deceitfulness, recklessness and other egregious tortious and racial discriminatory conduct."


It's a long list of defendants:


Carter claims the $4 million loan never happened and fake documents were manufactured to make it look like it did.


In addition to claiming that the documents are fake, Carter said that two FBI agents should have known the documents were fake and used to cover up fraud by PNC executives and bank officials.


The lawsuit said U.S. Attorney Ben Glassman cannot produce "certified and authenticated" PNC records showing the debt owed by Carter and Dynus. 


Carter has also filed a motion to overturn his conviction due to "overwhelmingly false testimony," the suit says.


He also accused Boehner and others of racial discrimination. He claims Boehner told an FBI informant: "That black guy, what the hell is he thinking?"


Carter was convicted in 2009. He is being held at the Ashland, Kentucky Federal Corrections Institution, a minimum-to-low security facility. He is scheduled for release in August 2023.
