Save money, travel more. The Miles to Memories team earns millions of miles/points each year to take amazing trips across the globe. We leverage loyalty programs to turn rewards into memories that last a lifetime. Come learn our secrets!

Learn how to maximize your points &amp; miles! Join the MtM Community!

I recently took a family trip to the Florida Keys and we decided to stay at the Hyatt Place Marathon Key.  I have been wanting to check this property out since it opened because it is a category 4 hotel which means it is only 15,000 Hyatt points per night.  As a category 4 it is also eligible for the category 1-4 free night that you get annually with the Hyatt credit card.



As stated above the Hyatt Place Marathon/Florida Keys is a category 4 hotel.  The room costs 15,000 Hyatt points per night and it is possible to redeem Hyatt credit card free nights at the hotel as well.  If you are able to find a cash plus points rate it would be $100 plus 7,500 Hyatt points.

The cash rate hovers in the $3-400 range during the busy season so Hyatt points offer a great value here at over 2 cents per point.

Even though this is a Hyatt Place they do have a suite with a mini kitchen and dining room.  Very similar to the one Shawn had at a Hyatt Place but the kitchen is a little bigger and more modern than Shawn had.  I am not sure if that room is bookable with points or if you are able to use a suite upgrade for it but something worth considering.  You can see photos of the room here.

The Hyatt Place Marathon is the 3rd ranked hotel on Marathon according to TripAdvisor.  It is next to the Marriott which is the highest ranked hotel in Marathon.  My parents stayed there so look out for that review in the next few weeks.



The Hyatt Place Marathon/Florida Keys is located on the western edge of Marathon key.  It is located in front of the Faro Blanco docks and marina.  I think there were some charters and boat rentals that could be set up right behind the hotel in the marina.

The hotel is a two and a half hour drive from Miami’s airport and an hour east of Key West.

The check in was pretty smooth and the hotel has the same set up as every other Hyatt Place.  Nothing out of the ordinary.  They normally had 1 employee manning the front desk.

We arrived at the hotel around 5PM and had no issues getting into our room right away.  The parking on site is free which is a great perk in the Keys.



We booked a double room with a pull out sectional couch.  It had a set up that anyone who has every stayed in a Hyatt Place is familiar with.  I enjoy the consistency of the brand and the set up is amazing for family vacations.  Having the option of 3 beds in a room while on vacation is great for a family to be able to spread out.  And it allows ample seating if you are in the room during the day.  The set up is truly hard to beat.



The room was very clean.  It came with a good size fridge which is a great perk.  The Hyatt Place Marathon rooms did not have a safe or microwave which was surprising.  The room also came with a coffee maker and a nice desk area.



The bathroom had just a shower set up.  The soap and shampoo were marginal items at best.



Breakfast comes free for everyone at the hotel which is an amazing perk and saved us a nice chunk of change while we were staying at the hotel. It is set up just off to the side of the front desk and they offer a small outside seating area as well.

Every morning they offered scrambled eggs (which were actually really good) and either sausage or bacon on the hot plates.  They also had cereal, muffins, bagels, a hot waffle iron, and toast.  It did get pretty packed down towards the end of breakfast so it is better to go earlier.  They served breakfast from 6-10AM.



There is also a restaurant that is in behind the Hyatt called Lighthouse Grill.  They say it is a part of the hotel but it is a little bit of walk, through a grassy area, to the restaurant. I felt more like it was it’s own entity. You can charge your meals back to your room though which is all that really matters isn’t it? 😉



The restaurant is beautiful and has an awesome view of the marina and docked yachts.  There is also a charming lighthouse in the marina that lights up at night.



The Lighthouse Grill has a pool in front of it which hotel guests are allowed to use.  They set up live music each night right next to the pool…probably the most fun we had on our trip was spent right there dancing with the kids.

The food was very good and if you get to the restaurant before 6PM you can get any entree for $19.99, a pretty great deal. They also had a promo going on that you could earn 500 Hyatt points for every entree purchased up to 2,000 points per stay.





Even though the hotel is only a Hyatt Place it does come with a few amenities.

There are actually two pools accessible for hotel guests.  The one that is on the Lighthouse Grill property and there is one right behind the hotel.  There are pluses and minuses to each pool.  If you want a more relaxing day at the pool then the attached pool is probably better.  You can also bring your own food and drinks to this pool.



The pool by the Lighthouse Grill is a little more active and while they don’t provide pool side service you can walk up to the bar and order a drink and food for the pool area.



The Hyatt Place Marathon also offers 3 Apple computers in the lobby for guests to use.  The wi-fi was free and came with pretty good coverage and speed.  It was even usable by the attached pool.



While this hotel does not offer a traditional beach vacation it does have a few great features, especially for a Hyatt Place.  Being able to book it with the Hyatt Credit card‘s free night certificate is what intrigues me most about the place.

The points price is just right but I couldn’t see myself spending $300-400 a night at this place.  I would stay here again using Hyatt points or using the Hyatt credit card’s free night.

The hotel has a good location, with a great restaurant on property.  I enjoyed the charm and lifestyle that comes with Marathon Key.  I have never met a more relaxed, welcoming group of locals in my life.  If you want to try a local restaurant with an awesome view then check out Burdines…their fresh cut fries are the best I have ever had!

 

 

Went here for a stop during our honeymoon down through the Keys – loved the hotel and Lighthouse Grill – the chef made a special off-menu meal for my vegan wife which was a highlight for her.  Great spot overall.

Awesome – loved the Lighthouse Grill.  Staff was great and 2 of the bartenders grew up like 20 minutes from where I live lol.

Hi Mark, I just stayed at this hotel at the very end of January and had a room just like the one you pictured.   Yep, 15,000 points per night was the rate.  Very nice hotel.  I will go and stay again and probably pick up that Hyatt Credit card. It was a short drive to Key West and lots of fun.

 I think it is a pretty great deal at 15K.  Did you eat at the restaurant at all?

No, I wanted to eat there but we were with another couple and they wanted to explore other options.  The breakfast was great.  The 15K deal was great. The location is good. The view was good. Was good for the price. Will do it again.

Thank you, Mark!
Great heads up for a future trip down the Keys.

My pleasure – thanks for reading

Am with you, Mark, Marathon has a nice laidback feel &amp; good restaurant prices since it is a fishing/locals town. Nice after the sticker shock of Key West!

Sparky’s Landing at Key Colony has a happy hour that starts at 4 pm – 30 cents for nice size beautiful pink shrimp &amp; wings. Tuesdays after 4 they have their own homemade gumbo, delish &amp; over the water. 

A fun (&amp; interesting) family activity is to ride the ferry over to Pigeon Key – where workers stayed while working on the 7-mile bridge; 2 1/2 hrs start to finish &amp; includes snorkeling &amp; a tour if you want. 

Our fav restaurant was Lazy Days – they do a bread crumb jalapeno parmesan crust on hog fish (mild). Fl lobster &amp; seafood grill also a hit. Wouldn’t say a huge bargain but WAS the best seafood for our entire 2 weeks in the Keys!

We stayed just down from the Hyatt at a Bluegreen Hammock timeshare, also on the water side. Perfect for families with lots of room; w/d; full kitchen. They will rent out, too, but book well in advance. 

The Turtle Hospital &amp; the Dolphin adventure center are 2 other good family activities (we didn’t make). Crane Point Nature reserve has walking trails and a museum.

So many good dining options in Marathon with prices that are comparable to home.  That is what I like about it vs Key West.

I have heard great things about the Turtle Hospital and Dolphin center but didn’t make it to either.  The Pigeon Key info center is actually right in front of the hotel which makes that a perfect trip.  Something I want to check out next time after driving by it on the way to Key West.

The locals highly recommended Florida Keys Steak and Lobster for dinner and Marathon Grill and Ale House for cheap food and drinks.  I think they had $1.50 beers and bogo entrees during happy hour.

Talking about it makes me want to go back lol.

me toooo best biscuits &amp; gravy ever at the Tiki bar restaurant at our Bluegreen timeshare reminded me of home! thx for the great tips when we return.

 







 Notify me of follow-up comments by email.


 Notify me of new posts by email.






Join over 6,500 people who are subscribed to receive a once daily email with all of our posts. Never miss out! 


								
							