By

Iain Burns


and 
Paul Thompson


and 
Abe Hawken For Mailonline






  Published:
  05:49 EDT, 11 March 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  07:13 EDT, 11 March 2018







         512

View  comments

The widow of a man killed in London by Russian spies has produced a letter from then-Home Secretary Theresa May in which she promises 'such a crime would never be repeated'.


Speaking on the Andrew Marr Show this morning, Marina Litvinenko said she was shocked to learn that ex-Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia were poisoned with a nerve agent in Salisbury last week. 


Her late husband, former Russian spy Alexander, died in 2006 after being poisoned with radioactive polonium-210 that had been slipped into his tea.


An inquiry later found that he was probably murdered by agents of the Russian state on the orders of Vladimir Putin.   


Speaking on the Andrew Marr Show this morning, Marina Litvinenko said she was shocked to learn that Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia were poisoned with a nerve agent in Salisbury last week

Her late husband, former Russian spy Alexander, died in 2006 after being poisoned by radioactive polonium-210 which had been slipped into his tea

Marine said: 'After this meeting I received a letter (pictured). At the end it said, 'I and this Government must continue to pursue justice for your husband's killing and that we will take every step to protect the UK and its people from such a crime ever being repeated'

She told Andrew Marr: 'I believed it would never, ever happen again after the public inquiry provided evidence of the death of my husband.'


Mrs Litvinenko added: 'We had a meeting [with Theresa May] and a discussion about what we might achieve after the public inquiry verdict.


'After this meeting I received a letter. At the end it said, 'I and this Government must continue to pursue justice for your husband's killing and that we will take every step to protect the UK and its people from such a crime ever being repeated'.


'Unfortunately, it happened again. It means something was not done.' 


It comes a week after Skripal and his daughter Yulia were poisoned with a nerve agent in Salisbury.


Police investigating the attack  have identified more than 240 witnesses and 200 pieces of evidence, Amber Rudd said.


The Home Secretary revealed the scale of the probe as investigators are said to have found traces of the chemical weapon at the Zizzi restaurant in the city centre.


The eatery was hidden from view behind hoardings on Saturday as officers returned to search for evidence, with the BBC later reporting the nerve agent was detected in one part of the premises.


Meanwhile, police investigating the poisoning are now focusing  on five sites in Salisbury.  


Extensive searches have been carried out at the former Russian spy's home and the cemetery where his wife and son are buried.


Police investigating the attack have identified more than 240 witnesses and 200 pieces of evidence after the Salisbury poisoning, Amber Rudd said. Pictured: Marr interviewing Alexander Litvinenko's widow this morning 

It comes a week after Skripal (pictured) and his daughter Yulia were poisoned with a nerve agent in Salisbury

Chemical warfare experts are now set to turn their attention to The Mill pub and the wooden park bench where the couple were found in a 'catatonic state' a week ago.


Green screens have already been erected outside the Zizzi restaurant where traces of the deadly nerve agent have been detected.


Specialist teams have been working at the Italian restaurant where 66-year-old Skripal and his daughter ate Sunday lunch.


Officials have said no others who were in the restaurant are at risk and have not made any appeal for them to come forward for health checks.


It is thought unlikely they were poisoned by their food or their drinks.


A source close to the inquiry added that a bouquet of fresh flowers laid by Skripal at his wife's grave has become a primary focus of investigators.  


The pair visited the cemetery where Liudmila is buried just hours before they both collapsed.   


It is believed the flowers may have been contaminated with the 'rare' nerve agent – yet to be publicly identified – that has left the pair fighting for life. 


After the pair ate their meal at Zizzi on Sunday they went on to visit The Mill pub, which has remained sealed off for a week, but has yet to be examined for contamination by forensic teams.


Police continued to guard the London Road cemetery where Liudmila Skrpial is buried and her son Alexander's ashes are interred.


Teams in Hazmat suits removed the plastic flowers from each of the graves as well as a toy dog that had been placed on Alexander's marble plaque.


He died in Russia last year and was cremated but his ashes flown to the UK to be interred in the Salisbury cemetery.


Family members have raised suspicions about his death although counter terrorism police have said there are no plans to exhume Liudmila's body to carry out tests.


Military personnel who are in Salisbury are expected to remove the wooden bench from The Maltings shopping centre over the next 48 hours.     


Zizzi restaurant in Salisbury (pictured) remained closed on Sunday as police continued to investigate 

Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey, who fell seriously ill after tending to the pair, released a statement from hospital saying 'he does not consider himself a hero' and was 'merely doing his job'.


Soldiers were seen at the South Western Ambulance Service station on Saturday after a vehicle was winched on to the back of an Army low-loader and taken away.


The Ministry of Defence said armed forces personnel would be returning to the city for a third day on Sunday.


Cordons remain in place at a host of locations across the city, including Mr Skripal's house and the cemetery where his wife and son are buried.


There was further police activity at the London Road cemetery on Saturday, where officers in hazmat suits had removed items and covered his son's memorial stone with a forensic tent.


Scotland Yard said no exhumations had taken place.


Speaking following a meeting of the Government's Cobra emergencies committee, Ms Rudd said there were more than 250 officers from eight out of 11 of the country's counter-terrorism units involved in the investigation.


She said: 'I want to stress that they are proceeding with speed and professionalism. We are putting in enormous resources to ensure that they have all the support that they need to do that.'


Ms Rudd said it was still too early to say who was responsible for the attack.


She said: 'This investigation is focused on making sure that we keep people safe and also that we collect all the evidence so that when it comes to attribution (of the attack) we will be absolutely clear where it should be,' she said.


'The police have said that if anybody thinks they have any additional information they would welcome them coming forward.


'There is also substantial amounts of CCTV they have to go through. This is a painstaking, detailed investigation and the police need to be given the space and time to get on with it.'


Mr Skripal and his daughter Yulia are still fighting for their lives after being exposed to a toxic substance in the Wiltshire city.


Mr Bailey, who was part of the initial response by authorities, also remains in hospital, although he released a statement thanking people for their support.


The statement read: 'Nick would like us to say on his behalf that he and his family are hugely grateful for all the messages of support from the public, and colleagues from the police family. People have been so kind and he has expressed that he will never forget that kindness.


'He also wishes to say that he was part of a group of officers and other emergency service colleagues who dealt with the initial incident.


Police at the grave of Liudmila Skripal the wife of Sergei Skripal in Salisbury on Saturday 

'He wants to say that he does not consider himself a 'hero', he states he was merely doing his job - a job he loves and is immensely proud of - just like all of his other dedicated colleagues do, day in day out, in order to protect the public and keep people safe.


'He would like to thank everyone once again for all of their kind thoughts and best wishes, they are truly appreciated.


'He asks respectfully that the media allow his family privacy at this difficult time.'


Police said 21 people had been seen for medical treatment since the incident.


The figure includes members of the public and emergency staff, some of whom have had blood tests as well as receiving support and advice.


The attack is being treated as attempted murder. 


POISONED FLOWERS 


Skripal regularly placed plastic flowers on his late wife Liudmila's grave, but last Sunday, unusually, according to a source, he took a fresh bunch. The deadly bouquet could have been taken to his house by a hit squad after being laced with poison.


A 'TROJAN HORSE' 


Some sources have suggested Yulia may have unwittingly brought a poisoned package, known as a Trojan Horse, into her father's home. It would have had to remain stable until activated – possibly concealed in a gift of vodka or cigars.


THE ZIZZI MEAL 


Skripal and his daughter ate garlic bread and seafood risotto in a branch of Zizzi just before they fell ill, so their food could have been poisoned. But that would have required the hitman to have access to the kitchen – and know which dish would go to their table.


THE MILL PINT 


The couple also went to The Mill pub in the Maltings which has been sealed off by police all week. The potent toxin could have somehow been slipped into their drinks without the bar staff being aware.


THE LETHAL LETTER 


The would-be assassins could have simply had the deadly chemicals delivered to Skripal's house in a letter or parcel. The ploy is simple but, because his symptoms appear to have developed rapidly while he was in Salisbury town centre rather than at home, seems less likely.


THE FACE SPRAY 


CCTV has captured images of an unknown couple walking close behind the Skripals just before they collapsed on a bench. They could have sprayed the nerve agent at them. The shocking tactic was used in the VX attack on a North Korean at an airport last year.


GRIM TASK: A gurney normally used for moving accident victims is taken towards Liudmila's grave yesterday

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group