
      Jump to navigation
    

A special cell of Delhi Police arrested three people who were allegedly trying to kill Waseem Rizvi, Chairman of Uttar Pradesh Shia Waqf Board. The three men were recruited by underworld don Chhota Shakeel to carry out the assassination.


The police arrested Salim Ahmed Ansari, Abrar and Arif from Bulandshahar in Uttar Pradesh. A large cache of arms and ammunition were seized from them.


Over the last few months, Delhis special cell received intelligence inputs that Chotta Shakeel, on orders from Indias most wanted criminal Dawood Ibrahim, was planning some activities in India.


The information gained credibility as it was revealed that Salim Ansari arrived in Bulandshahr from Dubai and was in constant contact with Dubai-based underworld operatives.


When Delhi Police monitored Salim closely, it was revealed that he was plotting to assassinate the Shia Waqf Board chief.


The group met in Delhi mid-March and went to Lucknow for a recce of Rizvi's office.


Delhi Police kept a close watch on the movement of the three men and after receiving fresh and specific intel today, nabbed them in Bulandshahr.


The special cell police recovered a massive collection of arms including three pistols, out of which one was county-made, 14 live cartridges, three Samsung handsets, an HTC mobile phone and six sim cards.


All three accused are hardened criminals who have previously served jail terms of duration of four days to two years for crimes ranging from chain-snatching to attempt to murder.


It was Salim Ansari who got in touch with an associate of Chhota Shakeel in Dubai and was recruited to carry out the assassination. Salim involved Arif and Abrar in the conspiracy. It was Abrar who obtained arms and ammunition to execute the plan now foiled by the police.


The investigation in the case is still ongoing and efforts are being made to arrest other accused in order to unearth the entire conspiracy.


Watch | Government will not compromise on crime, corruption, says UP CM Yogi Adityanath


&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt; &lt;/p&gt;



 Did Einstein believe Indians were stupid? His diaries suggest so

 Race 3 Movie Review: Salman Khan rocks. Nothing else matters

 Not happy with work and traffic, software engineer resigns and rides horse to office on last working day

 Missing Indonesian woman's body found inside belly of 7-metre-long python | VIDEO

 Bukhari murder: Pakistan's conspiracy exposed?

 LeT terrorist killed Shujaat Bukhari; PM Modi to meet farmers group; more

 Surgical strike video released: Watch how Indian Army destroyed terrorist launchpads in PoK

 Can Pakistan deny surgical strike now ?

 Amarnath Yatra: Second batch of pilgrims leave from Jammu base camp

 Surgical strikes proof: Bid to silence critics or diversionary tactic?

 Can Pakistan deny surgical strike now ?

 Bad weather halts Amarnath Yatra; Proof of surgical strike out; more

Copyright © 2018 Living Media India Limited. For reprint rights: Syndications Today