By

Hannah Parry



and 
Associated Press






  Published:
  13:27 EDT, 29 June 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  15:22 EDT, 29 June 2018







           5

View  comments

Jamaal A. Evans, 19, of Las Vegas, is charged with rape and forcible sodomy

A Utah State football player has been charged with sexually assaulting a woman at a party.


Jamaal A. Evans, 19, of Las Vegas, is charged with rape and forcible sodomy after he allegedly assaulted an intoxicated woman at an off-campus party on June 17.


It is the latest allegations of sexual assault to hit USU in recent years. 


The alleged victim says the last thing she remembered was drinking vodka with a friend in the basement of the party on the night in question.


'The next thing she remembered was waking up in the shower when she struck her head on a metal rack that was hanging over the shower head. (She) stated she heard Jamaal ask her if she 'was good,' KSL.com reports. 


At some point in the evening, her friends said they noticed she was missing and went looking for her, according to a Cache County Jail report.


But they say Evans was reluctant to tell them where the woman was, telling them 'we good.'


The friend headed upstairs to a bedroom where she found vomit covered floors, a bed and on Evan's shirt. The report states she heard the shower, but when she tried to get in, Evans attempted to stop her. 


When she finally gained entry, she said she found her friend 'completely nude', 'hunched over and … completely incoherent,' according to the report.


Evans (pictured on the field) a linebacker, redshirted as a freshman last year. He's now been suspended

It is the latest allegations of sexual assault to hit USU in recent years (pictured is the University of Utah campus)

She claims when she confronted him, he told her that he 'gave that girl what she wanted', adding that sometimes when you're in the moment, 'you just got to do it sometimes.' 


The 6-foot-2, 220-pound freshman linebacker, who appeared in court Thursday, denies the charges claiming the encounter was consensual.


His lawyer could not immediately be reached for comment.


Evans, a linebacker, redshirted as a freshman last year. He's now been suspended.


The charges come as a former Utah State player heads to trial on charges alleging he assaulted seven women. Torrey Green has maintained his innocence.


Torrey Green, 24, saw his star football career crash in 2016 when he was cut from the Atlanta Falcons after two initial rape investigations opened against him.


Torrey Green, 24, who is accused of raping seven women while he was a student athlete at Utah State University, also heads to trial soon

In March, a judge agreed to move the jury trial from Cache County, near Utah State University, to another location to give him a more fair trial and to consolidate six of the seven rape cases against him into one. The court ruled to move Green’s case to Brigham City court. 


Green is accused of raping or sexually assaulting seven women from 2013 to 2015 during his time as a student at USU.


He was charged with aggravated kidnapping, six counts of rape, two counts of object rape and three counts of forcible sexual abuse, according to HJ News.


Green originally had seven trials scheduled, but six of them were similar date-rape circumstances, leading the court to consolidate them into one.


The seventh case, however, occurred in a party setting, and will be tried separately.


Two fraternity members have also pleaded guilty in sexual assault cases in recent years.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group