How much gold did the two largest mining countries produce in history? 

Since the PBOC began to actively devalue the yuan versus the dollar four weeks ago, the price of COMEX gold has tracked the yuan nearly tick-for tick.

An ancient Babylonian code of law may hold some insight into fixing the rampant greed and corruption that presently exist in our financial industry.

The 18-year-old Maryland high school student accused of taking a loaded handgun and knife to school in Montgomery County, Maryland, last week, had a weapons cache at his home, including an AR-15-style rifle, multiple grenades, a detonator for C4 land mines, more guns, tactical vest, and a list of grievances, prosecutors said. The incident occurred one day after the mass school shooting at Stoneman Douglas High School in South Florida which left 17 children dead.



On Tuesday afternoon, Alwin Chen appeared at a Montgomery County District Court via closed-circuit television (CCTV) wearing glasses and a green jail jumpsuit. A judge ordered Chen, of Germantown, Maryland, to be held without bond, and ordered to undergo a psychiatric evaluation.

BREAKING: MoCo Police located the following items in home of Clarksburg HS student who allegedly brought handgun to class last week:
•AR-15 style rifle
•Multiple grenades
•Detonator for C4 land mines
•Additional guns
•Tactical vest
•List of grievances re: students/school pic.twitter.com/oBo71QoFVH

Chen was arrested after a school resource officer received information that he was concealing a loaded handgun in his AP Psychology class Thursday afternoon. Prosecutors also said he had a “list of grievances” in his possession at the time of the arrest.

NEW: Clarksburg High School email to parents cites "inaccurate" media reports re: Alwin Chen having "list of grievances."
To be clear, MoCo State's Attorney John McCarthy said today:
"He had written down a list of grievances + reasons why he brought the gun to school with him.” pic.twitter.com/R7NZ7O6cqs

“The list of grievances against students and school, possibly a motive for why he was going to use the gun,” assistant state’s attorney Frank Lazzaro asserted in open court. “This is about as dangerous of a situation that the court could possibly imagine.”

According to WJLA, an ABC-affiliated television station licensed to the District of Columbia, Chen told authorities his reasoning for the concealed loaded handgun was for “target practice” after school, but later changed his story and explained the weapon was for protection against bullies.

During police questioning, authorities say Chen changed his story. He initially stated he was going to “target practice” after school let out, but then explained he brought the two weapons to class for protective purposes because students had been harassing and bullying him.

Prosecutors also divulged that Chen had taken a gun to school on at least one prior occasion. However, they would not elaborate about when that offense occurred -or- if that information came to light before or after Chen’s arrest.

Later in the evening, a search warrant was served in Germantown, Maryland, where Chen lived with his parents.  Montgomery County Police were shocked when they found the following items:

MORE: Around 6pm, MCPD divulged they found "journal" in Chen's home, but claimed it contained nothing threatening.
Yet during Chen's 1pm bond review, prosecutors stated:
"The list of grievances against students and school, possibly a motive for why he was going to use the gun." pic.twitter.com/xNfMfUXaql

“He had written down a list of grievances and reasons why he brought the gun to school with him,” Montgomery County State’s Attorney John McCarthy stated Tuesday at the base of the courthouse steps. “He indicated that he had some difficulties with some other students in school, and because of those difficulties, he brought that gun to school.”

* * *

A Facebook post written by a Florida “Teacher of the Year” for the 2017-2018 academic year has received more than 740k shares because it places the blame for mass shootings not on guns, but on modern American culture.



ok I give up..ban everything..NOW!!!

the Vietnamese are attacking..

AR-15 "style"...  They're really going to run with this one.

In reply to ok I give up..ban everything… by Number 9

Maryland has a lot of special snowflakes indoctrinated by gubmint skools, telling them that they are special and that it's OK to get violent if they don't get what they want.  Becasue Maryland is tolerant and doesn't judge... 

Expect a LOT more of this in Maryland.

End result: Maryland passes WAY more laws making murder more illegal, demands a doubling of school budgets (higher taxes and larger gubmint) for more self-esteem programs in the gubmint skools, and tries to take more guns away from law abiding, peaceful, people.

In reply to AR-15 "style"...  They're… by Bud Dry

The SSRIs were not listed.  HHHhhhmmmmmmm..........

In reply to Maryland has a lot of… by ThinkerNotEmoter

this is not a school violence issue

it is a

young people emulating violence and "values"

of the adults around them, including American culture and society..... Moar War bitchez

full stop

In reply to The SSRIs were not listed. … by cossack55

Mueller has been on this one all along! Just waiting for the right time to STRIKE!

In reply to this is not a school… by Bes

a grizzly vet at the door is the answer

In reply to Mueller has been on this one… by DillyDilly

Where the hell would a kid get grenades from?

Okay kiddies, let's put our thinking caps on:

1. All of a sudden, a new "gun in school" incident seems to happen every week. 

2. All of these kids have psychological problems, but CONVENIENTLY, nobody seems to notice.

3. Where does a teenager go to buy 'assault rifles', ordnance, and explosives?

In reply to a grizzly vet at the door is… by wildbad

Charlie (of course)... Next question gets you a billion dollar contract for BELL HELICOPTERS...

 

C'MON people! Syria narrative is breaking down before our eyes... High time to get it all focused back on the gooks...

In reply to Where the hell would a kid… by Croesus

Just a guess that the "AR Style rifle" is one of the .22LR semi-autos made to look like an AR.  Good enough for the news media.

Does anyone recognize the handgun and rifle shown?

In reply to Charlie by DillyDilly

OPERATION GLADIO C: Government-Sponsored Domestic Terrorism Targets American Public Schools

 

http://stateofthenation2012.com/?p=94576

 

How the CIA’s MKUltra Mind Control Program Creates ‘Mass Shooters’ and Turns ‘Lone Gunmen’ Into Patsies

In reply to Just a guess that the "AR… by RAT005

Okay, what meds was this one on?

In reply to http://stateofthenation2012… by Super Sleuth

He's Asian. In AP classes. He's almost certainly on adderall. 

In reply to Okay, what meds was this one… by robertsgt40

GOOD one!  ^_^

In reply to He's Asian. In AP classes… by D503

Oriental?

In reply to He's Asian. In AP classes… by D503

Rug.

In reply to Oriental? by afronaut

sadly few will actually read this fine written article SOTN has some excellent analysis.

In reply to http://stateofthenation2012… by Super Sleuth

Inert Grenade= Rock

Electrical device... experts in law enforcement thought was a c-4 detonator.  Easy mistake for someone who has never seen one.  They also said the handgun was loaded with nuclear bombs and there were several dolls promoting mass murder.... GI Joe.

In reply to Just a guess that the "AR… by RAT005

That 'electrical device' they refer to, Im assuming the type that is used to detonate a claymore, is completely harmless without an actual claymore. Just scare mongering. Its no more dangerous than a battery. All it does is send an electrical charge to a mine.

 

Same with inert grenades, or dummy grenades. Either movie props, or the things used in classroom training to show people what different types of grenades look like. Can be bought online. Why anyone would want to own one is beyond me, unless you are some kind of weirdo with a need to try to scare people. Kinda like how everyone freaked out when some guy turned in a rocket launcher tube at a bun buy back. Completely harmless unless you hit someone in the head with it, but no more dangerous than any other heavy tube one might use to hit someone in the head with.

 

They are really turning up the heat with this shit. Makes my paranoia tingle. You aren't paranoid if they really are after you and/or your guns, right?

In reply to Inert Grenade= Rock… by E5

Grenade shaped paperweights and an electric starter from a bbq grill. I hate this planet.

In reply to Inert Grenade= Rock… by E5

This made me laugh really really hard...oh man that made my week.

In reply to Inert Grenade= Rock… by E5

I thought all schools now used metal detectors. How did he get a gun into the school?
I am so old now that I remember that the big school discipline rules were not smoking in the bathroom or chewing gum to look cool. But then I grew up in segregated schools that had no problems by todays standards. Things have changed.

In reply to Charlie by DillyDilly

Did you miss the part about the grenades being inert?

So... "toy grenades".  The horror! The humanity! Oh vey!

;-)

In reply to Where the hell would a kid… by Croesus

Trump must have call the FBI and told them there better not be any more of this shit so round up your zombies.

In reply to Did you miss the part about… by HRClinton

Is that a subtle way of asking for a source without actually asking? How long before they label him white?

In reply to Where the hell would a kid… by Croesus

&lt;&lt; an AR-15-style rifle, multiple grenades, a detonator for C4 land mines, more guns, tactical vest &gt;&gt;

 

Sounds like a normal Shitcago collection.

In reply to Is that a subtle way of… by overbet

in Texas just a hunting supplies.

grenades to fish and c4 to hunt deer and hogs.. ;-)

smiley face for those that fail to see the sarcasm

In reply to &lt;&lt; an AR-15-style rifle,… by CheapBastard

Oh he's white or yellow lives matter. Ask Soros.

In reply to Is that a subtle way of… by overbet

It was an inert grenade.

In reply to Where the hell would a kid… by Croesus

Not like Dads.

In reply to It was an inert grenade. by ClassicalLib17

@ Bes,

 

By the end of 2019 you'll have 18-year-olds fighting in this war who weren't even born when it began. 

 

Psychological Operations, Social Engineering &amp; Propaganda programs are “Generaltional.”  For a PsyOps to be truly effective it must cross Genertions or Muliti Generational. 

In reply to this is not a school… by Bes

Exactly like that KGB agent who defected, told us, back in 1981...  And the results are probably beyond their wildest dreams!

In reply to @ Bes,… by Chupacabra-322

Well look at the big brain on STP.  

 

Yep!  The KGB Agent interviewed by G. Edward Griffin. 

In reply to Exactly like that KGB agent… by STP

"it is a

young people emulating violence and "values"

of the adults around them, including American culture and society..... "

 

.. are you suggesting that the crows are coming back to roost  ?

 

In reply to this is not a school… by Bes

video games

In reply to this is not a school… by Bes

US politicians are clearly utterly selfish, arrogant children who think the law doesn't apply to them, are hell-bent on destroying the country, and think they can off people who go against them.

Fine role models, to be emulated by all! ;)

His name was Seth Rich.

 

In reply to this is not a school… by Bes

The Gas Lighting Scripted False Narrative PsyOp of “Assault Rifle” doesn’t Jive anymore.

 

False Flag - (N) Definition: When Governments or organizations (usually the former) stage highly sophisticated attacks on their own foreign soil with the purpose of placing the blame on a desirable enemy foreign or domestic, one who has otherwise done no wrong. Essentially a setup, it provides the government entity with an excuse via fabricated evidence in complicity with media to fulfill its various agendas. (IE: War or Law Making.)

 

False Flag - (N) Definition: Covert Operations conducted by governments, corporations, or other organizations, which are designed to deceive the public in such a way that the Operations appear as if they are being carried out by other entities. The name is derived from the military concept of flying false colors; that is, flying the flag of a country other than owns own. False Flag Operations are not limited to war and counter - insurgency operations, and have been used in Peace time.

 

###

 

The idea is to plant (Gas Light) the narrative in impressionable minds.  (Children have the most impressionable minds)

The brain meylin sheaths first information, so it has high retention.  Later contrary information will be disregarded because of how the brain works. (Bias / Preconceived Bias)

False flags are used because they are successful, and the human brain is why they are successful.

It takes much more effort to undo bad information, to then redirect the brain neural pathways and then sheath them into permanence.

In reply to AR-15 "style"...  They're… by Bud Dry

Derren Brown - The Experiment: The Assassin

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oC9J6O6soHA

 

 

SSRIs + spooktechs like this, plentiful supply.

 

Kid goes nice and peacefully without his trigger, eh?

 

Kill the treason network, stop the false flags

In reply to The Gas Lighting Scripted… by Chupacabra-322

Excellent comment!

To summarize: It is much easier to fool a man than to convince a man that he has been fooled.

In reply to The Gas Lighting Scripted… by Chupacabra-322

This guy is clearly North Korean

In reply to AR-15 "style"...  They're… by Bud Dry

Americans

Rage-filled,

hyper-stimulated slaves

of Satanic-digital-capitalism, powerless

and cerebrally impoverished; 

one day away from

national extinction.

In reply to This guy is clearly North… by I woke up

@ Deep,

 

A poster on the PeeP sTaTe thread made a very “Illuminating” post:

 

“you are missing the obvious.. the deep state wants/orchestrate the school shootings..

the US population must be disarmed for the satanists to start their culling of humanity..

500 million..

remember?”

 

 

That’s what their Stones say.  

 

These Pure Evil War Criminal Treasonous Seditious Psychopaths love their “Hidden in plain view” Deception.  

 

In reply to Americans… by Deep Snorkeler

the US population must be disarmed for the satanists to start their culling of humanity..

Chupacabra, in my opinion the satanists want to disarm the public so that the public doesn’t slaughter every last fucking one of them when this shitshow finally collapses, and since the FFs are becoming more frequent, I’m thinking the collapse is quickly approaching. Look at how they’re trying to censor social media. All signs add up to imminent shitshow implosion.

In reply to @ Deep,… by Chupacabra-322

Another reason Pol Pot, Chairman Meeow, Stalin, etc made sure the citizenry was disarmed before killing millions of them.

Makes me wonder how many Soros, Hillary and the skinny socialist Obama planned to kill if crooked Hillary got elected.

In reply to the US population must be… by Meat Hammer

If the She-Devil would've got elected, it would've been game on.  There's no friggin' way, we would've stood for a fucking felon to take the highest office in the land.

In reply to Another reason Pol Pot,… by CheapBastard

@ Meat,

 

Sure seems as though their rushing to the Exits as of Late.  If there are any exits?

 

Absolutely, NO SAFE QAURTER!

In reply to the US population must be… by Meat Hammer

North Korean, with Russian ties (see the red ties in closet) and thus both a Russian and Trump connection.

In reply to This guy is clearly North… by I woke up

Nope. Chinese.

In reply to This guy is clearly North… by I woke up

Nope.

In reply to This guy is clearly North… by I woke up

yeah, the fucknuts realized they missed covering mini 14s

In reply to AR-15 "style"...  They're… by Bud Dry

Tips: tips@zerohedge.com

General: info@zerohedge.com

Legal: legal@zerohedge.com

Advertising: ads@zerohedge.com

Abuse/Complaints: abuse@zerohedge.com

Advertise With Us

Make sure to read our "How To [Read/Tip Off] Zero Hedge Without Attracting The Interest Of [Human Resources/The Treasury/Black Helicopters]" Guide

It would be very wise of you to study our disclaimer, our privacy policy and our (non)policy on conflicts / full disclosure. Here's our Cookie Policy. 

 

How to report offensive comments

Notice on Racial Discrimination. 