




WORCESTER - Every time someone sees a health care provider, fills a prescription, or interacts with a government agency it leaves a data trail. Separately, these pieces of information might not tell a lot. But together, they give insight into complex issues.


A University of Massachusetts Medical School researcher gave a look at what linked databases show about what's driving the opioid crisis in Massachusetts and locally, at the inaugural Greater Worcester Public Health Grand Rounds, held Thursday afternoon in the Levi Lincoln Chamber at City Hall.


The in-depth analysis, using data from 2011 to 2015, highlighted the increasing impact of illicit fentanyl on opioid-related overdose deaths, as well as populations particularly at risk for fatal overdose, including those who had been in jail or prison, experienced homelessness, or had serious mental illness.


Thomas Land, an associate professor in the Division of Preventive and Behavioral Medicine, presented the public health grand rounds, coordinated by the UMass Worcester Research Prevention Center and the Worcester Division of Public Health. He previously served as director of the Office of Health Information Policy and Informatics for the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and was instrumental in creating a data-linking plan to better understand opioid overdoses statewide.


State legislation enacted in August 2015, known as Chapter 55, allowed for the first time the linking of 22 data sets to answer questions about opioid use and the epidemic spreading across the state. Data sources include public health, medical and hospital claims, MassHealth (Medicaid), mental health, public safety, jails and prisons, other law enforcement, housing, veterans' services, other service indicator flags, and community data such as town and ZIP code.


The data were linked in such a way to comply with patient privacy regulations.


Dr. Matilde Castiel, Worcester's health and human services commissioner, said data showing the high risk of opioid-related overdose death among people who had been incarcerated - 120 times the risk of the general population - pointed to the urgent need for better drug treatment in jail and upon release.


"We've been working on the re-entry piece; we've been working on medication-assisted treatment in the jail," she said. "That re-entry service needs to be huge."


The current practice of a single Vivitrol shot a day before leaving a correctional facility isn't enough to prepare a former inmate for recovery afterward, according to Dr. Castiel.


There are often multiple issues that increase the risk of opioid-related overdose death, Mr. Land said.


People experiencing homelessness, which is about 4 percent of the population, have a risk of fatal overdose that is 30 times higher than it is for the rest of the population.


Also, the risk of fatal overdose is six times higher for people diagnosed with a serious mental illness - which occurs in roughly one in four people age 11 and older in the MassHealth population - and three times higher for those diagnosed with depression.


The data analysis also showed the role of prescription painkillers on deaths, which, according to the latest state figures, released this week, were detected in 16 percent of overdose deaths in 2017 with a toxicology screen, a decrease from 26 percent in 2014.


These analyses support efforts by the medical community and state officials to overhaul prescribing practices through education, prescription limits, and full adoption of the prescription monitoring program known as Massachusetts Prescription Awareness Tool, or MassPAT.


Compared to the general population, those who received three months of prescribed opioids in 2011 were four times as likely to die from an opioid-related overdose death within one year, and 30 times as likely to die of an opioid related overdose death within five years.


According to Mr. Land, the vast majority of those who died of an opioid-related overdose did not have a prescription for an opioid within one month of death.


"Focusing on prescription opioids is a long-term preventive strategy," Mr. Land said. "This gives you an insight into the amount of opioids being diverted to other persons."


Mr. Land said the data showed geographic areas that had more of an "opioid burden" than others.


The level of community burden was estimated using information about fatal opioid overdoses for residents of a community, nonfatal opioid overdoses for residents of a community, Narcan kits distributed to communities and the number of infants born with neonatal abstinence syndrome to mothers who lived in these communities.


Worcester and Millbury were found to have a very high opioid burden in the greater Worcester area. Leicester had a high burden; Auburn, Holden, Grafton, West Boylston and Paxton had an average burden; and Shrewsbury had a lower than average opioid burden.


According to the Chapter 55 report, an estimated 4.4 percent of Massachusetts residents age 11 and older had opioid use disorder in 2015. By comparison, 8 percent of adults have been diagnosed with diabetes.


The Chapter 55 Overdose Report can be found online at www.mass.gov/service-details/chapter-55-overdose-report.


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							telegram.com  ~ 100 Front St., Floor 5, Worcester MA 01608 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.