Stephen A. Smith doesn't mince words about Kentavious Caldwell-Pope playing for the Lakers while serving a 25-day sentence at the Seal Beach Police Department Detention Center in California. (2:06)

Los Angeles Lakers guard Kentavious Caldwell-Pope violated his probation, the Los Angeles Times reported Thursday, and as a result is serving a 25-day sentence at the Seal Beach Police Department Detention Center in Orange County, California.


Caldwell-Pope is allowed to leave the facility to go to practice and Lakers games in California under a work-release program, but he must wear a GPS monitor outside the detention facility.


Zach Lowe highlights another young Chicago Bull, a masterful Dwyane Wade move, Andrew Wiggins and the winning-ugly Timberwolves, struggling lottery picks and more.

The detention stay has caused Caldwell-Pope, 24, to miss two road games. He also won't play at Houston on Dec. 31 and at Minnesota on Jan. 1.


Last week, Caldwell-Pope's attorney, Jeffrey Lance Abood, told ESPN that the player had to return to California to begin an intensive, 25-day program that would result in some travel restrictions and could cause him to miss games. The detention stay is that program.


The probation violation stems from an incident that occurred in March in Michigan, while Caldwell-Pope was a member of the Detroit Pistons. He was cited for operating a vehicle while intoxicated but pleaded guilty in May to the lesser charge of allowing someone to operate his vehicle while under the influence, which carried a 12-month probation.


The Times reported that Caldwell-Pope failed to comply with an order that required him to submit to mandatory alcohol and drug testing as part of the probation, resulting in the violation.


The Seal Beach facility charges $120 per night to inmates in the work-release program. Inmates in the pay-to-stay program are allowed to have new beds, flat-screen televisions and media centers, but are behind bars and may not watch TV after lights out, which starts at 10 p.m.


Caldwell-Pope was not with the Lakers during their light workout in Oakland, California, on Thursday but is expected to join the team on Friday for its game at Golden State.


On Saturday, the Lakers released a statement saying the team is "abiding by the terms of a program for Kentavious that were established for him by a court in the state of Michigan."


Caldwell-Pope is averaging 14.2 points in his first season with the Lakers. He joined the team in July on a one-year, $18 million deal after being heavily recruited in the first week of the free-agency period.


Information from ESPN's Ramona Shelburne and Ohm Youngmisuk was used in this report.

To help make this website better, to improve and personalize your experience and for advertising purposes, are you happy to accept cookies and other technologies?