LOS ANGELES (AP) — Los Angeles Lakers guard Kentavious Caldwell-Pope is serving a 25-day sentence at an Orange County detention center after violating his probation on a drunken driving arrest, the Los Angeles Times reported Thursday.

Caldwell-Pope is allowed to leave the Seal Beach Police Department Detention Center for practice and Lakers games in California under a work-release program, but must wear a GPS monitor outside the facility.

Caldwell-Pope has missed two road games, and won’t travel for games in Houston on Dec. 31 and Minnesota on Jan. 1. He was expected to play Friday night at Golden State.

While playing for the Detroit Pistons, Caldwell-Pope was arrested on suspicion of drunken driving early March 29 in Auburn Hills, Michigan, after police say he was spotted going about 45 mph in a 25 mph zone. He was arrested after a field sobriety test. A further test showed he had a blood alcohol level of 0.08 percent.

Caldwell-Pope is averaging 14.2 points this season. He signed a one-year, $18 million deal with the Lakers as a free agent in July.

Kevin Durant:

Everything else off the court, social media, perception, isn’t important. What people say, how they view you, it’s not important.

Also Kevin Durant:

 Thoughts? Agree or disagree? 💭🏀 #bucketgetters

A post shared by  Kalyb Champion (@bucketscenter) on Jul 10, 2018 at 10:37am PDT

 Nothing gonna stop me from achieving my dream now @kevindurant

A post shared by  Kalyb Champion (@bucketscenter) on Jul 10, 2018 at 4:59pm PDT

KD left the burner account at home this time. 💀👀 pic.twitter.com/FuidXOwLoi

— theScore (@theScore) July 11, 2018



KD out here beefing a high schooler in the DMs. 😶[Via Instagram/bucketscenter] pic.twitter.com/vnTdCJLlzu

— theScore (@theScore) July 11, 2018



Durant has already explained why he does these things, and I’m cool with it – because he’s not using a burner account. This is genuine.

It’s petty. It’s sensitive. It’s silly.

But it’s also genuine.

Just because Durant is successful, he shouldn’t argue with people online? Plenty of unsuccessful people spend a lot of time mad online, and nobody bats an eye. Durant will remain successful either way.

Nobody gets hurt. Durant clearly enjoys this (even if it’s a joy in misery). The teenager gets a desired rush of attention. It’s totally harmless.

And for what it’s worth, Durant is an elite two-way player who doesn’t elevate a team quite like LeBron James due to his playmaking/leadership deficiencies – relative to LeBron. I could go either way on Durant vs. Stephen Curry.

That’s hardly a slight! LeBron is the best player in the NBA, and Curry and Durant are in the discussion for No. 2.

LAS VEGAS —  Right now, everybody is waiting.

At Summer League, the buzz is that the Sacramento Kings are ready to make an offer to Marcus Smart. Which leads to two questions: At what number? And, will the Celtics match?

Enter Danny Ainge, via Brian Robb of the Boston Sports Journal.

Ainge on free agency: “Marcus is our top priority.”

— Brian Robb (@BrianTRobb) July 11, 2018



Danny Ainge on how luxury tax will factor into C's offseason moves: "It's my job to be fiscally responsible, but we will pay the tax. We plan on being a taxpayer for sure."

— Brian Robb (@BrianTRobb) July 11, 2018



All of this ties in. Boston expects to be a tax payer, but if they can put off crossing that line for one more season — delaying the repeater tax that will inevitably come — all the better. The Celtics have $112.3 in committed salary for next season, the luxury tax line is $123.7. The sense in Las Vegas is that the Celtics would still match a $12 million a year offer and make other moves during the season to get under the tax line, but if the Kings come in at $15 million or so, Boston will let him walk.

Ainge is going to say things that make it sound like he will match any offer, trying to scare off the Kings (or any other suitor). Do the Kings buy into it, or do they come in big? Sacramento thought they did with Zach LaVine, but the Bulls matched. Boston would LOVE it if Smart played for the qualifying offer and became an unrestricted free agent in a year.

The elite defensive wing is one of the few quality free agents still on the market, and where he lands is still up in the air.

Karl-Anthony Towns was the Third Team All-NBA center last season, averaging 21.3 points and 12.3 rebounds a game, shooting 54.5 percent from the floor.

That in just his third NBA season.

He is the definition of a no-brainer max contract extension, and the two sides are talking about it according to Michael Scotto and Jon Krawczynski of The Athletic.

The Athletic Sources: Karl-Anthony Towns and the Minnesota Timberwolves are discussing a maximum rookie scale contract extension, colleague @JonKrawczynski and I are told.

— Michael Scotto (@MikeAScotto) July 11, 2018



Towns recently returned to the States from Italy. Discussions are in early stages. Like Wiggins last year, Wolves making it clear they want Towns in the fold for the long term

— Jon Krawczynski (@JonKrawczynski) July 11, 2018



The only negotiation is about what kind of contract Towns wants. He likely will sign the “designated” rookie-scale extension — what Andrew Wiggins signed with the Timberwolves last season — and that means five years and $158 million (25 percent of the salary cap). However, if he makes All-NBA again next year he can get 30 percent of the cap, or $190 million over five.

Offensively, Towns is going to earn that contract. However, if he really wants to lift Minnesota to contender level is defense has to get better and more consistent. He still does not read that end of the floor well, and the effort is not there nightly.

This deal is going to get done, but it leaves a lot of questions about the future of the Timberwolves. Towns is an elite-level player who Minnesota has to bring back, unquestionably, but Jimmy Butler is not a fan of Towns and his work ethic. There appear to be factions within the Timberwolves locker room, with the hard-driving Tom Thibodeau and his backers like Butler on one side, Towns and the younger players on another, and Wiggins off in his own world (everyone seems frustrated with him, especially after his lackluster effort and focus after signing his big deal a year ago). One way or another changes are coming to that team in the next year, the chemistry is rough, and signing Towns to a max extension may signal where the franchise is going to plant its flag.

LAS VEGAS — Moritz Wagner, the Lakers’ rookie center out of Michigan, has had a solid summer. In the Sacramento Summer League he averaged 14.7 points and 8 rebounds a game, and in Las Vegas it has been 10.3 points and 8 rebounds a night. He’s shown three-point range, but hasn’t been terribly efficient with his shot yet. Still, you can see his potential as a rotation big man in the NBA, a backup who can knock down shots.

However, his summer may be done after tweaking both his ankle and knee in Tuesday night’s Lakers’ win over the Knicks. He did not play in the second half.

Update: Moe Wagner has a left knee strain and left ankle sprain, and will not return tonight. LAL lead 75-52 behind a big run to start the 3rd Q.

— Mike Trudell (@LakersReporter) July 11, 2018



These were not serious injuries that will sideline him in the fall. However, the Lakers may not want to push him for Summer League games. (That said, they did bring Lonzo Ball back after an injury last year as they chased and won the Summer League title, and they are again one of the better teams in Vegas.)

Josh Hart has been maybe the best player in Summer League, averaging 23.3 points per game in Vegas. As a second-year player who got regular NBA run last season a lot is expected of him in Summer League, and he has lived up to that — and shown why a lot of other teams have wanted him as part of any trade talks with the Lakers this summer