
    
        
            By Olivia Rizzo


            NJ Advance Media for NJ.com
            

TRENTON -- The man accused of driving the getaway vehicle in the October shooting that killed a city grandmother was behind the wheel that day.

Defense attorney Jack Furlong argued in court Thursday that his client - Togbah Kpehe - operated "an informal ride-share" service to people in the neighborhood and simply dropped the carload of people off at their desired destination.

Kpehe, 22, is accused of driving the alleged shooters, Zion Williams and two juveniles, to the scene in a BMW. He appeared in Mercer County Superior Court for a detention hearing.

Wilma Rutledge, a grandmother, was killed in front of her home on Carver Lane and North Willow Street on Oct. 6 . A 14-year-old girl was wounded in the gunfire.

Mercer County Assistant Prosecutor Heather Hadley argued that Kpehe knew the shooting was going to occur based on interaction captured between Kpehe and Rahein McInnis, who she alleged was the ring leader of the shooting.

To Furlong's ride share claim, Hadley countered that the group can be seen exiting the BMW with guns in their hands, and the car did not drive off after delivering the group to North Willow Street - as a ride-share service would.

The car remained parked on the side street and the group returns to the car. One of the alleged shooters can be seen dropping a gun cartridge and has to stop to pick it up before getting into the car, according to Hadley.

"The video doesn't show them running back like Butch Cassidy the Sundance Kid," Furlong said. 

5th arrest in shooting that killed grandmother, wounded teen

Kephe is also captured on surveillance video walking to McInnis and one of the juveniles and shaking their hands. 

Furlong argued that this was so he could receive payment for the ride he provided, but Hadley argued that no exchange of money is seen on video.   

The BMW did not belong to Kpehe, he borrowed the car from a friend and when he was asked to return it he told his friend it had been carjacked, Hadley said. 

Investigators found the car a few days after the shooting. Furlong disputed that his client ever said the car had been stolen. 

"It doesn't get more serious than murder," Mercer County Superior Court Judge Ronald Susswein said. "It can't get anymore dangerous."

Susswein ordered Kpehe to remain in jail in order to protect the safety of the community. All of the adult co-defendants have also been ordered detained pending the resolution of the case.

Olivia Rizzo may be reached at orizzo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @LivRizz. Find NJ.com on Facebook


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        