Even though the Winter Olympics are coming up, there are still a lot of great shows to watch.

From award shows and sporting events to documentaries and prestige programming, the winter TV schedule really does have something for everyone.


Much of NBC’s February schedule will be dominated by athletics, as it’s home to both the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Koream and the Super Bowl (but not the Kitten Bowl or the Puppy Bowl; Hallmark and Animal Planet have dibs on those). It’s also airing the Golden Globes ceremony in January, where host Seth Meyers will no doubt continue the recent time-honored tradition of taunting our Commander-in-Chief.


And even though this is the last season of Portlandia on IFC, the dream of the '90s is still very much alive. In addition to FX’s eventually Emmy-nominated The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story, there are several programs to remind us that this year marks the 25th anniversary of cult leader David Koresh’s months-long standoff with authorities. Just one example: Taylor Kitsch plays him in a miniseries that will air on the soon-to-be rebranded Paramount Network (aka the channel you’ll know as Spike until January 18).


Besides ACS, other premium content include new shows like Counterpart on Starz (which premieres January 21) and Six Feet Under creator Alan Ball’s new drama, Here and Now (bowing February 11 on HBO). Noteworthy documentaries include Rotten, which is out January 5 on Netflix and takes a true-crime look at the food world, and Planet Earth: Blue Planet II, the exquisitely shot nature documentary that premieres January 20 on BBCAmerica. 


Later in the year, new and returning shows like Hulu’s second season of The Handmaid’s Tale and ABC’s reboot of Roseanne will also get our attention. But for right now, consider your January and February TV plans made.


60 Days In (A&amp;E) It’s the fourth season of the acclaimed TV series, which features people who go undercover as inmates in an Indiana jail.


The 2018 Rose Parade Hosted by Cord &amp; Tish (Amazon) Molly Shannon and Will Ferrell offer a send-up of a hangover-soaked tradition: mocking the commentators who cover the Rose Parade in Pasadena, California.


The Bachelor (ABC)  Racecar driver Arie Luyendyk Jr., who was the runner-up on the eighth season of The Bachelorette, is the prize/eye candy/star of this season of the popular reality competition show.


Better Late than Never (NBC) William Shatner, Henry Winkler, George Foreman, Terry Bradshaw return for a second season of globe-traveling, bucket-list adventures.


Glace (Netflix) The French series makes its Netflix debut. It’s about a hunt for a serial killer after a discovery atop the Pyrenees.


Kids Baking Championship (Food) The fourth season of the cooking competition show starts off sweet enough. It’s called “Cookielicious.”


Love &amp; Hip Hop: Miami (VH1) The first season of the new spinoff follows musicians like rappers Trina and Trick Daddy and rapper Gunplay.


Lovesick (Netflix) It’s the third season of the British comedy that was previously (and brilliantly) named Scrotal Recall.


NFL Football Fanatic (USA) Australian ex-pat Darren McMullen scours North America to find an NFL team to call his own.


The Challenge: Vendettas (MTV) This season’s crop of warring former reality TV stars include folks from MTV UK’s Ex on the Beach and Geordie Shore as well as Big Brother. 


Chopped Gold Medals (Food) This new five-part tournament will challenge elite culinary competitors to use their skills in frying, grilling, baking and speed to create gold-medal worthy dishes.


Ellen’s Game of Games (NBC) Love the wacky games that Ellen DeGeneres plays on her talk show? Great. Now they’re supersized.


Hunting Hitler (History) It’s the third season of this series that theorizes the dictator actually made it out of the bunker. 


I Am Jazz (TLC) The fourth season of this reality series continues to chronicle what life is like for Jazz Jennings, a transgender teen.


Intervention (A&amp;E) In a first for this long-running series about addiction, the new season will focus on interconnected stories of addicts and their families who are suffering in the nation’s opioid crisis.


LA→Vegas (Fox) A workplace comedy set in the friendly skies, this series follows an airline crew stuck covering the weekend flights from Los Angeles to Las Vegas. Dylan McDermott and Peter Stormare star.


Married at First Sight (Lifetime) The sixth season of this docu-series/social experiment follows six Boston-area singletons so eager to find happiness that they’ve agreed to marry someone with whom a reality show deems them compatible. They’ll meet for the first time at the altar.


Restored by the Fords (HGTV) Having zilch to do with cars, this new home improvement series follows sister and brother Leanne and Steve Ford who flip and modernize older Pittsburgh-area homes.


9-1-1 (Fox) Ryan Murphy and Co. move into Dick Wolf’s turf and offering their take on the police procedural genre. Connie Britton, Angela Bassett, and Peter Krause star.


The Amazing Race (CBS) Teams who are part of the show’s 30th season include basketball stars Cedric Ceballos and Shawn Marion, racecar drivers Conor Daly and Alexander Rossi and—in a nice feat of CBS synergy—Big Brother alums Jessica Graf and Cody Nickson.


Billion Dollar Buyer (CNBC) The third season follows hospitality kingpin and Houston Rockets owner Tilman Fertitta as he hunts for products that he can use in his hotels, casinos, and restaurants.


Catfish: The TV Show (MTV) The seventh season of Nev Schulman and Max Joseph’s realty show has a tinkered format and will be centered mostly in Los Angeles. 


Grown-ish (Freeform) Yara Shahidi stars in this coming-of-age spinoff to ABC’s Black-ish.


Laff Mobb's Laff Tracks (truTV) A spin on the standard stand-up series, this new show brings comedians’ jokes to life with over-the-top visual recreations. 


Match Game (ABC) Guest stars Joel McHale, Niecy Nash, Mark Duplass, Caroline Rhea, Jason Ritter, and Constance Zimmer join host Alec Baldwin and his skinny microphone for this revival’s third-season premiere episode.


WAGS Atlanta (E!) This new spinoff about the partners of professional athletes features Brandi Rhodes, the wife of professional wrestler Cody Rhodes, and Kesha Norman, the girlfriend of defensive lineman C. J. Mosley.


The X-Files (Fox) The new chapter in the revived series focuses on the search for Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully’s (Gillian Anderson) missing son, William.


Building Giants (Science) The new series offers a deep dive into the building of some of the world's most important superstructures, be it an underwater sea wall designed to save Venice, Italy, from flooding or a new retractable roof stadium in Atlanta.


The Four: Battle for Stardom (Fox) The new singing competition series boasts Fergie as its presenter and judges Sean Combs, DJ Khaled, Meghan Trainor, and Charlie Walk. So does this mean NBC’s The Voice has been put on notice?


The Interrogation Room (Discovery) The new crime series puts viewers in the—ahem—room where it happens as they watch detectives attempt to obtain criminal confessions and listen to frightening conversations that could end in convictions.


Killing Fields (Discovery) The true-crime series heads to Wight County, Virginia, for its third season. There, the team will investigate the 2004 murder of 28-year-old Carrie Singer, who was found beaten and half-naked in a field. 


Mega Machines (Science) The new series explores the technology behind such machinery as roller coasters, bullet trains, and cargo planes.


Nashville (CMT) It’s the last act for this country music soap. We mean it this time.


Project Runway All-Stars (Lifetime) The theme this season is rookies versus vets, as half of the contestants will have appeared on past seasons of All Stars.


Truth and Lies: Waco (ABC) A new documentary re-examines cult leader David Koresh’s infamous 51-day standoff with the FBI and ATF.


Child Support (ABC) Fred Savage hosts the new game show where adults square off against a bunch of kids—some of whom, presumably, are smarter than a fifth-grader.


Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee (Netflix) Having moved from Crackle to its new home on Netflix, Jerry Seinfeld’s popular web series will reportedly feature guests like Dave Chappelle, Tom Hanks, and Kate McKinnon for its tenth season.


Devilman Crybaby (Netflix) The new anime series, which is based on the Devilman manga series, follows a duo trying to thwart a demon invasion and save humankind.


Mysteries &amp; Scandals (Oxygen) In this new series, journalist Soledad O'Brien explores some of pop culture’s most infamous deaths, crimes, and scandals (think Whitney, Michael, and O.J.).


Rotten (Netflix) Consider this a new take on the true-crime trend that the digital channel helped to popularize. This six-part documentary that helped make shows like Anthony Bourdain’s No Reservations explores the problems with the food industries.


The End of the F***ing World (Netflix) An extremely dysfunctional love story based on Charles S. Forsman’s popular comics series.


Falling Water (USA) The second season of the drama, which counts The Walking Dead’s Gale Anne Hurd as one of its producers, continues to follow three unrelated people whose worlds collide when they discover newfound abilities to manipulate dreams.


Say Yes to the Dress (TLC) Celebrity guests for this show’s (sweet) sixteenth season include Flipping Out’s Jenni Pulos and Shark Tank’s Barbara Corcoran.


A Tale of Two Coreys (Lifetime) The tragic tale of '80s teen heartthrobs Corey Feldman and Corey Haim gets the Lifetime treatment.


Broke &amp; Famous (Reelz) This reality show looks at the people who may have lost all their funds but still have their fame.  


CopyCat Killers (Reelz) This somewhat meta reality series focuses on the people who committed crimes that they learned about in pop culture.  


The Incredible Dr. Pol (Nat Geo Wild) This reality series follows a veterinary practice in rural Michigan.  


Love on the Slopes (Hallmark) A journalist is sent to cover an extreme sports event and ends up falling in love.


75th Annual Golden Globe Awards (NBC) Seth Meyers is hosting this year’s ceremony, so Donald Trump jokes are pretty much a given.


The Chi (Showtime) Creator Lena Waithe drew on personal experiences to create this emotional story about life in the South Side of Chicago.


Final Appeal (Oxygen) This new series follows the NFL’s Brian Banks—who was falsely accused of sexual assault—and former prosecutor Loni Coombs as they examine whether some of those who are behind bars were wrongfully convicted.


Sister Wives (TLC) It’s the new season of the reality series that follows members of a polygamist marriage and their extended family.


To Rome for Love (Bravo) Love expert Diann Valentine takes five single women to Italy in the hopes of finding them true love in this new series.


Worst Cooks in America (Food) Chefs Anne Burrell and Tyler Florence are back to whip a bunch of kitchen amateurs into shape for the new season of this reality competition series.


Island Life (HGTV) Dreaming of relaxing in the sand with a tropical drink in your hand? This reality series shows how to do this on any budget.  


Lone Star Law (Animal Planet) This reality series follows the Texas Game Wardens in charge of policing the state’s natural resources.  


Mother, May I Dance With Mary Jane's Fist?: A Lifetone Original Movie for Adult Swim (Adult Swim) In case the title weren’t blindingly obvious, here we have a parody of a Lifetime movie.  


North Woods Law (Animal Planet) Catch up with your favorite game wardens of the Maine Warden Service.  


Revenge Body with Khloe Kardashian (E!) In Khloe’s world, revenge is a dish best served with rock-hard abs.  


Star Trek: Discovery (CBS All Access) According to its logline, the second chapter’s season premiere has the “U.S.S. Discovery crew forced to get creative in their next efforts to survive opposing and unprecedented forces and return home.”  


Watch What Happens Live With Andy Cohen (Bravo) Fingers crossed Andy’s recovered from his New Year’s Eve hangover by now.


Antiques Roadshow (PBS) Host Mark L. Walberg and his crew are back again to prove that one person’s trash is another’s historic artifact.


David Bowie: The Last Five Years (HBO) Premiering on what would have been Bowie’s 71st birthday, this documentary will follow the glam-rock god through his final projects and his creative process as well as his battle with liver cancer.


Home Town (HGTV) The second season continues to follow Erin and Ben Napier as they restore old homes in and around their small Mississippi town.


Street Outlaws: Memphis (Discovery) The new series, a spinoff of Discovery’s long-running Street Outlaws, follows street racer JJ Da Boss and his family and friends.


America’s Next Top Model (VH1) Tyra Banks returns to her throne as host of this beloved reality TV franchise.


The Fosters (Freeform) The new season of the very-much culturally relevant teen drama picks up just after the ICE raids sent some characters to seek sanctuary in a church instead of going to prom.


The Haves and the Have Nots (OWN) Season Six of Tyler Perry’s drama finds Candace (Tika Sumpter) out for revenge after last year’s finale.


How the Universe Works (Science) The sixth season’s premiere will explore whether black holes are a real thing.


Ink Masters (Spike) It’s the tenth season of this reality competition series that puts tattoo artists to the test.


Undercover High (A&amp;E) Like a teen comedy but real, this new docu-series will send 20-somethings undercover to infiltrate a high school in Topeka, Kansas.


Real Story of … (Reelz) Differentiate fact from fiction with interviews with the men and women who serve as the basis for your favorite “based on a true story” films and TV shows.


Alejandro Riaño Especial de stand up (Netflix) The Colombian comedian is one of several Spanish-speaking talents to get his own Netflix special as the digital channel continues its push into the Latin American market.


Alone Together (Freeform) Comedians Esther Povitsky and Benji Aflalo’s platonic (and awkward) relationship puts forth the theory that maybe the term “soul mate” doesn’t have to mean marriage. Also, Parks and Recreation alum Jim O’Heir nails his guest-starring role in the pilot.


Family by the Ton (TLC) You know how they say that the buddy system works best for weight loss? Well, this new series follows the weight-loss journey of three cousins who weigh a combined amount of almost 2,000 pounds.


The Magicians (Syfy) In the third season of this fan-favorite drama, Quentin (Jason Ralph) and his friends must attempt to restore magic after their previous actions made it removed from the world.


My 600-lb Life (TLC) It’s the sixth season of this docu-series, which follows the morbidly obese people through medical journeys to save their lives.


Rooster &amp; Butch (A&amp;E) It’s a new reality show that follows Texans and self-made millionaires Mike “Rooster” McConaughey and Butch Gilliam. Yes, the first guy is Matthew’s brother.


The 3rd Annual Howie Mandel Stand-Up Gala (The CW) Performers like Cedric the Entertainer, Cristela Alonzo, and Ron Funches help benefit charity Just for Laughs.  


Animal Crackers (The CW) Football star Dan Marino hosts this comedy special that sees professional mascots who may take their jobs a little too far.  


Restored (DIY) Follow Brett Waterman as he finds ways to reinvent old properties for a modern world.


23rd Annual Critics' Choice Awards (The CW) Wonder Woman star Gal Gadot will be honored with the organization’s #SeeHer Award at a ceremony where The Shape of the Water leads the film nominees and FX’s Feud: Bette and Joan leads the TV nominees.


Growing Up Hip Hop Atlanta (WE) It’s the second season of the show that follows hip-hop royalty like Bow Wow and Lil Wayne’s daughter, Reginae Carter.


Making a Model with Yolanda Hadid (Lifetime) The former supermodel and Real Housewives of Beverly Hills alum (and mom of Gigi and Bella) hosts this new reality competition show.


Expecting (Up) Soon-to-be parents use Go-Pros, fixed rigs, and self-shot confessionals—but no camera crews and producers—to help them share the experience of a new child. Talk about TMI.  


Truth and Lies: The Tonya Harding Story (ABC) You didn’t think Margot Robbie was going to have the last say on the figure skater, did you?


Disjointed (Netflix) It’s the second season of this comedy from David Javerbaum and Chuck Lorre that stars Kathy Bates as the matriarch of a weed dispensary.


Love After Lockup (WE) This new series follows engaged couples attempting to reconnect after one served time.


Mama June: From Not to Hot (WE) Here Comes Honey Boo Boo’s answer to Kris Jenner is still here and attempting to stay culturally relevant.


Philip K. Dick's Electric Dreams (Amazon) The sci-fi anthology series based on Dick’s work is Amazon’s answer to Netflix’s Black Mirror.


Somebody Feed Phil (Netflix)  Always-hungry television creator Phil Rosenthal moves to Netflix from PBS (where he starred in I’ll Have What Phil’s Having) as he takes viewers on a what is described as a “goodwill eating tour” to Tel Aviv, Lisbon, Saigon, Mexico City, New Orleans, and Bangkok.


Taken (NBC) The series that serves as a precursor to the Liam Neeson movies got a major revamp for its second season. Only Jennifer Beals and Clive Standen return as regulars.


Tom Segura: Disgraceful (Netflix) In his second special for the digital channel, the comedian (and father) takes on topics like the meaning of life and why having a baby is the most selfish thing you can do.


The Vet Life (Animal Planet) The series follows Houston veterinarians Diarra Blue, Aubrey Ross, and Michael Lavigne.


Frozen in Love (Hallmark) Rachael Leigh Cook and Niall Matter star as a struggling bookstore owner and bad-boy professional hockey player who prove opposites attract.


Crashing (HBO) The second season of Pete Holmes’s semi-autobiographical comedy finds the religious comedian questioning his faith.


Divorce (HBO) The second season of this dramedy finds exes Frances (Sarah Jessica Parker) and Robert (Thomas Haden Church) attempting to rebuild their lives after their split.


Hot Streets (Adult Swim) Two FBI agents collaborate with a young girl and a cowardly dog to investigate paranormal activity in this new animated series.


Jodi Arias: An American Murder Mystery (ID) This three-part series looks into the bizarre and captivating trial of the woman charged with killing her boyfriend, Travis Alexander.


Seeking Sister Wife (TLC) The new series follows three polygamist couples.


Victoria (PBS) The second season of this period drama about Queen Victoria is perfect for those who binged The Crown on Netflix and need another fix of royal history.


Past Malice: An Emma Fielding Mystery (Hallmark Movie Channel) Courtney Thorne Smith and James Tupper star in this miniseries based on the Dana Cameron novel.  


   


The Untold Story of the '90s (History) So we should expect more than O.J., the Clintons, and grunge music?


49th NAACP Image Awards (TV One) Anthony Anderson hosts this year’s ceremony for the awards that annually honor the outstanding representations and achievements of people of color in motion pictures, television, music, and literature.


Chain of Command (Nat Geo) Chris Evans narrates this documentary series, which offers an intimate portrait of the people who have devoted their lives to fighting the war against violent extremism.


Detectorists (Acorn TV) This BAFTA-winning British sitcom stars Mackenzie Crook and Toby Jones as members of the so-called Danebury Metal Detecting Club. Crook also created and directs the show.


Siesta Key (MTV) It’s the new season of the reality series that’s the Laguna Beach for a new generation.


Black Lightning (The CW) Prison Break’s Cress Williams dons the suit to become TV’s latest superhero in the new show from Being Mary Jane creator Mara Brock Akil and her husband, Salim Akil.


Katt Williams: Great America (Netflix) It’s another comedy special for comedian Williams. The digital channel also houses some of his previous specials, like Katt Williams Presents: Katthouse Comedy and Katt Williams: It's Pimpin' Pimpin'.


The Paynes (OWN) The new comedy series, a spinoff of the channel’s popular House of Payne, will find Cassi Davis and LaVan Davis’ Ella and Curtis Payne realizing that retirement isn’t going to be as simple as they thought.


This Time Next Year (Lifetime) Struggling to keep your New Year’s resolutions? For that there’s this Cat Deeley-hosted show that follows average folk who embark on journeys to improve their lives.


True Conviction (ID) Anna-Sigga Nicolazzi, a former prosecutor with the Brooklyn District Attorney’s office, travels the country to interview prosecuting attorneys about their most difficult homicide cases.


The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story (FX) The new season of this anthology series starts with the death of the legendary fashion designer and works backward to look at what led his assassin to madness.


Corporate (Comedy Central) Ever been a corporate tool? Still are one? This show gets you.


The Path (Hulu) Freida Pinto will play a publicist who puts Aaron Paul’s Eddie in a tough place for the third season of this drama.


Beyond (Freeform) The first season followed Holden Mathews (Burkely Duffield), a young man who wakes up after 12 year in a coma to discover he now possesses strange powers. The second season will explore whether he actually wants said powers.


Jordskott (Shudder) It’s the second season of director Henrik Björn’s eerie, Nordic tale. We find detective Eva Thornblad (Moa Gammel) returning to her old job in Stockholm, where she attempts to put the past behind her. Then a mutilated corpse is discovered in a lake.


Lip Sync Battle (Paramount) The fourth season will premiere with a live event that celebrates the music of Michael Jackson.


Portlandia (IFC) This is the final season of Fred Armisen and Carrie Brownstein’s hipster-skewing sketch show. So put a bird on it for old time’s sake.


Black Card Revoked (BET) Comedian Tony Rock hosts the revival of this game show.  


Flip or Flop Nashville (HGTV) Home renovators Page Turner and DeRon Jenkins couldn’t get their relationship to work, but they seem to have better luck with real estate.


Gold Rush: White Water (Discovery) The new series follows father-and-son gold miners Dakota and Dustin Fred as they put their lives on the line in the hopes that their hunt for gold pans out.


Grace and Frankie (Netflix) Lisa Kudrow joins the cast of Friends co-creator Marta Kauffman and Howard J. Morris’ popular Netflix series. 


High Maintenance (HBO) Ben Sinclair’s “The Guy” continues on with his job delivering pot to some of New York’s most eccentric personalities.


Trolls: The Beat Goes On! (Netflix) Based on the film Trolls, the animated series stars Amanda Leighton as Poppy, Skylar Astin as Branch, and Ron Funches as Cooper.


Cake Hunters (Cooking) Have an appetite to find the perfect dessert for each occasion? Then dig into this show.


Cocaine Godmother: The Griselda Blanco Story (Lifetime) Catherine Zeta-Jones stars in this biopic about one of the pioneers of the Miami-based cocaine trade.


Planet Earth: Blue Planet II (BBC America) Expect brilliant photography and a soaring score by Hans Zimmer in this nature documentary. Like its predecessor, it’s narrated by Sir David Attenborough.


ABBA: When All Is Said and Done (Reelz) This two-hour documentary focuses on the female members of the Swedish band, Agnetha Faltskog and Anni-Frid "Frida" Lyngstad.  


One Winter Weekend (Hallmark) Taylor Cole stars as a magazine writer who falls in love while on a dating detox (Jack Turner plays the lucky guy).  


Say Yes: Wedding SOS (TLC) Style expert George Kotsipoulous hosts this wedding makeover show.


24th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards (TBS/TNT) Kristen Bell has been tapped as the first-ever host of this awards show.


Counterpart (Starz) J.K. Simmons stars as a simple pencil pusher who is let in on a deep government cover up (and also plays one of the people who brings him into this world).


The Resident (Fox) The new medical drama stars Gilmore Girls and The Good Wife’s Matt Czuchry as a starry-eyed young doctor who works under a tough (but genius) senior resident.


The Alienist (TNT) It’s the much-hyped adaptation of the Caleb Carr historical crime series. Luke Evans stars as crime reporter John Moore while Daniel Brühl and Dakota Fanning also appear.


Dear Murderer (Acorn) The new New Zealand drama is based on the life of Michael Bungay, an infamously eccentric lawyer in that country.


Mosaic (HBO) Steven Soderbergh’s new murder mystery has the perfect thing for those who love second-screen viewing: a compendium choose-your-own-adventure app.


Murder is Forever (ID) The network has partnered with novelist James Patterson on this endeavor. Each self-contained episode of this true-crime story will live on screen and within the pages of Patterson’s strategically co-branded Book Shots.


Summer House (Bravo) Kyle is officially in a relationship with Amanda. Good for them! Except that this breaks the golden rule of this Montauk, New York beach house: no couples allowed! (Maybe we spoke too soon).


Two Sides (TV One) Viola Davis executive produces and narrates this four-part documentary series that examines both sides of the story in the fatal police-related deaths of Eric Garner, Ezell Ford, John Crawford, and Sandra Bland.


Another Period (Comedy Central) New and returning guest stars for the third season of Natasha Leggero and Riki Lindhome’s period comedy include Michael Ian Black, Jon Daly, Jemaine Clement, Andy Kindler, Patton Oswalt, and Chelsea Peretti.


Baskets (FX) Creepy clowns are very much en vogue now. Unless they’re on Baskets. Then they’re just funny and awkward (and a little sad).


Bellevue (WGN) The eight-episode limited series stars Anna Paquin as a detective researching the impact a grizzly murder had on a small town.


The Detour (TBS) The third season of this comedy about a family road trip gone awry finds the Parker family (led by parents played by Jason Jones and Natalie Zea) hiding out in Alaska.


Drunk History (Comedy Central) Everyone’s new best friend Tiffany Haddish serves as the narrator in the first episode of this fan-favorite show’s new season.


The Quad (BET) Guest stars for the second season of the series, which stars Anika Noni Rose and centers on the goings-on at a prestigious Black college, include Antwan “Big Boi” Patton Sr., Sheryl Lee Ralph, and Jasmine Guy.


Todd Glass: Act Happy (Netflix) Everything from House Hunters to heart attacks are fair game in this comedian’s new special.


We’ll Meet Again (PBS) Ann Curry’s new series interviews survivors of some of history’s most dramatic events.


Let’s Get Physical (Pop) Jane Seymour and Matt Jones star in this new comedy about a aerobics scion who reluctantly returns to the family business after his dad dies. 


Schitt's Creek (Pop) It’s the new season of the Canadian comedy from Eugene and Dan Levy, which sees the Rose family seeming to finally settle into the small-town life—but not for long.


Waco (Paramount) Taylor Kitsch plays cult leader David Koresh in this miniseries about the infamous standoff and siege.


David Attenborough's Great Barrier Reef (Smithsonian) The esteemed naturalist takes us on a journey of never-before-seen footage of the Great Barrier Reef.


MVP: Most Valuable Performer (CBS) This new one-hour special is a star search to find football players who have talent off the field.


RuPaul's Drag Race All Stars (VH1) A whole new group of fan favorites are ready to werk for the show’s third season.


Dirty Money (Netflix) The new documentary from Alex Gibney’s production company brings multiple directors together to tackle different concepts related to corporate greed and scandal.


One Day at a Time (Netflix) The new season of the heartwarming series will continue to follow nurse, veteran and single mom Penelope (Justina Machado) as she struggles to raise two kids with the help of her larger-than-life mother (Rita Moreno).


Kavin Jay: Everybody Calm Down! (Netflix) The comedian and The REDjam co-host gets his own Netflix special.  


Mau Nieto: Viviendo sobrio… desde el bar (Netflix) Raúl Campos and Jan Suter directed this writer and comedian’s new standup special.  


Sebastián Marcelo Wainraich (Netflix) The Argentina-born comic’s standup special is another example of Netflix’s push to include more foreign talent in its catalog.


Elton John: The Nation's Favorite Song (Reelz) The singer tells the backstories of 20 of his biggest songs.  


Faith Under Fire: The Antoinette Tuff Story (Lifetime) Toni Braxton stars as the single mom who convinced a deranged gunman who stormed a school to put down his weapon.  


The Number on Great-Grandpa's Arm (HBO) This documentary includes historical footage and animation as it follows a conversation between a young boy and his great-grandfather, an Auschwitz survivor.  


Stalker Files (Reelz) This reality series follows the infamous stalking cases involving people like Erin Andrews, David Letterman, and Jodie Foster.  


Winter’s Dream (Hallmark) Dean Cain and Kristy Swanson star in this movie about a former ski champion who re-enters the sport after a teen asks for help.


60th Annual Grammy Awards (CBS) James Corden hosts this year’s awards show with Jay-Z and Kendrick Lamar leading the nominations.


Waco: Madman or Messiah (A&amp;E) This two-night special promises to release never-before-seen audio and video of cult leader David Koresh in the years leading up to the FBI siege of his compound in 1993.


Queen: How They Broke Free (Reelz) Archival footage as well as interviews with Queen guitarist Brian May, photographer Mick Rock and the group's former publicist, Eric Hall, trace the British band’s rise through the death of frontman Freddie Mercury in 1991.  


Silicon Valley: The Untold Story (Science) This three-part documentary series looks at how this Northern California neighborhood became synonymous with all things tech.


Girlfriends (Acorn TV) Miranda Richardson stars in this drama, which centers on a trio of friends who are facing the responsibilities that come with being a modern woman of a certain age.


May It Last: A Portrait of the Avett Brothers (HBO) The documentary follows the North Carolina band as they create their album, True Sadness.


Babylon Berlin (Netflix) The period drama, which is set in 1920s Berlin, follows a detective Gereon Rath (Volker Bruch), investigating Russian mafia-run a porn ring.


Citizen Rose (E!) Actress-activist Rose McGowan gives the Keeping Up with the Kardashians producers access to her personal life as she prepares for the launch of her memoir, Brave.  


State of the Union (several outlets) The nation braces itself to live-tweet President Trump’s address.


A.P. Bio (NBC) Glenn Howerton stars as a philosophy professor who, bitter that he lost out on his dream job, takes a gig teaching AP biology and uses his students to get back at the people he feels has wronged him. The series was created by Saturday Night Live’s Seth Meyers, Mike O'Brien, and Lorne Michaels.


Talk Show the Game Show (truTV) Guy Branum’s talk show-game show hybrid is back in all its campy glory. 


2 Dope Queens (HBO) Jessica Williams and Phoebe Robinson’s podcast gets the premium cable treatment. Four episodes will air over consecutive Friday nights and cover topics like dating white baes, sex, New York living, which borough has the best pizza and (appropriately, given the network) Cocoa Khaleesis. Guest stars include Uzo Aduba, Tituss Burgess, Jon Stewart, Sarah Jessica Parker and more.


Altered Carbon (Netflix) Based on Richard K. Morgan’s cyberpunk noir novel, this series is set 300 years in the future and covers everything from murder and love to sex and betrayal. The diverse cast features Joel Kinnaman, James Purefoy, Martha Higareda, Renee Elise Goldsberry, Will Yun Lee, and Dichen Lachman.


Strike Back: Retribution (Cinemax) The latest revamp of this British-American action series includes the manhunt for a terrorist. Daniel MacPherson, Warren Brown, Roxanne McKee, and Alin Sumarwata star.


The Trade (Showtime) This five-part docuseries chronicles the opioid epidemic by focusing on the growers, addicts, cartel bosses and law enforcement who are seemingly helpless to stop it.


The Artful Detective (Ovation) The eleventh season of Canada’s top drama (and where it’s known as Murdoch Mysteries) finds Detective Murdoch (Yannick Bisson) recoiling from the events of last season’s finale while attempting to save the lives of Dr. Julia Ogden (Hélène Joy), Inspector Brackenreid (Thomas Craig) and Constables George Crabtree (Jonny Harris), Henry Higgins (Lachlan Murdoch), and Slugger Jackson (Kristian Bruun).


The Simone Biles Story (Lifetime) Newcomer Jeanté Godlock will play the Olympian in this story of her life from foster care to gold medals.


Kitten Bowl V (Hallmark) By far, one of the two most important programs of the day.


Puppy Bowl XIII (Animal Planet) This is the other one.


Super Bowl LII (NBC)  Sorry, fellas. You’re still not as interesting as the cat and dog shows.


Bethenny and Fredrik (Bravo) Can two best friends with loud personalities work together without driving each other crazy?


Big Brother (CBS) It’s a celebrity edition of the popular reality show. But the only name we know for certain that will survive is host Julie Chen.


Rolling Stone 50 (ABC) This three-hour event will celebrate the music magazine’s legacy through live performances, short films, and more.


XXIII Olympic Winter Games Opening Ceremony (NBC) All eyes head to South Korea, where the winter games will begin in Pyeongchang.


Eric Clapton: A Life in 12 Bars (Showtime) This deeply personal documentary gets intimate with the legendary (and legendarily complex) musician.


2018 Bounce Trumpet Awards (Bounce) Power’s Larenz Tate and Survivor’s Remorse Erica Ash will host this ceremony, which celebrates African-American achievements and contributions.


Here and Now (HBO) Creator Alan Ball’s new family drama stars Tim Robbins and Holly Hunter as the adoptive and biological parents in a large multi-racial family.


Homeland (Showtime) Boardwalk Empire’s Morgan Spector joins the cast of this long-running spy drama, which sees heroine Carrie Mathison (Claire Danes) working for the president who betrayed her in last season’s finale.


Our Cartoon President (Showtime) Executive produced by Stephen Colbert, this animated series about you know who promises to “follow the tru-ish misadventures of the 45th President of the United States, Donald J. Trump, and his merry band of advisors and family members.”


The Top Ten Revealed (AXS) This new music-themed series hosted by Katie Daryl will panel superstar experts for their takes on things like the best '80s power ballads or guitar intros.


Autopsy: The Last Hours of... (Reelz) This reality series gets the details of controversial (and sometimes scandalous) deaths of global icons.  


The Price of Fame (Reelz) Learn what people like Shania Twain, Johnny Depp, Carrie Fisher, Patrick Swayze, Prince, and Robin Williams went through as they became household names.


Best in Show Shelter Dog Championship (Hallmark) The new special, which features dogs at shelters across America, will highlight the benefits of adopting a pet who is mixed-breed.


This Close (Sundance Now) This new relationship dramedy, which grew out of the 2017 Sundance Film Festival’s Short Form Episodic Showcase, stars Marlee Matlin, Cheryl Hines, Zach Gilford, and Colt Prattes.


Stargate: Origins (Stargate Command) The next chapter of the Stargate franchise follows a young Catherine Langford (this time played by Ellie Gall) who must attempt to save Earth by unlocking new mysteries.


Mozart in the Jungle (Amazon) In the fourth season of this dramedy, Hailey (Lola Kirke) struggles to prove herself as a conductor while partner Rodrigo (Gael García Bernal) fights to find the melodies again.


Meet the Peetes (Hallmark) The new reality series will follow actress and activist Holly Robinson Peete and her football star husband, Rodney Peete.


When Calls the Heart (Hallmark) It’s the fifth season of this feel-good frontier drama based on the Janette Oke book.


X Company (Ovation) This Canadian drama follows World War II-era recruits who are selected to train in the art of espionage.


The Tick (Amazon) Arthur (Griffin Newman) has been kidnapped. Too bad the one determined to rescue him is The Tick (Peter Serafinowicz).


Seven Seconds (Netflix), Regina King stars in the first season of The Killing creator Veena Sud’s latest project, which follows a cover-up that ensues when a white cop accidentally kills a black teen.


Notes From the Field (HBO) This film adaptation of Anna Deavere Smith’s one-woman show looks at America’s youth incarceration problem.


Ash vs. Evil Dead (Starz) The third season of this horror-comedy from the Evil Dead crew has Ash (Bruce Campbell) finding his long-lost daughter, Brandy Barr (Arielle Carver-O’Neill).


XXIII Olympic Winter Games Closing Ceremony (NBC) After 102 events, it’s time to pass the torch.


Good Girls (NBC) Retta, Christina Hendricks, and Mae Whitman star as moms who have had enough (and who also happen to be in over their heads).


Living Biblically (CBS) Based on Esquire editor-at-large A. J. Jacobs' best-seller, The Year of Living Biblically, this new series stars Mad Men’s Jay R. Ferguson as an expectant father who decides to live his life according to the Holy Bible.


Shoot the Messenger (WGN) The new crime drama stars Orphan Black’s Elyse Levesque as a young reporter who witnesses a crime that she thinks may be gang related. Things become more complicated after that.


UnREAL (Lifetime) Caitlin Fitzgerald joins the cast for the long-awaited third season of this dramedy about life behind the scenes of a Bachelor-like TV show.


The Voice (NBC) Kelly Clarkson, Alicia Keys, Adam Levine, and Blake Shelton fill the red swivel chairs for the fourteenth season of this popular singing competition show.


The Big Interview (AXS) Dan Rather’s interview series returns for a sixth season, where his guests will include Robert Plant, Shania Twain, and Billy Ray Cyrus.


Unsolved: The Murders of Tupac and The Notorious B.I.G. (USA) The first season of what USA hopes will become a popular anthology series will focus on the feuds and deaths of two of hip-hops biggest stars. Josh Duhamel, Jimmi Simpson, and Bokeem Woodbine star.


Glam Masters (Lifetime) This new reality show, which is produced by Kim Kardashian West and hosted by Laverne Cox, has beauty influencers break out their contour kits and mascara wands in the fight to be crowned the glam master.


The Looming Tower (Hulu) Based on Lawrence Wright’s Pulitzer-winning book about Al-Qaeda’s rise to power before 9/11, this series stars Jeff Daniels as FBI counter-terrorism chief John O'Neill.


Survivor (CBS) Survivor host Jeff Probst says that the new season, which is subtitled Ghost Island, “represents all the bad decisions made by former players.”


