Sunny skies. High 96F. Winds S at 10 to 15 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:52 am

Fans check out the view from the second level of the CenturyLink Center.

Fans check out the view from the second level of the CenturyLink Center.

Four men were arrested by Omaha police Sunday on suspicion of scalping tickets to the NCAA basketball tournament game at the CenturyLink Center.

All offered to sell Elite Eight tickets to undercover officers or basketball fans at a price higher than the $125 face value. One man tried to sell a ticket for $600.

The men, ages 55, 50, 56 and 42, were booked into the Douglas County Jail before the tipoff between Duke and Kansas.

The men were on 10th Street between Cass and Dodge Streets. City ordinance states that selling a ticket for higher than face value is prohibited within a half-mile of the CenturyLink Center.

One man offered two undercover police officers two tickets for $500, but when he was in custody, he said that he was selling them for $275 — his cost for the tickets plus taxes and fees.

Another man had four tickets for sale and offered them to an undercover police officer for $300 each.

An Omaha man offered to sell a ticket to an undercover police officer for $225. That officer declined and followed the man, who entered the arena’s south doors. When he was taken into custody, the man told police that he sold his extra ticket at face value before going into the game. Officers recovered $260, and a photocopy of the ticket was booked into evidence.




The 17,579 who were at the NCAA Midwest Regional final all left saying this was the greatest game they’ve ever seen. If they didn’t, they should have.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Alia Conley covers courts and crime and spends much of her day at the courthouse. Follow her on Twitter @aliavalentine. Phone: 402-444-1068.


                                    
                                        Whenever Alia Conley posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Seriously they were selling these all over the internet for $700, $800, even thousands of dollars per seat.  Why don't we focus on the scourge of online ticket "brokers" who continue to scoop up the tickets for all live events and drive the prices to ridiculous heights.  But thank goodness we busted these four schmoes for a couple of hundies each.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


