
    
        
            By Matt Wenzel

mwenzel2@mlive.com

LANSING - A trio of former Michigan State football players facing sexual assault charges agreed to plea deals for lesser charges that will allow them to potentially avoid jail time.

Josh King, Donnie Corley and Demetric Vance, all pleaded guilty to a felony charge of seduction - a law that dates back to at least the 1930s. The law states the punishment is for "any man who shall seduce and debauch any unmarried woman."

King, Corley and Vance, who faced charges related to an incident in January 2017 at an East Lansing apartment, all agreed to plea deals in Ingham County Circuit Court on Wednesday morning in front of Judge Rosemarie Aquilina.

The three each pleaded to the seduction felony, which is punishable by up to five years in prison. King also pleaded to a felony charge of surveilling an unclothed person, which is punishable by up two years in prison. 

King previously faced up to life in prison for charges of first- and third-degree criminal sexual conduct. Corley and Vance each previously faced a charge of third-degree criminal sexual conduct - punishable by up 15 years in prison. 

King, Corley and Vance reached agreements that allow them to avoid up-front jail time and Aquilina granted them status under the Holmes Youthful Trainee Act, which will allow their records to become non-public if they fulfill the terms of the agreement. The three are scheduled to be sentenced at 8:30 a.m. on June 6 and can remove their pleas if Aquilina sentences them to up-front jail time.

"The plea agreement speaks for itself," said Mary Chartier, who is Vance's attorney.

Michigan State's Donnie Corley, Josh King, Demetric Vance charged with sexual assault

Ingham County assistant prosecuting attorney Steve Kwasnik said the victim in the case was "extensively counseled" and agreed with the plea deals.

"I think if these gentlemen continue to comport themselves as they have throughout this case, I'm optimistic that this will go down as was described today," said John Shea, who is Corley's attorney.

Shannon Smith, who is representing King, declined to comment.

King, Corley and Vance all admitted to engaging in oral sex with the victim in January 2017 and King admitted to recording video and distributing it via Snapchat.

"We're certainly glad that they stood up in open court and finally said they were guilty of something," said Karen Truszkowski, a lawyer representing the victim. "They've been saying for the last year and three months that what happened was consensual and it was not and that gives her some vindication."

Truszkowski said her client, who is still a student at Michigan State, was not in the courtroom Wednesday but plans on being involved in June's sentencing hearing. She's unsure if she will appear in person to deliver a victim impact statement at that time.

"It's been a long, difficult year, so she will definitely make that known," Truszkowski said of her client. "She's made great strides, but she does want to put this behind her."

Ingham County prosecutor Carol Siemon released a statement late Wednesday afternoon that didn't name King, Corley or Vance but went into detail about the seduction charge.

"We must have a legal framework that allows us to treat the facts of each criminal case proportionately, which the current laws sometimes make difficult," Siemon said in the statement. "For cases that are submitted for our review, we look at multiple factors to try to craft an outcome that reflects the facts of the individual event.

"The use of 'seducing and debauching an unmarried female' as a plea is one that prosecutors have used consistently, but infrequently in the State of Michigan. The law itself is archaic and while the statute itself is valid, it certainly was originally enacted in a bygone era.

"The plea to seduction is a tool that we have as prosecutors, but it is an imperfect tool. It allows the criminal justice system to acknowledge the victim, and it provides an incentive for that offender to plea, in particular because it's not an offense that requires that they register as a sex offender."

King, Corley and Vance all signed national letter of intent this winter to play at Coahoma Community College in Mississippi and Corley and King received bond stipulation modifications in January to attend the school.

Coahoma chief communications officer Marriel Hardy on March 22 said both Corley and Vance were enrolled in school and with the football team but was unsure about King. Leaving court on Wednesday morning, King declined to comment about his college status.

King, Corley and Vance - all members of Michigan State's 2016 signing class - were suspended from the team in February 2017, dismissed from the program in June after they were charged and then expelled from university after the conclusion of a Title IX investigation.

King, 20, was a four-star defensive end recruit from Hinsdale South High School in Illinois. He appeared in nine games (two starts) as a true freshman and had 10 tackles.

Corley, 20, was a four-star wide receiver from Detroit Martin Luther King High School. He played both receiver and defensive back as a true freshman and appeared in all 12 games (two starts). Corley had 33 receptions for 453 yards - then a program record for a true freshman - and three touchdowns.

Vance, 20, was a four-star defensive back from Detroit Cass Tech High School. He did not play as a true freshman.

Carol Siemon's full statement Wednesday:

When I began receiving media requests earlier today, I was at an event commemorating the life of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. on the 50th anniversary of his assassination.  This anniversary is a reminder not only of how much has changed, but also in how much of his cause remains undone. Dr. King said that the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice. But he didn't mean that it happens automatically or that it doesn't require us to work and change the system.

We must have a legal framework that allows us to treat the facts of each criminal case proportionately, which the current laws sometimes make difficult. For cases that are submitted for our review, we look at multiple factors to try to craft an outcome that reflects the facts of the individual event.

The use of "seducing and debauching an unmarried female" as a plea is one that prosecutors have used consistently, but infrequently in the State of Michigan. The law itself is archaic and while the statute itself is valid, it certainly was originally enacted in a bygone era.

The plea to seduction is a tool that we have as prosecutors, but it is an imperfect tool. It allows the criminal justice system to acknowledge the victim, and it provides an incentive for that offender to plea, in particular because it's not an offense that requires that they register as a sex offender.

The sex offender registry is a blunt instrument that I believe needs to be reformed and streamlined so that law enforcement can make better use of the information. It would be more effective as a law enforcement tool to keep the public safe if it targeted the cases that are most likely to result in recidivism - child abuse and child sexual assault, for example, or serial rapists.

The sex offender registry is just one example of the types of cases where we have laws that are well-intentioned, but go too far from their original intent - and don't allow our courts to provide a proportionate response. We have seen people sentenced to a 40 year maximum sentence over one gram of cocaine or parents who are charged with child neglect for letting their kids walk home from the park. In the recent cases of school threats and bomb threats, for example, we're working to create a proportionate response that gives us the legal tools and range of options that addresses the individual situation.

In any case of domestic or sexual violence, we believe that it's just to not only consult with the victim, but to create a real consensus with that victim, whenever possible, about the resolution of their case. I'm not able to comment about any case that's sealed under YTA, but I can confirm that we consult with the victims/survivors in all cases of this sensitive nature.

The Holmes Youthful Training Act (YTA) is another imperfect tool that is available to prosecutors, defendants, and the courts. We know that the brain is still developing until a person is in their mid-twenties, yet in all too many cases, we have seen young persons incarcerated offenses, for decades, if not life - and burdened with a felony conviction. YTA is a tool that can be used to stem the epidemic of mass incarceration and create sentencing reforms that handle each case in an appropriate manner.

Under Michigan law, prosecutors have a great deal of discretion in the sanction that each offender receives. Prosecutors decide whether to issue charges, and if so, often have multiple options. Once a case is charged, pleas can be offered at the prosecutor's discretion. It's my belief that prosecutors can work to reform the system from within.

At an early age, children are taught to recite the promise of America: "Liberty and justice for all." If they have to say it, then we have to do it - Do our best to provide justice to all, and use the law to do what we should do, not just what we can do.

Newspaper | Digital Editions | eNewsletters


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        