Please sign in with Facebook or Google below:


                            No problem! Just sign in with Facebook
                            or Google to get started.
                        


                            If you have an older Salon account, please
                            enter your username and password below:
                          

The son of far-right conservative Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore had another run-in with the law Monday, the ninth time the 27-year-old has been placed in jail, according to AL.com.

Caleb Elisha Moore was booked and subsequently released on $1,000 bond for a charge related to his 2016 arrest for hunting without permission and hunting over bait — both misdemeanors.

In 2015, More was arrested for drug possession after he was allegedly caught with Xanax pills. Officers also found him in possession of marijuana. Moore was arrested and taken to the city jail. He was released on bond totaling $8,500, AL.com reported. He then responded to the charges in a Facebook post.

"This is nothing more than a prime example of how media and crooked police officers and critics of my dad try to not only destroy his career for what he stands for but will go as far as trying to destroy his family," he wrote, according to AL.com. "I am not a drug user as the drug test taken today will show. As for the malicious possession charges, justice will be served."

The drug charges were later dropped, after Moore agreed to enter a pre-trial diversion program which subjected him to regular drug tests, AL.com reported

Back in March 2013, Moore was placed on probation after pleading guilty to a misdemeanor drug paraphernalia charge. He was told at the time of his pleading that he had to spend a year at a Christian prison-alternative program that offers a one-year rehabilitation process, according to AL.com. But a few months later, an order was filed asserting he had tested positive for marijuana, amphetamines and Benzodiazepine. Nevertheless, a judge ruled that December that Moore had complied with the conditions of his sentence, and his probation was ended.

In 2011, he was arrested and charged with drug possession and driving under the influence in Crenshaw County.

Moore frequently blamed his trouble with the law on his famous father, who made a name for himself as an Alabaman judge by defying the federal government's same-sex law and for installing huge plaques of the Ten Commandments in house courthouse.

"I've really dealt with it most of my life," Moore told AL.com in 2015. "Most people would get upset and retaliate. I guess some people take it seriously. I really don't. I know in my heart who I am. I could really care less what these critics of my dad say."

Moore's father has dominated the news again for beating Sen. Luther Strange in a primary that determined the Republican Party candidate for the election that will fill Attorney General Jeff Sessions' old seat. Moore was backed by Breitbart editor Steve Bannon because of his far-right Christian beliefs that even offend Republicans in Congress. Moore's strict adherence to Christian teachings don't seem to resonate with his son.

 


    Copyright © 2018 Salon Media Group, Inc. Reproduction of material from any Salon pages without written permission is strictly prohibited. SALON ® is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office as a trademark of Salon Media Group Inc. Associated Press articles: Copyright © 2016 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
  