By Andrew Dys



                                            adys@heraldonline.com
                                        


                        
                            March 15, 2018 12:53 PM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

 The suspect in what police said was a January “ambush” of York County law enforcement officers where one was killed, was wheeled out of a hospital Thursday morning and rolled into jail.

Christian Thomas McCall, 47, is being held without bond on a fugitive warrant at the Mecklenburg County jail, according to his defense attorney, Montrio Belton. McCall, of Farrier Lane outside York, was wounded in the Jan. 16 shootout near his home. He spent the past two months at Carolinas Medical Center in Charlotte recovering from his wounds. 

McCall has been taken to the Mecklenburg County Jail, where he will be held on a fugitive warrant. His stay there could be brief.

McCall could waive extradition from North Carolina and be brought to the York County jail to be served arrest warrants and booked as early as Friday. He is expected to be charged in the killing of Deputy Mike Doty, and wouding of  three other officers -- sheriff's deputies Sgt. Randy Clinton and Sgt. Buddy Brown, and York Police Department Sgt. Kyle Cummings.

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

McCall also could fight extradition and force York County prosecutors to get governors South Carolina and North Carolina to order McCall be extradited.

16th Circuit Solicitor Kevin Brackett has previously told The Herald McCall is expected to face a murder charge in Doty’s death and three counts of attempted murder for the wounded officers. He also could face charges for weapons crimes and charges related to shooting a State Law Enforcement Division helicopter that was part of the manhunt for him.

McCall can’t be arrested on South Carolina charges until he is in South Carolina, police and prosecutors said. 

McCall’s family issued a statement Thursday, sent by his attorney. 

The statement says: “The family is shocked, saddened and devastated by the events of Jan. 16, 2018. Our hearts have ached for officers Mike Doty, Randy Clinton, Buddy Brown, Kyle Cummings and their families. 

“The Christian McCall we know is a loving Christian, husband of over 20 years, father of two great kids, son and brother. Chris had a successful career in the banking industry, where he was well liked by his coworkers. He is also a proud veteran of the U.S. Army. So, this tragedy, as we know it, was something uncharacteristic of Chris’ past and seemingly promising future. 

“The family would like to thank the doctors and nurses at CMC and officers with the Charlottee-Mecklenburg Police Department for their high level of professionalism and compassion during this difficult situation. We continue to pray for the recovery of all those impacted.”

 

Four York County law enforcement officials were shot and injured responding to a domestic violence call late Monday. York County Sheriff's Office spokesman Trent Faris did not release the conditions and identities of the officers Tuesday morning. 






Once McCall is back in South Carolina and charged, he will have a court hearing where the charges will be explained to him by a magistrate. McCall cannot get a bond in the case because a magistrate cannot set a bond for a murder charge. 

Because the person killed in the case was a police officer, prosecutors have authority under South Carolina law to seek the death penalty in the murder case. Prosecutors have not yet said if they intend to pursue capital punishment.

McCall is also expected to face domestic violence and weapons charges. McCall’s wife alleged she was the victim of domestic violence Jan. 15 when she called 911. Officers arrived at the family home outside York and found McCall had fled, York County Sheriff Kevin Tolson said after the shootings.

McCall shot Clinton, a K-9 officer tracking McCall, late on Jan. 15, Tolson said.

The thee other officers were members of a York County SWAT team that responded after Clinton was shot. McCall then shot the three other officers in an ambush and shot at the helicopter carrying SLED agents, Tolson said.

The State Law Enforcement Division handled the investigation because York County police officers were involved.

Doty, 37, a member of the York County drug unit, died Jan. 17, a day after he was shot. His organs were donated. The procession of Doty’s body back to York County and funeral were attended by thousands of people.

Check back for updates on this developing story.

Andrew Dys: 803-329-4065, @AndrewDysHerald


                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    