By

Valerie Edwards For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  13:36 EDT, 7 December 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  15:17 EDT, 7 December 2017







           1

View  comments

A man who had just been released from jail on Tuesday was arrested again after he set off a fire extinguisher inside a Kentucky jail. 


Jose Antonio Rojas called authorities to report that he had been robbed at gunpoint while at a US Bank. But when Hopkinsville police officers reviewed surveillance footage, they determined that he was lying. 


Shortly after that incident, Rojas allegedly went to Jennie Stuart Medical Center and claimed he was robbed by people who had chased him around in the hospital.   


Jose Antonio Rojas (right) who had just been released from jail on Tuesday was arrested again after he set off a fire extinguisher inside a Kentucky jail

Rojas was allegedly involved in a series of incidents that led up to his arrest for disorderly conduct on Tuesday around 3.50pm. Rojas was released from the Christian County Jail at 10pm. He reportedly ran back in side the jail and grabbed the extinguisher (pictured) 

According to News Channel 5, police determined he was lying again and arrested him for disorderly conduct around 3.50pm. 


Rojas was released from the Christian County Jail around 10pm that night. He reportedly started running around the jail's parking lot before running back inside 10 minutes later. 


Surveillance footage at the jail showed Rojas grab a fire extinguisher and set it off under the sprinkler system.


Rojas is seen spraying the extinguisher everywhere until the cameras are covered. 


Chief Deputy Steve Howard told Channel 5 that Rojas tried breaking the door knob to the administrative office using a wet floor sign but failed.


'I absolutely don't know the reason why he would do something like that and come back to the facility. I just don't understand it,' Howard said.


Surveillance footage at the jail showed Rojas (left and right) grab a fire extinguisher and set it off under the sprinkler system

Rojas then allegedly used the fire extinguisher to break the door know to the administrative office. Police said the incident took place during off hours but jail staff managed to take him into custody before he got any further

Rojas then allegedly used the fire extinguisher to break the door know to the administrative office. 


Police said the incident took place during off hours but jail staff managed to take him into custody before he got any further.


Rojas was charged with disorderly conduct, criminal mischief and falsely reporting an incident.


Bond was set at $2000 and an arraignment hearing was scheduled for next week. 


Rojas is expected to undergo a mental evaluation. Police do not believe that he was under the influence. 


Rojas was charged with disorderly conduct, criminal mischief and falsely reporting an incident. He will undergo a mental evaluation. Police do not believe that he was under the influence. Rojas sprayed the extinguisher everywhere until the cameras were covered (above)

Authorities said the incident took place at the Christian County Jail (pictured)

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group