Dallas County Sheriff Lupe Valdez resigned Wednesday to run for Texas governor, but it will be at least two weeks before she is replaced. 

County commissioners will probably vote on an interim sheriff at their Dec. 19 meeting, said Commissioner John Wiley Price. That person will be in charge until voters elect a new sheriff in November, who will serve the rest of Valdez's term through the end of 2020. 


In the meantime, the department will run under the same command staff, spokeswoman Melinda Urbina said. Operations will be led by Valdez's second-in-command, Executive Chief Deputy Jesse Flores, and her third-in-command, Chief Deputy Marian Brown. 

Price said he trusts Valdez's judgment, so he will vote to appoint as interim sheriff anyone she recommends. During her tenure, Price said, Valdez has greatly improved the nation's seventh-largest jail and done a solid job managing its $132 million annual budget. 


"She has brought this jail into compliance, she has saved us tens of millions of dollars," Price said. "She needs to say who she would like to see be her heir apparent — she's earned that right."


Valdez hasn't commented publicly on who should replace her, but she told Commissioner Elba Garcia privately that she would recommend her chief deputy, Brown, Garcia said.


"She mentioned that, 'My staff is very qualified -- I think Marian can do it,'" Garcia said.    

Even so, Garcia said she would probably vote for Constable Roy Williams Jr. to be interim sheriff. Williams and Brown have emerged as candidates in the Democratic primary election in March, along with Dallas lawyer Pete Schulte. 


The commissioners may want to appoint someone who is not running, Garcia said, to even the election's playing field. In that case, Garcia said she would vote to appoint either Chief Deputy Jesse Herrera or Assistant Chief Deputy Debbie Foster. 


County Judge Clay Jenkins and Commissioner Theresa Daniel have declined to say whom they want to appoint as interim sheriff. Commissioner Mike Cantrell, the sole Republican, didn't return messages seeking comment. 


Republicans criticized the majority-Democratic commissioners court for waiting two weeks to appoint an interim sheriff.   


"The citizens of Dallas County deserve absolute clarity on who they have for a Sheriff, and they should have the undivided attention of the person receiving the paycheck for that job," said James Dickey, chairman of the Republican Party of Texas. 


Democrats and Republicans will hold primary elections March 6, and the general election will happen in November. 

Regardless of who wins, the jail's medical director, Dr. Esmaeil Porsa of Parkland Memorial Hospital, hopes the new leader continues what he called Valdez's commitment to humanely serving the infirm inmates. Mentally and physically ill inmates make up nearly half the jail's population of 5,100, he said.


"Sheriff Valdez runs, really, a very large hospital and everyone wears an orange jumpsuit," Porsa said. "We've had a really great working relationship, which really helps me accomplish my task. If we get someone who thinks, 'This is a jail, we're going to treat them like inmates,' that's going to make things very difficult."

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.