By

Regina F. Graham For Dailymail.com







  Published:
  10:35 EDT, 9 October 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  11:40 EDT, 9 October 2017







           9

View  comments

Two corrections officers were fired and several others disciplined after shocking surveillance camera footage showed them dragging an inmate by his heels before beating him.


Ohio corrections officers Matthew Abott and Christopher Zadroski were fired by Trumbull County Sheriff Paul Monroe on September 20 after an investigation. 


Prisoner Solomon Cindea, who was locked up at the Trumbull County jail, reported that he was assaulted August 24 while he was being transported from a booking area back to his cell, according to jail documents obtained by WKBN.


The officers who were transporting Cindea claim he was restrained after making threats to harm himself and them. 


Scroll down for video 


Corrections officers Matthew Abott (left) and Christopher Zadroski (right) were fired on September 20 after an investigation into the use-of-force was launched as a result of an incident at the Trumbull County Jail involving inmate Solomon Cindea, WKBN reported.

The surveillance video of the shocking incident shows Abbott yanking Cindea by his ankle shackles before dragging him across the floor inside the jail 

The shocking video of the shocking incident shows Abbott yanking Cindea by his ankle shackles before dragging him across the floor inside the jail. 


Another angle from a different camera in the jail shows Abbott pulling Cindea from a bench in booking before dragging him through the hallway and into an elevator. 


The inmate was then moved and placed inside of cell where Monroe said Zadroski then punched Cindea while he was still handcuffed and shackled and being held face down on the floor by four officers. 


In the notice of discipline by the sheriff, Zadroski admitted to punching Cindea, but did not come clean about it in his first interview or in the report of the incident. 


Cindea, who was locked up at the Trumbull County jail, reported that he was assaulted August 24 while he was being transported from a booking area back to his cell, according to jail documents

 Abbott claimed that he was transporting Cindea in that manner because the inmate allegedly tried to kick him. However, the sheriff wrote in his discipline report that the surveillance footage did not support Abbott's claim

Cindea, who was booked into the jail on theft, breaking and entering and receiving stolen property charges, hit his head against the elevator while being dragged out, the sheriff said. 


Abbott claimed that he was transporting Cindea in that manner because the inmate allegedly tried to kick him. However, Monroe wrote in his discipline report that the surveillance footage did not support Abbott's claim. 


The sheriff found both Zadroski and Abbott in violation of the department's use-of-force policy as well as being dishonest during the investigation.    





'We did what we feel we have to do and what the public expects us to do,' Chief Deputy Joe Dragovich told WKBN. 


The inmate was then moved and placed inside of cell where the sheriff said said Zadroski then punched Cindea while he was still handcuffed and shackled and being held face down on the floor by four officers

Corrections officer Joseph Lynn (left), Sgt.Ariana McBride (center) and Sgt. Anita Babcock (right) were all disciplined as a result of the incident with Cindea

Deputy Anthony Diehl (left), corrections officer William Dreier (center) and corrections officer Jordan Clay (right)were all disciplined as a result of the incident with Cindea

'We will not tolerate somebody dragging an inmate. We will not tolerate somebody striking an inmate that was shackled behind their back and at their ankles and being held down.'


In addition to Abbott and Zadroski being fired, six other officers were disciplined as a result of the investigation.  


Sgt. Ariana McBride, Sgt. Anita Babcock, corrections officer William Dreier, corrections officer Jordan Clay, deputy Anthony Diehl, and corrections officer Joseph Lynn were suspended for anywhere from two to 10 days.   





'We disciplined the folks in between to let them know that if you see that behavior your expectation is to intervene and stop it,' Dragovich said.  


The Trumbull County Prosecutor's office will also be looking into the incident.


Both Abbott and Zadroski are appealing their terminations. 




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group