
    
        
            By Craig Turpin

cturpin@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Four people are facing drug-related charges after two separate drug busts in Hunterdon County, the prosecutor's office has reported.

A three-month joint investigation resulted in the arrest of Michael Kolba, Jr. of Lebanon, Victor Tranquilli of Hampton and Maxwell Krizan, of Branchburg, all 19, in a raid that took place on Jan. 23 in Clinton, according to a news release.

Over $2,400 in cash was seized. Kolba was charged with distribution of Alprazolam; Tranquilli, third-degree conspiracy to distribute marijuana; and, Krizan, possession of marijuana, Hunterdon County Prosecutor Anthony P. Kearns, III said.

Kolba, who held been held in the Somerset County Jail pending a detention hearing, was also arrested on Sunday in connection with thefts that took place at two Clinton businesses in January.

Tranquilli and Krizan were released pending a court appearance, according to a news release.

Hunterdon teen arrested after theft, police say

The joint investigation and raid involved the prosecutor's office's Gangs, Guns, &amp; Narcotics Task Force, the Town of Clinton Police Department, the Hunterdon County Prosecutor's Office SWAT Team and the New Jersey State Police, the prosecutor's office said. The charges were jointly announced by Kearns, Chief of Detectives John J. Kuczynski and Town of Clinton Police Chief Brett Matheis.

A second joint investigation resulted in the arrest of Tyquan R. Jenkins, 23, of Paterson, on charges of second-degree distribution of heroin, Kearns said.

Jenkins was arrested on Monday Readington Township following an investigation by the prosecutor's office's Office Gangs, Guns, &amp; Narcotics Task Force and Readington Township Police Department, it was reported.

Jenkins was held in the Somerset County Jail pending a detention hearing.

Readington Township Police Chief Joseph Greco joined Kearns and Kuczynski in announcing Jenkins' arrest.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        