A star defense attorney has just met with alleged school shooter Nikolas Cruz and is preparing to take on his case, The Blast has reported.

According to the website, the legal eagle has worked on several nationally-covered cases, including the Whitewater scandal involving former President Bill Clinton.


Cruz, 19, could use a skilled lawyer as on February 14, he walked into Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Florida and opened fire. Seventeen were killed and over 50 were injured — and Americans have been devastated and searching for solutions to school shootings ever since.

The Blast source says that Cruz met with the attorney at Broward County Jail for several hours on Saturday, Feb. 24 amid high security.

PHOTOS: Mourning The Dead – Las Vegas Massacre Victims Identified

An armed sheriff was stationed outside of the meeting room in an odd move for an attorney-client meeting, the report noted.

The website hasn’t named the lawyer due to security issues involving the person’s staff and family.

But The Blast does know that “this person has worked on very high-profile cases with international reach and worked at the Justice Department on the Whitewater investigation,” which involved Clinton.

The report said the attorney will most likely be working pro bono, at no cost to Cruz, and a legal Dream Team could be put together with lawyers “specializing in the death penalty.”

PHOTOS: Las Vegas Shooter Girlfriend’s Family Hires Criminal Defense Attorney The top lawyer reportedly might reveal himself next week after safety arrangements are put in place.

Cruz appeared in court on Monday and a judge refused his current defense attorney’s request to seal documents in the case. The teen kept his head down during the proceedings.


We pay for juicy info! Do you have a story for RadarOnline.com? Email us at tips@radaronline.com, or call us at (866) ON-RADAR (667-2327) any time, day or night.

RadarOnline has affiliate partnerships so we may receive compensation for some links to products and services.