
    
        
            By Joe Brandt

jbrandt@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com





Three men who escaped from a state juvenile facility in Burlington County earlier this month were arrested in Newark this week.

Newark residents Lonell Carruthers, 22, Almuqtadir Padgett, 20, and Dyshawn Williams, 22, were wanted for a May 3 escape from the Albert Elias Residential Community Home in Bordentown Township.

The home is on the campus of the Juvenile Medium Security Facility, and both are run by the state's Juvenile Justice Commission (JJC). The facilities are known as the Johnstone Campus.

No public alert was made about the escape.

A spokesperson for the state Office of the Attorney General, which oversees the JJC facilities, said the escape remains under investigation and declined to comment further.

Carruthers and Williams were also wanted for a carjacking, according to a news release from Newark Public Safety Director Anthony Ambrose.

Newark's Fugitive Apprehension Team, New Jersey State Police and Juvenile Justice investigators arrested Carruthers Thursday morning on the 800 block of Clinton Avenue, in the Clinton Hill area of the city. 

That same group of law enforcement then went to the 300 block of West Runyon Street and arrested Williams and Padgett.

The fugitive busts on Thursday also snared Narik Feaster, 23, of Orange, and Newark resident Jahaan Allen. Both were wanted on federal warrants for weapons offenses unrelated to the May 3 escape.

Editor's Note: This story has been updated with information from the Juvenile Justice Commission about the facility from which the men escaped.

Joe Brandt can be reached at jbrandt@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JBrandt_NJ. Find NJ.com on Facebook. 

Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        