County Commissioner Candidates with BerniePDX In Portland, three candidates of color are vying for the Multnomah County Commissioner District 2 seat. Hear from Maria Garcia, Susheela Jayapal, and Sharon Maxwell, as well as Washington County candidate Shabba Woodley as they each expand on their platforms in hopes of securing the BerniePDX endorsement. Watershed PDX, 5040 SE Milwaukie, 6:45-9:30 pm, FREE

Benefit to Build a System of Social Change Celebrate Black History Month as it closes with Don’t Shoot PDX. While the group has operated as a grassroots org since 2014, this year marks their inaugural year as a nonprofit. Support their work directly by enjoying an evening of tasty refreshments, spoken word poets, and two speakers on gun violence and the need for change, all hosted by Teressa Raiford. Artists Repertory Theatre, 1515 SW Morrison, 7-10 pm, $20

Deconstructing Antisemitism with Treyft Podcast Have you ever considered the multiplicity of anti-Semitic frameworks? In this workshop geared towards Jewish leftists (but open to all), Sam Bick and David Zinman of the Treyft Podcast will discuss the dominant framework for understanding anti-Semitism, its faults, and how to better this understanding through an intersectional lens. First Congregational United Church of Christ, 1126 SW Park, noon-3:30 pm, FREE

Be There for the Gorge Support for the Gorge and restoration efforts in the wake of the Eagle Creek fire are an ongoing need. Luckily, giving back can be fun. Purchase raffle tickets for a chance to win a slew of amazing donated prizes from Double Mountain Brewery, pFriem Family Brewers, US Outdoor, and more. Better yet, all proceeds benefit trail restoration near Multnomah Falls. Minors okay until 8 pm. Century, 930 SE Sandy, 5-9 pm, FREE

Esto Es Para Ti: Zine Launch to Humanize DACA We the Dreamers are a diverse collective of undocumented artists, and have launched two zines to amplify the stories, art, and poems of people who are undocumented in the United States. Several incredible DJs and musicians will share their sounds as atteendees peruse zines, and enjoy Latin American food and a presentation on the zine project. Cash only. Free for Dreamers of any age and their families. Ecotrust, 721 NW 9th, 7-11 pm, $

Honoring Ursula: A Sci-Fi Event This dynamic event will feature an open mic, sci-fi book trade, and potluck from 3 to 5 pm followed by a screening of The Lathe of Heaven, all in the name of the late, great Ursula K. Le Guin! Proceeds will benefit Anarres and the Malheur Field Station—a beloved nonprofit that educates and conducts research about the birding, cultural history, writing, and more of the Great Basin region. Anarres Infoshop &amp; Community Space, 7101 N Lombard, 3-7 pm, $5 suggested donation

Scandal’s Oscars Viewing Party There’s likely no better way to enjoy a viewing of the 90th Academy Awards than at a bar with raffles, drink specials, and trivia. This event, hosted by Bruce Ross, will benefit the Cascade AIDS Project. Scandals PDX, 1125 SW Stark, 4-8 pm, FREE

Clinton St. Resistance Series presents Blade Runner: The Final Cut Although there are debates about which version of Blade Runner to watch, 2007’s final cut probably wins. Be your own judge at the latest edition of the Clinton St. Resistance series, benefitting New Avenues for Youth, a nonprofit advocating for the many needs of houseless youth. Clinton Street Theater, 2522 SE Clinton, 7-10 pm, $5

Bingo for Dykes on Bikes (DOB) When two dozen women motorcyclists gathered at San Francisco Pride in 1976, a tradition was unexpectedly born. Four decades later, Dykes on Bikes continue to tear up the roads in the name of queer visibility and LGBTQ empowerment. You can support their efforts every first Monday at Crush by trying your hand at bingo. First card is free, and additional cards are $2 or $5. A portion of all Crush sales for the evening also benefits the group. Crush Bar, 1400 SE Morrison, 6-9 pm, FREE

Discussion and Screening: Free CeCe! Free CeCe! is a documentary that explores the life of CeCe McDonald, a Black trans woman who was imprisoned in a male correctional facility after she survived a violent physical attack by fighting back. The film is narrated by McDonald and Laverne Cox, and light refreshments and discussions will follow the screening. PCC Rock Creek Campus, Building 5, Room 122, 17705 NW Springville, 5-7 pm, FREE

Interrupting Hate in Public Spaces If you’re worried you might not know how to stand up to perpetrators in the face of hate, you’re not alone. Rabbi Debra Kolodny will lead a nonviolent workshop to train folks on the best methods to be an active bystander and how to intervene in stressful situations. RSVP early online for this free, open training, as space is limited. Q Center, 4115 N Mississippi, 5:30-8:30 pm, FREE

Sign up for the latest news and to win free tickets to events

Buy tickets to events around Portland

Great deals on local businesses

Print Archives


            
              All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204
            
          


            Contact
            |
            Privacy Policy
            |
            Terms of Use
            |
            Takedown Policy
          


          
            All contents © Index Newspapers LLC
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204
          
        


          
            Contact |
            Privacy Policy |
            Terms of Use |
            Takedown Policy
          
        