
    
        
            By Ted Sherman

tsherman@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

Two more inmates at the state's troubled women's prison charge they were the victims of repeated sexual assaults or abuse by several guards, and faced retaliation when they complained.

In a lawsuit filed in state Superior Court, the inmates--both serving lengthy sentences for robbery--said they were forced into sexual acts with a number of corrections officers, including two who have already been criminally charged in cases involving other women incarcerated at the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility in Union Township.

And they claimed that administrators knew what was going on, but did nothing about it.

The complaint, filed Monday, declared that "a pattern and practice exists in the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility where sexual assault is prevalent and frequently perpetrated by corrections officers on inmates," with the knowledge and acquiescence of prison officials and administrators.

Among those named as defendants included four corrections officers, the current and former prison administrator, the state's Department of Corrections commissioner, and numerous unnamed "John and Jane Does" working at the state prison.

"We are just scratching the surface of the number of sexual assaults that have been committed by correctional officers, due to other correctional officers and administrators turning a blind eye and therefore condoning these acts," said attorney Mark Frost of Philadelphia, who represents the two women.

Matthew Schuman, a spokesman for the state Department of Corrections, declined comment.

"We do not comment on pending litigation," he said.

A spokesman for the Hunterdon County Prosecutor's office, which has an ongoing investigation at the prison, also declined comment.

A number of other female inmates at the prison have filed similar lawsuits in recent months. Over the past three years, at least five corrections officers and once civilian employee at Edna Mahon have been criminally charged with sexually abusing inmates--including Brian Y. Ambroise and Thomas Seguine, who were both named in the latest lawsuit.

An attorney for Ambroise, James Wronko of Somerville, was aware of the lawsuit.

"He denied the allegations when he was indicted. He still denies it and the case will be tried next year," he said.

Seguine pleaded guilty to official misconduct in February and has been sentenced to three years in prison. Ambroise is awaiting trial.

An NJ Advance Media special report earlier this year drew scrutiny to abuse claims at the women's prison, disclosing that officials had quietly fired three officers in 2010 after one was accused of abusing more than a dozen inmates. There are 613 women currently incarcerated at Edna Mahon, according to Schumann.

Contact between an inmate and an officer is considered sexual assault under state law, which recognizes that prisoners cannot consent to sexual relationships with those charged with overseeing them.

Aleks Kajstura, legal director of the Prison Policy Initiative, a non-profit, non-partisan Massachusetts-based group that advocates for prison reform, said that nationally, females account for 7 percent of sentenced prison inmates, but "represent 33 percent of all victims of staff-on-inmate sexual victimization in federal and state prisons." The numbers are even higher in local jails, where she said females represent only 13 percent of inmates in local jails, but account for 67 percent of all victims of staff-on inmate victimization incidents.

"It's a pervasive problem everywhere," Kajstura said of sexual assaults or abuse of women in prison. "But it's something that doesn't get reported very often because of the power dynamics at play--who is the person you're going to report it to? The person who assaulted you."

Those who do report it often end up in solitary confinement for their own protection, she added.

"If the state takes you under their jurisdiction, there should be an additional burden not to rape people," Kajstura said.

In the latest lawsuit, a 22-year-old Elizabeth woman charged that Ambroise pursued and harassed her, and performed oral sex on her several times a month. She said other guards frequently opened the curtain to the bathroom while she was showering. After she complained to investigators from the Hunterdon County Prosecutor's office, she said officers retaliated by destroying her possessions.

A second inmate, a 24-year-old Cherry Hill woman, claimed Seguine had sex with her, and that they began corresponding with each other by letter on a regular basis. She said another officer gave her a vibrator and told her he wanted to watch her use it on herself. She also alleged that other guards also pulled open the shower curtain to see her naked, and that one later touched her under her clothes on her genitals.

After Seguine was criminally charged, she was placed in protective custody against her will.

Attorneys for the two women said the actions by the corrections officers, and inaction by prison administrators, violated the inmates' constitutional right to be free of cruel and unusual punishment.

"The acts committed by the defendants shock the conscience and constitute intentional misconduct, excessive use of force, assault/battery, cruel and unusual punishment, deliberate indifference to (the plaintiffs), and an unnecessary, wanton infliction of harm for no good faith purpose," the lawsuit stated.

According to the filing, at least 16 women have been assaulted by prison officers in the past five years, while the prison for years reported no cases or under-reported cases of sexual abuse.

Ted Sherman may be reached at tsherman@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TedShermanSL. Facebook: @TedSherman.reporter. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        