
                                                            Politico

Shia Kapos' must-read rundown of political news in the Land of Lincoln

Get the Illinois Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

04/18/2018 07:30 AM EDT

By Natasha Korecki (nkorecki@politico.com ; @natashakorecki) and Kristen East (keast@politico.com ; @kristenicoleast) 

Good Wednesday morning, Illinois. 


Story Continued Below

THE BUZZ: Gov. Bruce Rauner’s campaign paid $100,000 to two companies tied to former Cambridge Analytica executive Matt Oczkowski for data-related work, campaign filings show. 

Last week, we wrote about how Rauner’s campaign used one of Oczkowski’s firms, HuMn Behavior, for data-related work, paying the firm $5,000. 

Expense filings made public Monday show Rauner’s campaign paid $95,000 to a different firm Oczkowski heads called Data Propria. The firm was just formed in February. Citizens for Rauner made the payment a month later, listing the services as “data modeling.”

While Oczkowski’s information shows him based in Chicago, the address included in state records for Data Propria links to San Antonio, Texas where CloudCommerce Inc. is located. 

Connecting the dots: CloudCommerce Inc. bought Brad Parscale’s firm. Parscale was digital media director for Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign. (The Associated Press recently wrote a revealing piece about Cloud Commerce.)

We asked the Rauner camp “what role Oczkowski and/or his firm, HuMn Behavior, is playing in the campaign?” At the time, Rauner spokesman Will Allison said only: “HuMn Behavior advised on tech infrastructure and worked to strengthen our existing operations. They performed some work for us which is now complete.” Updated records still show one expenditure for $5,000. The campaign described the work in disclosures as "Data Digital Tech Audit &amp; Consulting.”

TRUMP TIME: Donald Trump is central to two Chicago stories today, one with ties to the federal investigation of president’s personal attorney Michael Cohen, and the second linked to old-school city politics.

TRUMP ONE: First let’s look at the report by the Sun-Times’ Tim Novak, who uncovered deeper ties between Cohen and Chicago’s taxicab industry, as in, $20 million deep. “Trump lawyer’s family lent $20M to wife of Chicago cab mogul,” Over the past eight months, Cohen’s father-in-law has given at least $20 million in loans to Yasya Shtayner, records examined by the Chicago Sun-Times show. Her family owns Chicago Medallion Management Corp., which manages 368 taxicabs, including 22 owned by Cohen. Shtayner and her husband Semyon Shtayner — Chicago Medallion Management’s corporate secretary — were identified in a warrant the FBI used to raid Cohen’s law office and home, looking for documents relating to his business interests as well as his $130,000 payment to porn star Stormy Daniels to keep her from discussing her alleged dalliance with Trump, according to a CNN report.

“Shtayner has received eight loans from Cohen’s father-in-law, Fima Shusterman, according to documents filed with the Cook County recorder of deeds.” Story here

TRUMP TWO: “Chuy goes after Burke for property tax appeals work for Trump Tower,” by Sun-Times’ Fran Spielman: “Democratic Congressional nominee Jesus ‘Chuy’ Garcia on Tuesday accused Ald. Edward Burke (14th) of ‘disrespecting’ the residents of his predominantly Hispanic ward by doing property tax reduction work for the riverfront tower that bears the name of President Donald Trump. One day after Burke declared his brother’s humiliating defeat would not alter his plan to seek re-election, Garcia made the case for ending the 49-year-reign of the City Council’s most powerful and longest-serving alderman … ‘Donald Trump began his campaign for the presidency attacking the Mexican-American community. The overwhelming number of residents of the 14th Ward are of Mexican-American heritage. It is highly disrespectful to put that aside and simply respond to self interest,’ Garcia said. ‘It shows that he’s out of touch with the community and that the community’s concern was nowhere on his radar screen.’” Story here

IN MEMORIAM — “Barbara Bush, matriarch of American political dynasty, dies at 92,” The Washington Post’s Lois Romano: “Barbara Bush, who was the wife of one president and the mother of another and whose embrace of her image as America’s warm-hearted grandmother belied her influence and mettle, died April 17. She was 92. The office of her husband, former president George H.W. Bush, issued a statement Tuesday evening announcing her death but did not disclose the cause. Mrs. Bush was reportedly battling chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and congestive heart failure ... As the matriarch of one of America’s political dynasties, Mrs. Bush spent a half century in the public eye. She was portrayed as the consummate wife and homemaker as her husband rose from Texas oilman to commander in chief. They had six children, the eldest of whom, George W. Bush, became president. Their eldest daughter, Robin, died at age 3 of leukemia, a tragedy that had a profound impact on the family.” Story here

— And if you really feel like crying this morning: ‘One last time’: Barbara Bush had already faced a death more painful than her own,” by the Washington Post’s Steve Hendrix. Story here

Welcome to the POLITICO Illinois Playbook! Please send tips, events, announcements to nkorecki@politico.com or @natashakorecki SUBSCRIBE to Illinois Playbook For more Illinois news visit: http://www.politico.com/news/illinois

THE QUOTE -- “I’m like a breakup he can’t get over,” James Comey says of President Donald Trump. Comey joined Stephen Colbert on the Late Show last night. Watch

COOK COUNTY 

SHE’S THE BOSS: “Machine shifting gears? Toni Preckwinkle poised to make history,” by Sun-Times’ Alexandra Arriaga: “It’s a shell of the mighty make-or-break political organization it once was, but the Cook County Democratic Party could still be ready to make history. Chicago’s ultimate insiders club is preparing to usher in a new era on Wednesday, an era that could see the longtime bastion of white men choosing its first African-American, and first woman, chairman. Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle is expected to take over the county’s top political spot from Cook County Assessor Joe Berrios, who’s held the seat since he was unanimously elected in 2007.“ Story here

STATE— “24,000 state workers are still owed $63M. SB 2269 would finally pay them,” by State Journal-Register’s Doug Finke: “Another attempt is underway in the Illinois General Assembly to get more than $63 million in pay to state workers who have been owed it since 2011. Senate Bill 2269 was approved by a bi-partisan vote in a Senate committee last week and is now awaiting a vote by the full Senate.” Story here 

— “Warnings of $100M Overpayment Prompt Recommendation to Void Contract,” by NBC5’s Phil Rogers: “One month after NBC 5 Investigates reported allegations that the University of Illinois Hospitals had entered into a mammoth software contract which would potentially incur as much as $100 million in implementation costs, a state board declared today that there was evidence of a conflict of interest on the part of a major vendor, which would require that the contract be voided. The matter was referred to the state’s Executive Ethics Commission for further investigation. The controversy concerns U of I’s efforts to purchase sophisticated software for billing and medical records systems. After the contract was awarded to Epic Systems, losing bidder Cerner Corporation warned that the Epic decision would result in tens of millions of dollars in overpayments by Illinois taxpayers.” Story here

— “Decatur prison program aids West Frankfort student’s Harvard acceptance,” by Claire Hettinger: “Before her mother went to prison, Olivia Weeks was a competent student but not an outstanding one — certainly not one on track for an Ivy League education. Then her mother and only surviving parent, Tabitha Weeks, pleaded guilty in 2012 to aggravated DUI in the death of Craig Payne, 41, of Bonnie. She served five years at the Decatur Correctional Center and was paroled in January. When her mother left, Olivia Weeks, then 12 years old, made a choice to excel. She determined that she would not let the ‘black cloud of judgment’ following her around her hometown of West Frankfort keep her from succeeding — and she would not let her mother’s mistake wipe away all the good she had done in her life. … Soon, the senior at Frankfort Community High School will move on to a new challenge: Harvard University, where she'll begin classes with a full-ride scholarship in August.” Story here 

— “Effingham County now a ‘sanctuary’ for gun owners,” by Effingham Daily News’ Graham Milldrum: “Declaring Effingham County a sanctuary for gun owners, the county board on Monday directed its employees not to enforce any new Illinois law that would ‘unconstitutionally restrict the Second Amendment.’ The action is largely symbolic, according to Effingham County State's Attorney Bryan Kibler. He said the resolution, adopted by an 8-1 vote, will not control the decision making in the sheriff's office. Sheriff Dave Mahon agreed that it was a county board decision and would not control his office.” Story here 

— “Cupich urges lawmakers to override Rauner veto of gun dealer licensing legislation,” by CBS Chicago: “Cardinal Blase Cupich is urging Illinois lawmakers to search their conscience and override Gov. Bruce Rauner’s veto of legislation requiring gun dealers to be licensed by the state. Cupich was joined Tuesday morning by medical professionals who treat gun violence victims in the emergency room at Loyola University Medical Center.” Story here 

— “Commentary: Mock Indiana? Think again,” by Chicago Tribune’s Kristen McQueary: “You’ve probably heard the joke about why trees in Illinois lean east — because Indiana sucks. Trash-talking our neighbor, or several of them, is the standard response from defenders of Illinois’ embarrassing political status quo. Yes, Indiana has a funded, stable pension system. Yes, Indiana keeps local governments accountable with effective property tax caps. Yes, Indiana pays its bills on time. But, hey, Hoosiers are all a bunch of hicks so who cares? Instead of following Indiana’s example, Illinois taxpayers have accepted the unacceptable. We rationalize the irrational. We wear state government chicanery like a badge of honor.” Story here 

CHICAGO

— “See what Tribune Tower owners want to build next door,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Danny Ecker: “A redeveloped Tribune Tower would be dwarfed by a new skyscraper right next to it, standing as the second-tallest building in the city, if the investors behind the ambitious project get their way. In a proposal that would reshape the Chicago skyline and add more than 700 new residences and 200 hotel rooms overlooking Michigan Avenue, the development team of Chicago-based Golub and Los Angeles-based CIM Group last night laid out their $1 billion-plus vision.” Story here 

— “Metra, Amtrak tussle over Union Station,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Claire Bushey: “Metra is asking federal railroad regulators to block what it argues is overreach by Amtrak to gain leverage in upcoming negotiations at Union Station. Amtrak's absorption last year of the subsidiary that owned Union Station could cost Metra the right to appeal to the U.S. Surface Transportation Board if it objects to lease terms offered on the downtown facility.” Story here 

— “Editorial: The question now is what can Blago offer Trump?” by Chicago Sun-Times Editorial Board: “Rod Blagojevich’s only hope now is a show of mercy from a ridiculous president. Donald Trump, though, is not likely to pardon Blagojevich, or to commute the former governor’s sentence. Not unless Trump can see something in it for himself, which is his only way.” Story here 

— “Art Institute lands largest cash donation, $70 million in total,” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Steve Johnson: “The Art Institute of Chicago publicly revealed the largest announced monetary gift in its history Tuesday, an unrestricted $50 million donation from trustee Janet Duchossois and her husband, Craig Duchossois, officials said. In addition, trustees at Tuesday’s board meeting received news that board Chairman Robert Levy and his wife, Diane v.S. Levy, had ponied up another $20 million for operations and acquisitions at the not-for-profit institution.” Story here 

AROUND THE COLLARS

— “It’s in the hole! Bill Murray helps open ‘Caddyshack’ in Rosemont,” by The Daily Herald’s Christopher Placek: “In what one might call a Cinderella story, one-time North Shore golf caddie Bill Murray returned to his roots in the Chicago suburbs Tuesday morning to help open his family's new "Caddyshack"-themed sports bar. Murray Bros. Caddyshack, at 9546 Balmoral Ave. in Rosemont, is inspired by the 1980 classic comedy film about high jinks on the links, staring Murray as gopher-hunting greenskeeper Carl Spackler.” Story here 

 MEDIA

— “Deep Dish Baseball podcast: Cubs and WGN celebrate 70 years: Q&amp;A with Bob Vorwald, WGN’s director of production,” by Chicago Tribune: “Special guest Bob Vorwald, WGN's director of production, talks about the network's 70-year anniversary plans for Monday night's Cubs-Cardinals game at Wrigley Field, including flashbacks of Kerry Wood, Bill Murray, Ernie Banks, Ron Santo and many more.” Story here 

NATION

— “Starbucks to close all U.S. stores afternoon of May 29 for anti-racial bias training,” by Chicago Tribune’s Lauren Zumbach: Story here

— “IRS payment site crashes hours before Tax Day filing deadline,” by CNBC’s Darla Mercado: Story here

— Gorsuch swings against Trump in deportation case,” by POLITICO’s Josh Gerstein: Story here 

— “Sandy Hook Parents Sue Alex Jones for Defamation,” by NYT’s Matthew Haag: Story here

PODCASTS 

— Run Women Run! Three 2018 IL Primary Stories by The Broad Cast: The latest episode features three women who ran for Congress in 2018 in an attempt increase the measly percentage of women who have a seat in the US House of Reps (19%!) - Sol Flores who ran in the 4th CD to replace Rep. Luis Gutierrez; Kelly Mazeski who ran in a crowded field in the 6th CD to challenge Rep. Pete Roskam; and Marie Newman who challenged Rep. Dan Lipinski in the Dem primary in the 3rd CD. They share their experiences as women running for office for the first time and the challenges they faced campaigning on the heels of #MeToo and #TimesUp.” Listen

EVENTS courtesy of IntelligentEvent (@Chi_Intellevent)

THURSDAY - 2018 World Leaders Forum - Judson College - Former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich and former Vermont Governor Howard Dean will have a bipartisan conversation about leadership in divided times. 

- Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright - Institute of Politics - SOLD OUT — Join the IOP as we welcome Madeleine Albright, former US Secretary of State under President Clinton. Before becoming the first woman ever to hold the position, Secretary Albright served in the National Security Council and as the United States’ Permanent Representative to the United Nations. 

FRIDAY 

- James Comey: Higher Loyalty — Chicago Humanities Festival - SOLD OUT - Former FBI director James Comey has been at the center of American politics for some time now, starting with his investigation of then-presidential candidate Hillary Clinton's emails and ending with his queries into Russian ties to the Trump campaign. Join us for an evening that will provide both unprecedented entry into the corridors of power and a remarkable lesson on leadership. 

POLITICO Space is our new weekly briefing on the policies and personalities shaping the second space age. Sign-up today.

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ...New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ...Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX 

 Want to make an impact? POLITICO Illinois has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Land of Lincoln. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: [jshapiro@politico.com] jshapiro@politico.com. 



                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew


                                            By Edward-Isaac Dovere


                                            By POLITICO Magazine

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC