By WBTV


                        
                            June 12, 2018 01:49 PM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

A man who was wanted for allegedly holding his girlfriend against her will and repeatedly assaulting her inside a Catawba County home for several days has been arrested. 

According to the Catawba County Sheriff's Office, a woman ran to the Love's Travel Shop on Southfork Drive in Newton around 8 p.m. on June 5 after "escaping" from her boyfriend, 35-year-old Jason Travis Shook. 

The victim told deputies that Shook allegedly held her against her will inside a home on Viewpoint Road for three days. The woman said she was not allowed to leave and that she was physically and sexually assaulted several times, deputies said. 

According to the warrant, the victim said Shook assaulted her with a baseball bat, clothes hanger and his fists. The warrant states the victim appeared severely beaten and had numerous abrasions on her body.

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

The woman was taken to Frye Hospital following the incident, according to the sheriff's office. 

When officers went to the home, they found the victim's brother who said he was stopping by because family had not been able to contact his sister for several days. The brother said on his way there he had picked up Shook at the corner. He said Shook told him the victim had taken "a bunch of pain pills and wasn't acting right," the warrant states.

The brother said when he picked Shook up he had an aluminum bat with him. When they pulled up to the house, Shook took off running.

When deputies searched the home, they seized several items including a baseball bat, coat hangers and several pieces of furniture. 

Shook's whereabouts were unknown for nearly a week but, deputies said, he was arrested at a Circle K convenience store on Highway 70 in Newton on Monday. He was charged with larceny of a motor vehicle, fleeing to elude arrest and assault with a deadly weapon. 

He was placed in the Catawba County Jail and given a $25,000 secured bond. 

Deputies said Shook will make his first court appearance in Newton on Tuesday. 

The suspect had previously been arrested in connection for reportedly leading officers on a chase through Catawba County and into Iredell County.

The chase began in Claremont where officers spotted a green Mercedes with what appeared to be a stolen tag. The driver, identified as Shook, was stopped but then took off. He stopped again on Cobb Road and was taken into custody. 

Anyone with other information can call the sheriff's office at 828-464-3112.


                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    