Welcome! 

News Feed Item



COLUMBIA, Mo., March 6, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- The American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) has chosen OBERD to provide a patient-reported outcomes (PRO) data collection system for their members to support multi-center research studies.




OBERD, providers of the industry-leading PRO solution, will set-up and host multi-center research studies, one of the main goals reflected in the ASES strategic plan and supported by the society's leadership. The studies will help to further developments in many aspects of upper-extremity orthopaedic research.


Participating ASES members will benefit from features that are standard with OBERD's system, including:


"In choosing a vendor, we were seeking the market leader, with a robust platform, and a commitment to using data for evidence-based clinical decisions and to support research," stated John Kuhn, MD, Chair of the ASES Multi-center Study Taskforce. "OBERD's experience and reputation in supporting research, and their position as an industry-independent vendor, made them the ideal choice to host many of our studies."


As well as PRO data collection, ASES members will be able to take advantage of OBERD's Clinical Intakes and Operative Notes, Patient Satisfaction, Patient Education, and care management system, CareGuide™, collecting data from multiple sources on a single platform. ASES members will also be able to benchmark against de-identified data in OBERD's vast orthopaedic outcomes database.


"We are thrilled and honored to have been chosen by ASES, a revered and prestigious organization", said Ali Hussam, PhD., CEO and co-Founder of OBERD. "We continually aspire to improve the quality and efficacy of care, through the collection and presentation of data that improves clinical decision-making and patient understanding."


The collaboration with ASES will be featured at OBERD's booth (#4171) at the American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons' (AAOS) Annual Meeting in New Orleans, LA, March 6 – 10, 2018.

About ASES


The Mission of the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons is to support quality shoulder and elbow care through the ethical practice of leadership, medical education, research and quality, and patient advocacy.﻿


The American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) is a society made up of leading national and international Orthopaedic surgeons who specialize in surgery of the shoulder and elbow. Through continuing medical education, the ASES Annual Meetings serve as a forum where persons involved in this field of medicine can meet, discuss new ideas and present scientific material. The membership, which is by invitation only, currently consists of 733 members.


For more information visit http://www.ases-assn.org/ 


About OBERD (Universal Research Solutions, LLC)


OBERD (a.k.a. Universal Research Solutions, LLC) owns, develops, implements and supports outcomes and clinical data collection software systems. OBERD optimizes the data collection necessary to empower evidence-based medical practice, improve the quality and efficacy of care and advance clinical decision-making and patient understanding. OBERD has been collecting patient outcomes data in orthopaedics for over 7 years, with over 10 million scored forms from over 4 million patients in its database. It includes a QCDR, with CMS-approved measures specific to orthopaedics. For more information, visit www.oberd.com or follow the company on Twitter @oberdnews.


 


 View original content with multimedia:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/ases-chooses-oberd-for-patient-reported-outcomes-data-collection-300609112.html


SOURCE OBERD


Published March 6, 2018 
Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2007 PR Newswire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of PRNewswire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of PRNewswire. PRNewswire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





