
                        
*                        

                        
                            Corresponding authors

                                                                                                            
                    


                        
                                a
                        

                        
                            Center for Agroforestry, School of Natural Resources, University of Missouri, Columbia, USA

                                
                                E-mail:
                                    linchu@missouri.edu                                                                                                            
                    


                        
                                b
                        

                        
                            Department of Forestry, School of Natural Resources, University of Missouri, Columbia, USA

                                                                                                            
                    


                        
                                c
                        

                        
                            Center of Core Facilities, Cuu Long Delta Rice Research Institute, Vietnam

                                                                                                            
                    


                        
                                d
                        

                        
                            Center for Children and Families Across Cultures, Department of Human Development and Family Science, University of Missouri, Columbia, USA

                                                                                                            
                    


                        
                                e
                        

                        
                            Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, USA

                                                                                                            
                    


                        
                                f
                        

                        
                            Department of Individual, Family, and Community Education, University of New Mexico, USA

                                                                                                            
                    


                        
                                g
                        

                        
                            Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, School of Medicine, University of Missouri, USA

                                                                                                            
                    

Children are among the most vulnerable to certain air pollutants, such as volatile organic compounds. Analysis of indoor air has been analytically challenging and costly. The objectives of this study were to (1) develop and validate a sensitive analytical method for assessing the exposure of children to volatile organic compounds at child care centers and (2) characterize the indoor concentrations of target volatile organic compounds in classrooms at child care centers. The volatile organic compounds were sampled by using thermal desorption samplers and the concentrations of the volatile organic compounds were determined by a thermal desorption gas chromatography-mass spectrometry method. Among the 73 target indoor volatile organic compounds, 47 were identified and quantified in the air samples collected from the selected child care center. The limits of detection and limits of quantitation ranged from 0.001 to 0.123 μg m−3, and 0.002 to 0.406 μg m−3, respectively. The correlation coefficients (R2) of the calibration were between 0.982 and 0.999. The mean recoveries of the analytes ranged from 87% to 112%. The precision expressed as the coefficient of variation was between 0.6% and 16.2%. The volatile organic compounds identified in our pilot study include a wide range of potential toxic chemicals and endocrine disruptors, such as the ingredients in dry cleaning agents (e.g., tetrachloroethylene), surfactants (e.g., butoxyethanol), and personal care products (e.g., homosalate). Due to the portability, affordability, and flexibility, the developed sampling and analytical method has several advantages over conventional techniques for large-scale multi-position air quality monitoring studies at child care centers.




        The article was

            received on 02 Nov 2017,

            accepted on 09 Jan 2018

and            first published on 30 Jan 2018
    


        If you are not the author of this article and you wish to reproduce material from
        it in a third party non-RSC publication you must 
            formally request permission using RightsLink.
        Go to our 
            Instructions for using RightsLink page for details.
    


        Authors contributing to RSC publications (journal articles, books or book chapters)
        do not need to formally request permission to reproduce material contained in this
        article provided that the correct acknowledgement is given with the reproduced material.
    


        Reproduced material should be attributed as follows:
    


        If the material has been adapted instead of reproduced from the original RSC publication
        "Reproduced from" can be substituted with "Adapted from".
    


        In all cases the Ref. XX is the XXth reference in the list of references.
    


        If you are the author of this article you do not need to formally request permission
        to reproduce figures, diagrams etc. contained in this article in third party publications
        or in a thesis or dissertation provided that the correct acknowledgement is given
        with the reproduced material.
    


        Reproduced material should be attributed as follows:
    


        If you are the author of this article you still need to obtain permission to reproduce
        the whole article in a third party publication with the exception of reproduction
        of the whole article in a thesis or dissertation.
    


        Information about reproducing material from RSC articles with different licences
        is available on our Permission Requests page.
    


                                            
                                            Fetching data from CrossRef.
                                            This may take some time to load.
                                        


                                        
                                    