Subscribe

 

        

* Required fields

Thank you for your subscription.

IRI and Columbia University’s Center for Pricing and Revenue Management Announce 2018 Pricing Analytics Program Two-day program will teach executives how to leverage pricing analytics to better understand consumers and drive profitable growth

CHICAGO and NEW YORK CITY — IRI®, the global leader in innovative solutions and services for consumer, retail and media companies, today announced a two-day program with Columbia University’s Center for Pricing and Revenue Management focused on teaching executives how to use analytics to better understand their customers and design more targeted and profitable pricing and promotional programs.

The program, titled “Pricing Analytics: The Science of Profitable Growth,” will be held June 5-6, 2018, at Columbia University’s New York City campus.

“It’s more important than ever that companies think about pricing and promotion in a strategic manner and make pricing decisions that will drive growth,” said Dr. Sharat Mathur, executive and practice leader, IRI Strategic Analytics. “Companies that want to win will need to leverage advanced analytics to inform their pricing and promotion plans.

Research has consistently shown that companies using an analytics-driven approach to pricing significantly outperform their competitors. By learning how to leverage data, executives can improve pricing and marketing decisions, revenue growth and profitability.

“Modeling consumer choice, estimating consumer demand and using a disciplined approach to pricing is an essential strategy for business leaders in their go-to-market strategy and execution,” said Dr. Costis Maglaras, faculty co-director and the David and Lyn Silfen Professor of Business, Columbia Business School.

During the Pricing Analytics program, executives will learn how to:

• Build analytics capabilities within their organizations

• Translate analytic insights into action

• Integrate analytics into core business processes

• Link analytics to corporate strategy

Dr. Oded Netzer, professor of business in the Marketing Division of Columbia Business School, will join Dr. Maglaras. Dr. Mathur will lead the program for IRI.

Click here to learn more about the course and to register online.

Those interested in registering may contact Columbia Business School’s Alberto Cruz at alberto.cruz@gsb.columbia.edu or 212.854.6037.

About IRI 

IRI is a leading provider of big data, predictive analytics and forward-looking insights that help CPG, OTC health care organizations, retailers and media companies to grow their businesses. With the largest repository of purchase, media, social, causal and loyalty data, all integrated on an on-demand, cloud-based technology platform, IRI helps to guide its more than 5,000 clients around the world in their quests to remain relentlessly relevant, capture market share, connect with consumers and deliver market-leading growth. A confluence of major external events — a revolution in consumer buying, big data coming into its own, advanced analytics and automated consumer activation — is leading to a seismic shift in drivers of success in all industries. Ensure your business can leverage data at www.iriworldwide.com.

About the Center for Pricing and Revenue Management 

The Center for Pricing and Revenue Management is a joint initiative of Columbia Business School and the Industrial Engineering and Operations Research department of the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science at Columbia University. The Center’s activities focus on research, education, and industry practice in pricing, customer, and business analytics. To learn more about the Center for Pricing and Revenue Management, visit www.gsb.columbia.edu/cprm.

# # #

Costis Maglaras is a Professor at the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University in the division of Decision, Risk &amp; Operations. His research...

Professor Netzer's research centers on one of the major business challenges of the data-rich environment of the 21st century: developing quantitative methods that...

        Ideas at Work e-newsletterChazen Global Insights e-newsletterNews on Executive EducationNews on MBA Programs

* Required fields

Thank you for your subscription.

press@gsb.columbia.edu212-854-2747



© document.write(new Date().getFullYear()) Columbia University
            Columbia University in the City of New York
            3022 Broadway, New York, NY 10027 212-854-1100
            Privacy and Policy Statements
          