
    
        
            By Bill Gallo Jr.

bgallo@njadvancemedia.com

 For NJ.com

A Monmouth County man was stabbed to death Friday after an apparent confrontation between him and another person in Columbia, South Carolina, authorities say.

Abdias O. Pacius, 28, of Neptune died from a single stab wound to his upper body, Richland County Coroner Gary Watts said Saturday.

Columbia police say they arrested Matthew Scott Young, 43, of Columbia shortly after the incident and charged him murder and possession of a weapon during the commission of a violent crime.

Authorities said the motive for the killing was "a conflict between the suspect and the victim." Police did not say what sparked the argument, only that Young "became angry with (Pacius), then stabbed him."

#CPDInvestigates | Deadly stabbing at Heritage Village Walk near the Harbison area. Male victim was injured the upper body. He was pronounced deceased at a local hospital. pic.twitter.com/kZy21np5Tn

Pacius and Young did not know each other, police said.

The stabbing occurred on Heritage Village Lane in the Harbison area of Columbia Friday shortly before 11 a.m.

When police arrived at the scene, they say that Pacius was found outside. He was taken to an area hospital where he was pronounced dead, according to authorities.

Pacius attended Neptune High School and played football in the position of linebacker for the Scarlet Flyers, records show.

After graduation from Neptune in 2008, he went on to play football at Benedict College in Columbia.

Young was being held at a Columbia area jail, authorities said.

Bill Gallo Jr. may be reached at bgallo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow Bill Gallo Jr. on Twitter @bgallojr. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        