 by Dan Miller | May 12, 2018 | all, choice, hotel, hotel reviews | 2 comments

Don't miss out! Join the thousands of people who subscribe to our once-daily email or our free miles and points Facebook group with all the best travel news.  Some links on this page may pay me a commission - as always, thanks for your support if you use them

DISCLOSURE: My family and I received two rooms complimentary as part of our visit to the nearby Pro Football Hall of Fame.  It was not clear to me whether these rooms were paid for by the HOF or comped by the hotel itself but I do feel it’s important to disclose this information. As you’ll see in the review, we did not really have any interaction with hotel staff and I feel that our stay was pretty representative of what any traveler would expect with a stay at the Comfort Suites Hartville.

The Comfort Suites Hartville Ohio hotel is located at 953 Edison Street, NW, Hartville, OH, 44632.  Hartville is a small town located between Akron and Canton in Northeastern Ohio.  Edison Street is also Ohio State Route 619, which runs east-west a bit south of Akron.  The Comfort Suites Hartville is located about 10 miles east of I-77 and about 25 minutes north of the Pro Football Hall of Fame (which was our destination the next morning after our stay).  It took us about an hour to drive to the Hartville Comfort Suites from the western suburbs of Cleveland.

I didn’t get my own picture of the exterior of the building but here is one from the hotel website itself



As you can see, the hotel itself is quite new – it was built in 2015.  Walking into the building, the lobby is spacious



The breakfast area is to the rear (more detailed picture below)

Since our family of 8 generally doesn’t fit into one hotel room at most hotels, we had 2 adjoining rooms.  While I know many people do not care for rooms that have connecting doors, these are a great fit for our family as it means the difference between me sharing a bed with my wife or sharing one with a wiggly 7 year old…

One of our rooms was a 1 King room (pictured below)



As you can see it had a decent sized table which was more than enough for what we needed it for – here’s a more detailed look



The 1BR room that we had had a bathroom that was different than others I’ve seen with a shower that was strange.  At first I thought it might be an Accessible room (I know oftentimes especially in newer hotels that rooms with connecting doors often have one of them be an accessible room.  But the lip on the floor into the shower doesn’t seem like it would work for a wheelchair, though I admit I’m fairly ignorant in this area.





The 2BR room that we were in had a standard tub and was laid out as shown.  Both rooms had sleeper sofas.  We configured our family as follows – 2 boys in 1 bed, 2 girls in the other, oldest boy on the sleeper sofa, youngest kid on the floor on the cushions from the sofa bed.  Mom and Dad got their own room / bed :-).  The 2 rooms we got at the Comfort Suites Hartville is actually a perfect configuration for our family.



Each room had a small closet where the extra linens for the sleeper sofa were stored



Each of our rooms at the Comfort Suites Hartville Ohio also had a microwave and small minifridge.



The Comfort Suites Hartville Ohio did have an indoor swimming pool and hot tub



Right next to the indoor pool on the first floor was a fitness center with a variety of machines



There is a business center on the first floor near the breakfast area



Coin operated laundry was located on the 2nd floor



I took a picture of this sign that was in the elevator which I appreciated.  Fits right in with my 4 hotel etiquette tips for children!



The Hartville Comfort Suites does come with complimentary hot breakfast.  The breakfast area is fairly large and is located right to the rear of the main lobby. This picture is from the night before – the breakfast items are located behind those wooden doors, which are of course opened in the mornings.



The business center mentioned earlier is located around the corner to the rear of this photo and there was a conference room located out of the picture to the right.  It had a fairly wide selection of the typical cold breakfast foods



One interesting thing that I saw at the Comfort Suites Hartville that I had not seen before anywhere else was that in addition to the standard waffles, they also had pumpkin spice waffles! (And it was only May!).  I had a bit of my kids’ waffles and they tasted pumpkin-y



There were 2 hot items – on the day I was there it was typical scrambled eggs and link sausage.



They also have one of those grab and go sections off of the lobby with food that is somehow more overpriced than even gas station food :-).  I get the reason for having these items but if you can avoid it, I recommend planning ahead and getting your own supplies



The Comfort Suites Hartville Ohio is a Category 3 in the Choice Privileges loyalty program, and costs 12,000 points / night



As you can also see from that picture, it is very highly reviewed with 4.9/5 stars and 99% of guests recommending the hotel.  You can also read other reviews at TripAdvisor.

If you’re paying cash instead of points, room rates depend but ranged from $90-$120 on the dates which I saw.  You can check prices for your dates at hotels.com (direct link)

My Comfort Suites Hartville hotel review definitely recommends staying here and I would stay here again if I was in the area

Have you stayed at the Comfort Suites Hartville?  Leave your experience in the comments

When people complain about too many Park Hyatt Vendadome reviews this is what we get I guess

Thanks for clicking through and taking your time to tell us that!!! 😛  As I mentioned in the post (which it seems unlikely you read), I get that most people are not going to care about reviews of random hotels in random areas.  But for someone that’s looking for a hotel in this area, having a review from someone who’s been there

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *


Comment 


Name * 

Email * 

Website 

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

I don't want to miss another post - sign me up for the PWaC newsletter (never more than 1 email per day, and no spam)


 







 Notify me of follow-up comments by email.




Designed by Elegant Themes | Powered by WordPress



Sign up for our once-daily email with the latest tips and tricks on how to travel for free / cheap. 


								
							