


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police say Gary Laverne Minor, 45, had been driving a stolen truck and ran to the hotel after an officer tried to pull him over early Tuesday.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Gary Minor
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The suspect in a nearly 15-hour standoff with police at a Comfort Suites hotel in Phoenix has been identified as Gary Laverne Minor, authorities said Wednesday.


The 45-year-old Surprise resident was booked into jail Tuesday evening on suspicion of crimes that include aggravated assault, endangerment, unlawful imprisonment, kidnapping, discharging a firearm at a residence and unlawful flight from law enforcement.


The standoff was preceded by an officer attempting to stop a truck for a stolen license plate near the intersection of 27th and Dunlap avenues at about 2:30 a.m. Tuesday. The driver fled from the vehicle and rushed into the Comfort Suites near Interstate 17 and Peoria Avenue.


Police say Minor was armed with a gun and had barricaded himself in the hotel room with his wife. 


Inside the room, the pair heard police voices outside, causing Minor's wife to want to open the door for the police, according to court documents.


Minor was holding a gun and told her not to leave, but did not point the gun at her, documents say. However, Minor's wife told police she felt that he would hurt her if she tried to leave.


Court documents also say Minor was standing behind his wife for most of the incident to use her as a human shield.  


Police eventually deployed a camera into the room, court documents say. Minor grabbed his wife with one hand while holding his gun in the other and forced her to lead him to the camera. He then asked her to throw a pillow over the camera to block it, according to the court documents. 


The wife believes Minor may have pointed the gun at her back, but he never directly threatened her, according to court documents.


During the standoff, police say Minor threatened to shoot police officers. Later during negotiations, officers heard a gunshot, prompting police to force entry and detain Minor and his wife at about 5 p.m.


Minor told police that he heard a loud noise, causing him to accidentally fire the gun, records say.


However, records say, his wife told police she believes he fired the gun to try to get the police officers to leave. Court documents say the gunshot endangered officers who were standing on the other side of the door; no officers were harmed. 


Minor had slight injuries and his wife was unharmed.


Court records indicate Minor has no criminal history in Arizona.


READ MORE:


Car struck by train at Phoenix crossing; driver injured


Mother urges public to help solve daughter's 2016 murder in Phoenix


Surprise driver arrested in June death of passenger after testing positive for pot
