This copy is for your personal non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies of Toronto Star content for distribution to colleagues, clients or customers, or inquire about permissions/licensing, please go to: www.TorontoStarReprints.com


INDIA—Maybe it was the rose petals showered from above as we arrived, or the sachets discovered tucked into luggage, the cleaning kit left beside an iPad or the welcoming ceremony at each hotel. No, it was definitely the pony.


I’d joked with the manager at The Oberoi, Mumbai that the service from staff at the Marine Dr. waterfront hotel made me wonder if I’d return to find a pony in my room. The general manager at the Oberoi Udaivilas in Udaipur took that idea and galloped with it.

“Your horse is here,” a smiling staff member said the following morning. There, in the front courtyard, was a white steed in ornamental saddle and red-tassel bridle. I was simply gobsmacked, too shocked to ride the patient dobbin, which was led away after a few pats.


Oberoi Hotels &amp; Resorts began in 1934 and operates more than 30 hotels, including 12 in India. Properties have been awarded numerous world’s-best and luxury-brand awards as the hotel hones in on seamless service from staff trained at its Delhi-based Centre for Learning and Development, including butlers that are summoned by an in-room call button. Spas are open 24 hours and many have Ayurvedic treatments. We ate everything from classic northern Italian food to traditional regional dishes and wonderfully creative new Indian cuisine in the hotels.

Each property offers a range of add-on-for-fee “experiences,” including tours, art and cooking classes, and romantic dinners in special locations around the hotel grounds.


And if the dripping bathing suit you hung in the shower has gone AWOL, you’ll find it dried and nestled in tissue in a wicker basket at the foot of the bed with a note on top explaining where your missing swimwear went.


Lavish Kohinoor Suites, named for the legendary diamond, are the ultimate stay in each hotel, with more than 2,300-sq.-ft.of space in regional design. Each is different, but all have a butler’s pantry, bedrooms with ensuite showplace bathrooms, a dining room and a massive living room with artworks. There’s often a grand piano. Michael Jackson played the one in the Kohinoor at The Oberoi, Mumbai. Prices start at around $13,500 per night.


Here are five others that I stayed at:


The Oberoi Udaivilas, Udaipur: On Lake Pichola across from the City Palace on the 200-year-old hunting grounds of the Maharana of Mewar, the stunning palace-inspired hotel takes its romantic design from classic Mughal architecture. Interconnecting domes, walkways and courtyards lead to terraces and swimming pools, some for private or semi-private use. Hallways are painted with colourful Mewar miniature art. See excellent examples at the 150-year-old hunting lodge, where spotted deer and wild boar are on view and it’s not unusual to see wild peacocks.

The Oberoi, Mumbai: Primarily a business hotel, with a soaring 14-storey atrium and Marine Dr. waterfront views from 287 rooms. It offers packages starting at about $317 that include breakfast and a free airport transfer. It’s close to historic Gateway of India and Mani Bhavan Gandhi Museum situated in a leafy residential area, where spinning wheels and a bed used by the leader of India’s independence movement are on display. Be sure to see the massive Dhobi Ghat, the world’s largest outdoor laundry.


The Oberoi Amarvilas, Agra: The 102-room hotel boasts a Taj Mahal view from every window — including some bathrooms. With the Taj just 600 metres away, guests get to the gate in minutes, shuttled by electric golf cart. The cobalt-blue tiled swimming pool, bracketed by tiered waterfalls and terraced green lawns, is jaw dropping. Among the hotel’s signature dishes is saffron-scented chicken curry topped with 24-carat gold leaf. And our early morning yoga session that guests can book as an add-on “experience” had a wonderful conclusion: a round of laughter yoga. 

The Oberoi Sukhvilas Resort &amp; Spa, New Changigarh: Go for a hike or mountain bike tour with activities manager Jacob Kamei at this new hotel near the Himalayan foothills in the protected Siswan Forest Range. We also cycled with Kamei to a nearby village, where the head man introduced us to the sacred cow, capping our day on a forest-viewing platform for a sunset champagne toast while searching for deer. There’s a 12,000-sq.-ft. spa building and glamping gets an upgrade with Deluxe Royal Forest Tent suites, each with private pool.

The Oberoi, Gurgaon: One of two Oberoi hotels in Delhi, the 202-room modernist Gurgaon resembles a glass jewel box, dramatically bracketed by pools and greenery walls. Close to the airport, in the business and commercial centre of Delhi’s National Capital Region. If you want to visit the markets of Old Delhi, expect a 35-minute drive, depending on traffic. We rode in bicycle rickshaws through the legendarily chaotic Chandni Chowk market to buy spices at Mehar Chand and Sons from master blender Anshu Kumar, whose clients include Loblaws’ President’s Choice products in Canada.

Linda Barnard was hosted by Abercrombie &amp; Kent Luxury Tailor Made Travel and Oberoi Hotels &amp; Resorts, which did not review or approve this story.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copyright owned or licensed by Toronto Star Newspapers Limited. All rights reserved. Republication or distribution of this content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Toronto Star Newspapers Limited and/or its licensors. To order copies of Toronto Star articles, please go to: www.TorontoStarReprints.com
