


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

These hotels deliver an authentic island vibe without sacrificing comfort.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Tensing Pen Resort has a dramatic setting perched on limestone cliffs overlooking the ocean.
(Photo: Tensing Pen Resort)

The majority of vacationers flying into Jamaica flock to the island’s all-inclusive resorts along the northern coast. These are famous for supplying all the bells and whistles of a beach holiday. But not all travelers are looking for the full-tilt resort experience and instead desire accommodations at boutique and chic properties that provide a more authentic experience. Here are a few appealing options throughout Jamaica.


Hotel Mockingbird Hill


One of my favorite destinations in Jamaica is Port Antonio, on the northeastern coast of the island. Since getting there takes a little more effort, the region sees fewer visitors. This gives Port Antonio a caught-in-time aspect. One of the best hotels — especially for eco-conscious travelers — is Hotel Mockingbird Hill. The 10-room sustainable property sits atop a hill surrounded by a lush green landscape. Hotel Mockingbird Hill is managed by two women — Shireen Aga and Barbara Walker — which in itself is a real feat in the male-dominated culture of Jamaica. While not on the beach, swimming at Frenchman’s Cove is only minutes away, and the hotel has its own pool. The property’s restaurant, Mille Fleurs, offers fusion Caribbean-European cuisine in an al fresco setting with sea views. The hotel has Wi-Fi but lacks TVs and telephones. Hotel Mockingbird Hill would be a great choice for birdwatchers and travelers who want to connect with Jamaica’s local culture. Rates per room, single or double occupancy, begin at $245 during the low season, May through Dec. 15, 2018


Tensing Pen Resort


Negril, located on the western tip of Jamaica, is often referred to as the “Capital of Casual.” There are several standout resorts in Negril providing a sophisticated take on Jamaica’s laidback style. One of these is Tensing Pen Resort, which is perched on limestone cliffs overlooking the ocean. The boutique property has Caribbean-rustic thatch-roofed rooms and cottages that deliver an authentic island vibe without sacrificing comfort. Amenities include a restaurant, spa and pool. There are no TVs or phones in the rooms, although Wi-Fi is available in the lobby and restaurant. This makes Tensing Pen an ideal place for a digital detox. Advertised rates online are as low as $212 a night.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Jakes Hotel, Villas &amp; Spa


Jakes Hotel, Villas &amp; Spa has a hipper-than-hip pedigree, being carefully crafted by designer Sally Henzell in a style that could be called Caribbean funky but chic. Her husband Perry Henzell was the director and writer of The Harder They Come, starring Jimmy Cliff, arguably the most famous Jamaican film. Jakes is on the southern coast of the island so no matter if you fly into Montego Bay or Kingston, you’re facing a two- or three-hour drive. The rooms, villas and cottages at the seaside property have a true island feel with none of the gated atmosphere you’ll find at larger resorts. There’s an onsite restaurant and bar which is especially lively when local musicians play. There are nearby attractions to explore, such as YS Falls, and excursions on the Black River, but most guests will be content to kick back and soak up the irie atmosphere at Jakes. Rates on the Internet are as low as $87 per night.


Strawberry Hill Jamaica Luxury Resort


A unique Caribbean holiday would be to vacation far from the beach, in Jamaica’s Blue Mountains, famous as the island’s main coffee-growing region. Strawberry Hill, a property with roots going back to the 18th century, was bought in 1974 by Chris Blackwell of Island Records fame. Bob Marley was a frequent guest at Strawberry Hill during the 1970s. Strawberry Hill Jamaica Luxury Resort was founded as an Island Outpost property in 1994 and quickly garnered design and architecture awards. Strawberry Hill Restaurant serves New Jamaican cuisine, in which traditional dishes get a fresh spin. One of my favorite Caribbean memories is having tea in the afternoon at Strawberry Hill, while a wood fire burned in the fireplace, and the sun cut through the mist of the surrounding hills. Rates at Strawberry Hill’s cottages start at $310 per night.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Courtleigh Hotel &amp; Suites


Not many vacationers find their way to Jamaica’s capital city of Kingston, which is a shame since there’s much to discover about the island’s culture and heritage during a city stay. Museums, markets and sites such as the Bob Marley Museum (Marley’s former home) ratchet up the island experience. If you do plan to overnight in Kingston, a good choice is the Courtleigh Hotel &amp; Suites. The hotel has 128 rooms and suites and is located in the heart of the capital, making it convenient to visit city sights. If you’re lucky enough to be there on a Wednesday, the Courtleigh throws its weekly “Jerk, BBQ, and Jive” event which includes live music. Advertised nightly rates on the internet are as low as $191.


GoldenEye’s Ian Fleming Villa


GoldenEye is a collection of Lagoon Cottages, Beach Huts and Villas, located on the north coast of Jamaica on Oracabessa Bay. This is also a Chris Blackwell Island Outpost property. Heavy-hitters in the pop music world have been guests, including Sting, who wrote Every Breath You Take while staying at the property. While there’s an eclectic selection of accommodation, the piece de resistance is the Ian Fleming Villa. This is the actual villa where Ian Fleming, the creator of James Bond, penned his 14 books featuring 007. The pricey three-bedroom villa sleeps up to 10 adults and has its own dedicated staff. The villa also has two one-bedroom cottages, Sweet Spot and Pool House, adding another level of privacy and intimacy. There’s also a private pool and private beach. Bono was a guest at the Ian Fleming Villa and made the most of the occasion by writing the theme song to the film GoldenEye during his stay. Rates start at $6,000 per night.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
