

ROCKVILLE, Md. – Choice Privileges, the award-winning loyalty program from Choice Hotels, is celebrating the holidays by giving its loyal members chances to win prizes totaling more than 10 million Choice Privileges points. The popular loyalty program has debuted the Choice Privileges Tap the App sweepstakes, offering members who use the new Choice Hotels mobile app weekly chances to win more than 10 million points in prizes.

The Choice Privileges Tap the App Sweepstakes runs from December 11, 2017, through February 9, 2018, and showcases the simplicity of the mobile app's new features, including booking a stay or redeeming points for free nights, gift cards and other rewards.

"Choice Privileges members make up the majority of Choice Hotels mobile app users, so we took direction on how to make it better based on their needs and preferences," said Sarah Searls, vice president of Digital Commerce for Choice Hotels. "Since launching the new mobile app, Choice Hotels has seen downloads increase by 40 percent and reservations on the app more than double. The Tap the App sweepstakes is a great way to highlight all the new features as well as thank members by offering them chances to receive generous prizes."

Choice Hotels will award 100,000 Choice Privileges points to 10 winners weekly, along with 400,000 points to three grand-prize winners. Members can enter the Tap the App sweepstakes once every 24 hours through the Choice Hotels mobile app.

The Choice Hotels mobile app is available on iOS and Android. Signing up for the Choice Privileges program is free, and can be done on the Choice Hotels mobile app, online by going to https://www.choicehotels.com/about/mobile, or in person at any Choice Hotels property.

For Official Rules, entry details, prize descriptions and odds disclosure, visit: https://choicehotels.promo.eprize.com/sweeps/public/fulfillment/rules.pdf.

The Choice Hotels loyalty rewards program, Choice Privileges, was rated no.1 in the USA Today 10Best Readers' Choice Awards for two consecutive years. In addition to fast rewards, instant perks, and exclusive member rates when booking direct at https://www.choicehotels.com/about/mobile, members can redeem points towards free stays at any of Choice's 11 hotel brands worldwide, including the Ascend Hotel Collection, Cambria Hotels, Comfort Inn, Comfort Suites, Sleep Inn, Quality, Clarion, MainStay Suites, Suburban Extended Stay Hotel, Econo Lodge, and Rodeway Inn.

For full information about the Choice Privileges rewards program, visit www.choicehotels.com/choice-privileges.

Choice Hotels International, Inc. (NYSE: CHH) is one of the world's largest hotel companies. With over 6,500 hotels franchised in more than 40 countries and territories, Choice Hotels International represents more than 500,000 rooms around the globe. As of September 30, 2017, over 800 hotels were in our development pipeline. Our company's Ascend Hotel Collection®, Cambria® Hotels, Comfort Inn®, Comfort Suites®, Sleep Inn®, Quality®, Clarion®, MainStay Suites®, WoodSpring Suites®, Suburban Extended Stay Hotel®, Econo Lodge®, Rodeway Inn®, and Vacation Rentals by Choice Hotels® brands provide a spectrum of lodging choices to meet guests' needs. With more than 35 million members, our Choice Privileges® rewards program enhances every trip a guest takes, with benefits ranging from instant, every day rewards to exceptional experiences, starting right when they join. All hotels and vacation rentals are independently owned and operated. Visit us at www.choicehotels.com for more information.

Subscribe to our daily newsletter