
    
        
            By Chris Franklin

cfranklin@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

BRIDGETON -- Staff at the Cumberland County Jail are being credited with saving the lives of four inmates who overdosed at the facility Friday.

During the evening of Oct. 6, a call was made to 911 stating that four inmates were found in cardiac arrest. The jail's corrections and medical staff gave the inmates Narcan. The four inmates were revived and taken to Inspira hospitals in the area.

"Had it not been for the swift action of these Officers and our medical staff, the outcome could have been much worse," said Cumberland County Jail Warden Richard Smith.

Smith added that the medical staff was trained on how to administer Narcan.  He also added that while the medical staff was working on two of the inmates, they instructed the correctional officers how to apply the Narcan to the other two inmates. 

"They responded very well in a crisis and are to be commended for their efforts," Smith said. "All four inmates were responsive when they left the Correctional Facility thanks to the great work of our staff."

The incident comes at a time where the Cumberland County Jail has been the focus of a lot of news. During a Sept. 26 Cumberland County Freeholders Board meeting, both the warden and corrections officer's union talked about incidents that had occurred at the jail, including three corrections officers being charged in connection with two of suicides at the jail as well as training and other issues related to the correction officer's union contract.

"These critical incidents with positive outcomes are routine events that seldom get reported across the country when saving lives," said Local PBA 231 President Victor Bermudez. "The Union commends our officers for heroics above and beyond the call of duty with limited to no training in these events. The opioid epidemic is a phenomenon in which we must evolve to collectively."

One inmate remains in critical condition while one is in a step-down unit. Two other inmates were treated and released back into the custody of jail officials. Officials are still investigating how the drugs were able to get into the possession of inmates. 

Chris Franklin can be reached at cfranklin@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @cfranklinnews. Find NJ.com on Facebook


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        