Partly cloudy. High 79F. Winds NE at 10 to 15 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 58F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:56 pm

Keith Lutzen, 47, is arraigned Wednesday, Nov. 30, 2016, in Attleboro District Court on robbery charges. His attorney, at left, is James McKenna. (Sun Chronicle file photo)

Keith Lutzen, 47, is arraigned Wednesday, Nov. 30, 2016, in Attleboro District Court on robbery charges. His attorney, at left, is James McKenna. (Sun Chronicle file photo)

ATTLEBORO -- A Rhode Island man is now serving a prison sentence for the robberies of two County Square businesses last year.

Keith Lutzen, 48, is serving a two-year sentence for the Nov. 25, 2016 robbery at Cumberland Farms and one two days later at the nearby Honey Dew Donuts.

He pleaded guilty last month in Fall River Superior Court to two counts of unarmed robbery, charges reduced from armed robbery as a result of his change of plea, according to court records.

Lutzen, whose last known addresses were in Warwick and Cranston, has been held in jail since his arrest Nov. 28, 2016.

Lutzen showed no weapon but kept his hand in his pocket when he robbed the two businesses.

Lutzen was staying with a girlfriend at the Maple Terrace public housing apartments off Thacher Street but left shortly after the robberies, according to police.

An employee at Cumberland Farms recognized Lutzen as a regular customer and remembered seeing him at a Maple Terrace bus stop, wearing the same puffy black jacket worn by the robber, according to prosecutors.

Police say he later confessed after he was apprehended in Cranston on unrelated charges.

Kayla Canne can be reached at 508-236-0336, kcanne@thesunchronicle.com or on Twitter at @SCNAttleboro.

ATTLEBORO — The suspect arrested in connection to a pair of robberies at two County Square businesses in November has been indicted by a Brist…


                                    
                                        Whenever DAVE LINTON posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.
