Gallery: U.S. Justice Department asked to probe Cumberland jail suicides, April 4, 2017


    
        
            By Chris Franklin

cfranklin@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

CAMDEN -- The family of a man who committed suicide in the Cumberland County Jail has filed a lawsuit in federal court.

The family of David Conroy is suing Cumberland County, current Cumberland County Jail Warden Richard Smith, former warden Robert Balicki, and CFG Health Systems for $1 million in connection with the 32-year-old's death.

The lawsuit claims that CFG Health Systems "failed to properly screen" Conroy for suicidal tendencies or any other psychological problems while not properly monitoring Conroy while he was incarcerated.

The lawsuit also alleges that the current and former jail administration failed to train the corrections staff on how to monitor inmates properly, created policies that "created a culture of unconstitutional behavior and indifference," deprived Conroy of his constitutional rights and failed to maintain a safe and suitable environment for him.

The lawsuit comes four days after charges were filed against three corrections officers in connection with Conroy's death and other suicides that occurred at the jail.

Corrections officers Nicolas Gomez and Justin Cimino were charged for allegedly falsifying entries on a "close watch form" and incident forms relating to Conroy's death.

"It was a lawsuit that was being contemplated and being filed and it comes on the heels of this indictment that came down last week," said attorney Conrad J. Benedetto, who is representing the family of David Conroy. "It's highly questionable and very concerning that you have six in-custody suicides in a less than three-year time. The situation begs for reform."

In a statement issued last week, PBA Local 231 President Victor Bermudez said "The PBA has been proactive in suggesting adopting protocols and resources successfully exercised by other institutions, striving to provide a safe and secure environment. Even if improvements are needed and welcomed, that does not equate with anything criminal taking place."

Cumberland County Solicitor Ted Baker declined to comment because the county had not yet been served the lawsuit.

The lawsuit is the sixth one to be filed by the family of someone who committed suicide in the Cumberland County Jail. Benedetto is representing the other five cases. 

Chris Franklin can be reached at cfranklin@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @cfranklinnews. Find NJ.com on Facebook


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        