Isolated thunderstorms early, becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Isolated thunderstorms early, becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:35 pm

BY KEN WALKER

POST-INTELLIGENCER

A Humboldt man was arrested for rape Saturday morning at the Henry County jail.

Justin D. Barker, 28, was arrested by Henry County Sheriff’s Deputy James Higgins at 11:45 a.m. Saturday and charged with a Class B felony rape.

Barker is scheduled to appear Tuesday in Henry County General Sessions Court. His bond is set at $50,000.

In an unrelated incident, a Dresden man already facing an aggravated arson charge was arrested on two additional charges Friday morning.

Cody R. Brundage, 26, was charged with aggravated burglary and theft over $2,500 when he was arrested by Sheriff’s Sgt. David Powell at 10:16 a.m. Friday at the jail.

Brundage had been arrested Wednesday in Dresden on the aggravated arson charge which is related to a fire he allegedly set here in Henry County.

The Post-Intelligencer’s report Friday on that arrest contained incorrect information about the arson charge, saying it was connected to a home owned by Gary Fletcher at 3450 Elkhorn Road and that the fire was in June last year. Actually, Brundage is accused of setting a different fire, one that happened at a farm house owned by Fletcher. That fire was in December.

Brundage is to appear Tuesday in General Sessions Court on his new charges.

In other incidents:

• Paris Police arrested a Springville man on a variety of drug and weapons charges after searching his vehicle at a convenience store in Paris.

Dustin A. Kreitz, 29, of 125 Buchanan Resort Road was arrested by PPD Sgt. Jamie James, who saw Kreitz in a vehicle in a parking lot. Inside his vehicle, officers found two pistols, 41 grams of methamphetamine and 6 grams of marijuana.

Kreitz was charged with possession of a Schedule II controlled substance with the intent to sell, manufacture or deliver; simple possession of a Schedule VI controlled substance; and two counts of being a felon in possession of a firearm.

Kreitz is scheduled to appear Tuesday in General Sessions Court. His bond was set at $20,000.

• A Kentucky man who was upset about not getting help with a flat tire apparently decided to steal a television from the man who had refused help.

Andrew Kimmel, 26, of Hopkinsville was arrested at 8:08 p.m. Saturday at a home on Jim Merrill Road after he returned to the home from which he had stolen the television.

Sheriff’s Lt. Clyde Sulcer originally responded to a call at that address Saturday afternoon. The resident said he and his family had been gone from 11 a.m. until 4:10 p.m. that day. When they returned, they saw a rear window smashed in and noticed the window on the rear door had been broken by a heavy instrument like a skillet.

A Panasonic 55-inch smart television the home owner was renting from a local rental center was missing.

Moments later, the man started receiving text messages from a friend who said Kimmel had contacted her and admitted stealing the television.

Sulcer went back to the address shortly after 8 p.m. when he learned Kimmel had returned to the home, bringing with him a new $800 television he had bought in Hopkinsville. When Sulcer spoke to Kimmel, he said he had stolen the TV because he was mad at the home owner for not helping him with a flat tire. Kimmel said he sold the TV to a drug dealer in Hopkinsville that afternoon for $60.

Kimmel was charged with aggravated burglary, vandalism, theft under $1,000, and unlawful drug paraphernalia. He is scheduled to appear Tuesday in General Sessions Court. His bond was set at $25,000.

• Dakota C. Middleton, 22, of 100 Jeffrey Cove in Paris was arrested Saturday afternoon on a Henry County theft charge.

Sheriff’s Deputy John Krezinski arrested Middleton at 2:10 p.m. Saturday in Covington County, Miss., Middleton was charged with theft of property greater than $1,000. He is to appear Tuesday in General Sessions Court. His bond was set at $5,000.

• A resident of an apartment on Harrison Lane reported several items stolen from her residence Saturday night.

Paris Patrolman Daniel Andres took a report from the woman, who said a window had been opened at the apartment while she was gone.

Stolen were a Samsung flat screen television, valued at $350; a Nintendo gaming system, $200; and body wash and spray, $50.  


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription