By

Dailymail.com Reporter






  Published:
  16:30 EDT, 15 November 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  18:59 EDT, 15 November 2017







         102

View  comments

 Grammy-winning rock singer Melissa Etheridge, 56, has avoided jail time for a misdemeanor charge of possessing marijuana in North Dakota.


Burke County state attorney Amber Fiesel told TMZ that in return for her guilty plea on Tuesday, the I'm The Only One hitmaker will pay only $1,000 in fines and fees and get six months of unsupervised probation.  


Etheridge was arrested in August when investigators found marijuana on her tour bus as it crossed from Canada into the U.S. Etheridge, who is a cancer survivor, has said she believes in the medicinal applications of cannabis.


Her mug shot: Grammy-winning rock singer Melissa Etheridge, 56, has avoided jail time for a misdemeanor charge of possessing marijuana in North Dakota. Pictured last week

TMZ reported that initially prosecutors wanted the Bring Me Some Water songstress to submit to drug testing, but 'the judge shut that down after hearing Melissa has a medical marijuana card in Cali to treat her cancer-related pain.'


KMOT-TV reports Etheridge's attorney says the musician intended to apply for a medical marijuana license in North Dakota. 


State officials are setting up a medical marijuana system after voters approved it last year, but don't expect the drug to be available to patients until late next year.


Close call: In return for her guilty plea on Tuesday, the I'm The Only One hitmaker will pay only $1,000 in fines and fees and get six months of unsupervised probation. Pictured in September

The Come To My Window singer has been open about her marijuana use as back in August she revealed she has even smoked the drug with her two oldest children, and uses it almost every night with her wife of three years Linda Wallem.


'Cannabis is the best marital aid, you get a nice indica,' Etheridge said while speaking with Yahoo as part of their 'Weed &amp; the American Family' series.


'When it’s date night, it takes down your inhibition. Your sexual desires are enhanced.'


She went on to say: 'We take a bath every night and smoke and talk and wind down and sleep a very, very good night sleep. And sleep is extremely important.' 


Bring me some weed: The singer has been open about her marijuana use as back in August she revealed she has even smoked the drug with her two oldest children. Seen here in February



Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group