Get the latest sports news, coverage and opinion – all in your inbox.


                
                    Now reading the latest in
                

                
                Cowboys News
            


            
                The latest in
            
            
            Cowboys News
        


        This story is about
        Cowboys
    


        Published
        Apr. 15
    


                    Smiley N. Pool/Staff Photographer                

Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Dez Bryant reacts after his apparent reception was reversed on replay during the fourth quarter of an NFC divisional round playoff game against the Green Bay Packers at Lambeau Field on Sunday, Jan. 11, 2015, in Green Bay. ( Smiley N. Pool / The Dallas Morning News )



        
            By
            
                            
                            SportsDayDFW.com                     

                    
            
                Contact SportsDayDFW.com 
                
                    
                    on Twitter:
                    @SportsDayDFW
                                            
            

Here are the top five things you need to know about the Cowboys deciding to cut Dez Bryant.

If I didn’t have my edge I got it now... I’m sorry they got to feel me it’s personal... it’s very personal

This has the potential to be insanely wild. 


Bryant told the NFL Network he wants to stay in the NFC East: "It's personal," he said. "I'm just tired of being a scapegoat."


SportsDay special contributor Matt Mosley said he believes Bryant would take less money to play for an NFC East team. Will Dez get that chance? Not at the moment, according to two NFL reporters.

It’s early but Dez Bryant’s goal to play in NFC East is not being embraced at this moment by Redskins, Giants and Eagles #oops

More on Dez Bryant: The #Redskins, per a league source, “have not discussed [him] at all” and have no desire to explore signing him. I’m also told the #Giants are not interested - neither are the #Eagles. So Dez’s goal of remaining in the NFC East appears to be a pipe dream. https://t.co/svOW357u9W

Bryant also started to point fingers at some former teammates, although he didn't name specific people. He just called them the "Garrett guys" in reference to head coach Jason.


In a Friday evening interview with the NFL Network's Jane Slater, Bryant specifically mentioned the team's captains.


"I'll say this right here: I believe that 'Garrett guys' [played a role in my departure]," Bryant said. "I would say that. I believe that. I truly believe it."

Since Garrett became head coach, the Cowboys have usually had five captains, two on offense, two on defense and one on special teams. Garrett added a third defender in 2017, however, he stuck with two on offense.


Bryant wasn't one of them and it bothered him.


The group last season consisted of Dak Prescott, Jason Witten, Sean Lee, Tyrone Crawford, Orlando Scandrick and Dan Bailey.


"I won't put no names out, but they know, and I want them to know I know," Bryant said. "I'll shoot them a text message and let them know. Little do they know is, you know, they can wear that C all they want to, but in that locker room, they know who they run and talk to, they know who they communicate with. Everybody knows where the real love is at. I'm not throwing anybody under the bus, but that's the difference between me and them."


SportsDay's Jon Machota listed five teams that are not in the NFC East that he thinks Dez should consider signing with. Here's an excerpt from his post:


1. San Francisco 49ers — The 49ers have plenty of money. Bryant could join forces with a good young quarterback in Jimmy Garoppolo and head coach Kyle Shanahan, who had success coaching bog-bodied star receiver Julio Jones in Atlanta.

See the other four teams here.


There is also no shortage of athletes recruiting Dez on Twitter. See a full list — including Redskins CB Josh Norman — here.



                    Ashley Landis/Staff Photographer                

Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Dez Bryant (88) points to the sideline during the first quarter of their game against the New York Giants on Sunday, September 11, 2016 at AT&amp;T Stadium in Arlington, Texas.
(Ashley Landis/The Dallas Morning News)


Here's how SportsDay's David Moore explained it:


What began as a conversation about the need for a pay cut led to a much harsher conclusion.


Internal discussions about how this could work going forward all came to the same realization:


The Cowboys are better off without Dez Bryant.

Cutting Bryant saves the Cowboys $8.5 million against the salary cap and again underlines how quickly things change in the National Football League. 


But money wasn't the only factor in the team parting ways with a receiving icon, either, said Moore.


Once Bryant and Jerry Jones finally got in the same room, it was painfully clear this was no longer about the money. A source said a pay cut was never broached. Friday's conversation was too quick for the owner to address any sort of salary adjustment.


Money was the spark, but the decision on Bryant quickly evolved into where he stands as a player, how he approaches his job and what's important to him. Could the receiver's temperament allow him to handle a pay cut, or would his hurt and resentment seep into the locker room and impact his interactions with coaches and teammates?


In asking and answering these questions, club officials were forced to acknowledge the support system that helped Bryant flourish early in his career had now become a crutch that too often enabled immature behavior or inhibited his professional growth. They were culpable.


Jerry Jones issued a statement shortly after he met with Bryant at The Star, in part:


"As an organization we hold Dez Bryant in the highest regard, and we are grateful for his passion, spirit and contributions to this team. ...


"Dez and I share a personal and professional relationship that is very strong. ...This was not an easy decision. It was made based upon doing what we believe is in the best interest of the Dallas Cowboys.


"We arrived at this crossroad collectively with input from several voices within the organization."


More: Nothing personal, Dez: Jerry Jones' move was all business, plain and simple


Regardless of how we got here, Cowboys QB Dak Prescott said the move "puts everything in perspective for me" realizing that the NFL is a business. He also said he had no say in the decision to let the wide receiver go.


"He was a great player," Prescott said of Bryant. "He did a lot of great things for us, obviously. He was a guy that man-to-man you'd go to. At this point, we've got to figure that out with the guys we got. I'm sure we're going to go after guys in the draft or free agency. Who knows?


"All I can do is just continue to get better at my job and do the best I can."

Now that Dez is gone, what does Dallas have at wide receiver? Here's a quick look at what's on the roster. [Stats via pro-football-reference.com and Pro Football Focus]


SportsDay's Kate Hairopoulos broke down the receivers on the roster here. We'll give you a quick sneak peak of her story here:


The biggest addition, for the moment, comes in the form of Allen Hurns. The Cowboys signed the former Jacksonville receiver to a relatively affordable deal in free agency. It is unclear if he's ready to be a No. 1 receiver and simply take Bryant's spot, though his numbers have been similar to Bryant's over the last three seasons. His best season came in 2015, when he caught 64 passes for 1,031 yards and 10 touchdowns.


But his production has slipped the last two seasons when he missed 11 games because of a sports hernia and a high ankle sprain. He combined for 74 catches for 961 yards and five touchdowns.


Terrance Williams is in line for his sixth season in Dallas after he signed a new contract last season that fully guarantees his salary in 2018. But he didn't have a touchdown in 2017 and is now coming back from foot surgery.


Cole Beasley, entering his seventh season, was Prescott's go-to in 2016, but Beasley's impact sank last season, along with the entire offense. He has one year remaining in his current deal. It will be up to the Cowboys find ways to help Prescott better connect with his slot receiver.


If we know one thing for sure, it is that Hurns won't wear the No. 88 jersey.

I will not be wearing 88, they might as well retire that number.

Check out why Hurns picked the No. 17 here.



                    Tom Fox/Staff Photographer                

Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Dez Bryant (88) reacts after making a catch along the sideline during Blue-White Scrimmage day at training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, August 6, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News)

Will Dallas use the draft to find a replacement for Bryant? 


Draft expert Dane Brugler said he believes popular WR draft name — Calvin Ridley — isn't the best fit to slide in for Bryant's old role at the "X" position. Instead, he mentioned Maryland's D.J. Moore.


Although he might not have ideal height for the "X" receiver position, Moore (6-0, 210, 4.42) has the build and physicality to handle the rigors of the position. He added 40 pounds of good weight since high school, pushing himself in the weight room to develop his body without losing his speed. Catching a pass from eight different quarterbacks the last three seasons at Maryland, Moore has proven himself as a target able to adjust and produce regardless of the situation around him.

The Steve Smith comparisons are routinely overused each draft season, but Moore's college film gives off a distinct Smith vibe. He creates separation before and after the catch and overpower defenders to win at the catch point. The Cowboys have met with Moore multiple times, including a top-30 visit where he was brought to Frisco at the team's facility. He is absolutely in the mix at No. 19.


Check out two other names Brugler mentions here. Brugler also identified a receiver Dallas could look at taking in every round (Rounds 1-7) in this year's draft. Here's what he had to say about his Round 2 target, Anthony Miller out of Memphis.


A former walk-on, Miller not only performed at a high level at Memphis, but he broke all of Isaac Bruce's receiving records and leaves as the most productive wideout in school history. He is a crafty route runner with the sudden footwork to skirt defenders and create after the catch. The biggest obstacle right now for Miller is a foot injury that sidelined him for the Senior Bowl.


See the rest of the receivers from Rounds 1-7 here.


SMU's Courtland Sutton is also an option for Dallas. Brugler tweeted shortly after Bryant's release that Sutton to Dallas at 19 became more of a possibility. Sutton even tweeted himself.

👀

Sutton worked out extensively with Cowboys head coach Jason Garrettat SMU's pro day, then reportedly had a private workout scheduled with the team.


This week, ESPN draft analyst Todd McShay told SportsDay's Jori Epstein that Sutton was a "Dez type" receiver the Cowboys could select.


"He's a bigger receiver, more Dez type," McShay said. "He doesn't have elite quickness and suddenness but big, physical, really good hands. He's a playmaker."


Here are some available wide receiver free agents:

*Stats via pro-football-reference and Pro Football Focus. Cap hits via spotrac.com.


In mid-May, SportsDay's Brandon George identified Decker as a possible target for Dallas to pursue (before Dez's departure):


Eric Decker could come at a reduced rate after back-to-back disappointing seasons.


Decker's lone season in Tennessee didn't go as planned. He finished with 54 catches for 563 yards and only one touchdown.


The Jets released Decker last June after he played in just three games in 2016. He was placed on injured reserve because of a shoulder injury.


Decker, who turns 31 next month, has posted three 1,000-yard seasons since 2012. From 2012 to 2014 with the Broncos and Jets, Decker averaged 81.5 catches for 1,085 yards and 10 touchdowns.


Also, new Cowboys receivers coach Sanjay Lal is familiar with Decker. In Decker's first year with the Jets in 2014, Lal was his receivers coach. Decker started 15 games that season and caught 74 passes for 962 yards and five touchdowns.


There's two parts to this: what happened on the field and what happened off it.


In eight seasons and 113 games in Dallas, Bryant had 531 catches for 7,459 yards and 73 touchdowns.


Bryant tied the Cowboys' legendary receiver for all-time touchdown catches in Week 7 against the San Francisco 49ers. Bryant then set the new franchise mark with his 72nd career TD grab in Week 13 against the Washington Redskins. Bryant finishes his Cowboys career with 73 touchdown catches and 15 multi-touchdown reception games, which ties him with Hayes for most in franchise history.


The decline in his production began in 2015, when injuries and other issues began impacting his play after he'd put up three-straight seasons of 1,200 yards or more. Here are Bryant's stats from 2010-14 and 2015-17:


He was also prone to have the occasional outburst or two on the sideline. Here's what Cowboys executive vice president Stephen Jones had to say about those in late January, well before the decision to release Dez became official:


"The other thing that we all see and it is certainly visible to anyone who watches our games, watches our sideline, is Dez is certainly a fiery guy who plays with a lot of emotion both on and off the field. Sometimes that can be a distraction. It can be a distraction for Dez, it can be a distraction for other teammates. And we just have to really get our hands around when you put all the full body of work together where that's headed."

Then there is the Dez off the field. Some of it was odd, like the pet monkey.

 My new best friend.... Dallas Bryant world #throwupthex

A post shared by  Dez Bryant (@dezbryant) on Oct 21, 2015 at 3:40pm PDT

Some of it was concerning to the Cowboys, like when the team enacted the "Dez rules," as explained below.


Bryant had a somewhat tumultuous start with the Cowboys after he arrived as the 24th overall pick in the 2010 draft. He made headlines after he was asked to leave NorthParkCenter when he and his friends refused to pull up their sagging pants. He was named in lawsuits over unpaid debts. He was involved in a verbal altercation at a Miami club.

And then there was a physical altercation with his mother in the summer of 2012 that made for embarrassing headlines. In the end, a misdemeanor family assault charge was conditionally dismissed by the Dallas County district attorney's office after his mother chose not to pursue charges. Bryant agreed to attend a family violence treatment program.


So in 2012, the Cowboys and Bryant developed rules to provide structure including tight security, curfews, places to stay away from and counseling.


There was more, too, like his outburst in the locker room that sparked the famous phrase, "How about you all fix this [expletive], Rich."


There was more. A lot more. Check it out here.


You can also read about his career highs and lows with Dallas right here.