Get the latest sports news, coverage and opinion – all in your inbox.


                
                    Now reading the latest in
                

                
                Rangers News
            


            
                The latest in
            
            
            Rangers News
        


        This story is about
        Rangers
    


        Published
        Jan. 1
    


                    /The Dallas Morning News                

An artist rendering shows an overhead view of a new retractable roof ballpark and entertainment venue above it. Johnson Creek and AT&amp;T Stadium are on the left.  Arlington Mayor W. Jeff Williams and Texas Rangers Co-Chairman Ray Davis unveiled plans for a new baseball stadium during a press conference in the Council Briefing Room at Arlington City Hall, Friday, May 20, 2016. Plans are for a new retractable-roof ballpark and an entertainment center. (Credit: Populous



        
            By
            
                            
                            SportsDayDFW.com                     

                    
            
                Contact SportsDayDFW.com 
                
                    
                    on Twitter:
                    @SportsDayDFW
                                            
            

In September, the Texas Rangers broke ground on their new home -- Globe Life Field.

Here's some things you should know about the new park...


There were rumblings and rumors of Dallas trying to lure the Rangers away with a downtown ballpark, but Arlington crushed those dreams and the stadium will be staying in the mid-cities. The agreement between the team and the city for the new ballpark will run until January 1, 2053.



                    /                

Globe Life Field Aerial (Credit: HKS)

Globe Life Park cost $191 million to build in 1994 ($305 million in 2016 dollars), so this stadium will be much more costly. The roof adds to the cost, but with this price tag, you'll probably see a lot of amenities in the new park that Globe Life Park could only dream of having.


From The Dallas Morning News' Jeff Mosier and Loyd Brumfield:


The deal calls for the city to issue $500 million in bonds to help pay for the stadium. A half-cent of sales tax, 2 percent hotel occupancy tax and 5 percent car rental tax would pay off those bonds over an estimated 30 years.


Voters also approved a ticket tax of up to 10 percent and parking tax of up to $3 at the new stadium. That money would be used for some of the Rangers' portion of the debt, which was criticized by the opposition campaign.

The desire to add a retractable roof was the biggest reason the Rangers made this move so quickly. July and August games in Arlington are notorious for being insufferably hot and many fans say they don't even think about attending Rangers games in those months because of the weather. With a roof comes climate-controlled baseball, something that has plenty of critics of its own.


The park will be located south of Randol Mill Road and west of Stadium Drive, where parking lots A and B are currently located. This will make the park closer to the river between the baseball and football stadiums, but will also create a greater need for parking in the area.

This was one of the bigger surprises. The new stadium, which costs $1.1 billion, is scheduled to open in time for the 2020 Major League Baseball season.


Globe Life Park's lease runs through 2024, but Rangers owner Ray Davis says the team will be playing in its new park no later than April 2021, less than five seasons from now.


The size of the new stadium also hasn't been determined, but it's expected to be much smaller than Globe Life Park, which can hold 48,114 fans. The Rangers' agreement with the city requires that the new stadium hold at least 38,000. The team expects capacity to be closer to 42,000.



                    /                

North Plaza (Credit: HKS)

Renderings of the new stadium, while very preliminary, show plans for the Texas Live! development to be an integral part of the fan experience next to the stadium. Similar to Ballpark Village in St. Louis, the development bumps up with the left field stands and gives fans a view into the stadium from outside.


                    /                

The lights are aglow as the Texas Rangers face the New York Yankees at the Rangers Ballpark in Arlington.  As it stands now, the Rangers would face the Yankees in the playoffs, Friday, September 10, 2010.  (The stadium is reflected in Mark Holtz lake.)  (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) 

Rangers owner Ray Davis also said he hopes the new ballpark will retain the look and feel that Globe Life Park has been widely praised for. 


"That day I called Tom Schieffer," Davis said. "I said 'You and President Bush did a tremendous job designing this ballpark.' It's stood the test of time, it's a classic baseball look. I went into the office and talked to Rob and I said 'Let's talk to our architects. If we can't build a roof over what we've got, can we preserve the tradition of what we have? Can we build a ballpark, as much as we can, like we've got, and put a roof on it?' And the architect said yeah we can do that. So that's our plan."


Arlington Mayor Jeff Williams answered a question on the possibility of adding public transportation to the stadiums in his city, but was vague in his response. There are no concrete plans for an Arlington extension to DART, but Williams said he and his team will consider all new transportation options as the stadium is being built.