Get the latest sports news, coverage and opinion – all in your inbox.


                
                    Now reading the latest in
                

                
                Cowboys News
            


            
                The latest in
            
            
            Cowboys News
        


        This story is about
        Cowboys
    


        Published
        Sep. 19
    


                    Vernon Bryant/Staff Photographer                

Dallas Cowboys running back Ezekiel Elliott (21) is stopped by Denver Broncos defensive tackle Adam Gotsis (99), Denver Broncos outside linebacker Shaquil Barrett (48), and Denver Broncos defensive end Derek Wolfe (95) during the first quarter of play at Sports Authority Field in Denver on Sunday, September 17, 2017. (Vernon Bryant/The Dallas Morning News)



        
            By
            
                            
                            Kevin Sherrington            , Staff Columnist        

                    
            
                Contact Kevin Sherrington
                
                    
                    on Twitter:
                    @KSherringtonDMN
                                            
            

Every NFL season comes with an inexplicable result or two for each member. A game so preposterous, there's no explanation. The team thus does its best to move on, eventually gathering the record that best fits its actual description.

So after two polar-opposite games, are the Cowboys the bunch that dominated the Giants?


Or was that belly-flop in Denver something we should get used to?


My guess is they're closer to the former than the latter, but at least one disturbing trend continues to grow.


Before we get there, though, let's look at the big picture of the 42-17 loss to the Broncos and what went wrong. Basically, other than the kicker and punter, who painted graceful arcs in the mile-high air all afternoon, you could have turned a fire hose on the locker room afterward and not doused anyone innocent.

The World's Greatest Offensive Line performed like a band of AARP members trying to hold back the crowd at a Walmart opening. The defense made Trevor Siemian look like the old Broncos quarterback up in the suites, watching through binoculars. Meanwhile, Dak Prescott resembled the quarterback everyone pegged as a fourth-rounder. Or worse.


The Cowboys were so inept, it was a victory when they managed to remain upright. They slipped and slid and spun their wheels. The sight of Jeff Heath -- head down, feet pedaling the air while his man ran away from him -- is an image that will stick with me awhile.

Unfortunately, this one, too: Zeke Elliott standing at midfield, hands on hips, watching as a Bronco goes the other way with a ball intended for Dez Bryant.


LaDainian Tomlinson certainly didn't care for the look, telling the rest of the NFL GameDay Prime crew that Zeke "absolutely quit on his team today." And the Hall of Fame running back wasn't just talking about Zeke's give-up on the interception. Frankly, we've seen Cowboys stars do that before. Remember Dez getting in an argument with an opponent rather than give chase? The excuse made for Dez in such times of regret is that "passion" overcomes his better angels. That's not passion; that's emotion, and a tantrum, at that. In any case, Elliott looked neither emotional nor passionate Sunday.


And that's the picture that bugged LT, too: Zeke sitting alone on the bench, wearing an expression as vacant as a beach house in winter, engaging no one.


Look, maybe LT went too far, calling Zeke a quitter. Sure, he quit on a play. And, no, he didn't seem to run with the same conviction that we saw just the week before. Or that Kareem Hunt has displayed two weeks into an improbable start for the Chiefs. But "quit on his team"? Could be an exaggeration.


Then again, LT might have a bone to pick with Zeke, whom he called the league's "top dog."


"So if you want to be the top dog," the former TCU star said, "you have to do it on and off the field."

Well, we know how all that's going. Zeke's got a lot of growing up to do, to say the least.


But even Elliott hasn't been an issue for two weeks running, so to speak. For that perspective, consider another GameDay Prime critique, this one from Deion Sanders. The Hall of Fame corner noted that, in Dez's first two games, mostly going against the Giants' Janoris Jenkins and the Broncos' Aqib Talib, he caught just nine passes for 102 yards and a single touchdown:


"The last few times that Dez has gone against a real, pure, dominant corner, they haven't gotten the ball to him or he hasn't made catches or he hasn't had productivity ..."

Deion, who called Dez one of the game's best receivers, said you don't see similar results from the likes of Antonio Brown or Julio Jones when they go up against the league's best DBs.


Of course, you could argue that this is what separates Dez from Brown or Jones, "separation" being the key word. He doesn't get much from any defensive back, either, which can be problematic for a quarterback scanning the field with a clock ticking in his head.


As has been discussed previously in this space, what I like best about Dak is his head. He doesn't like taking chances, which accounts for the paucity of interceptions in his young career, at least until Sunday. There's a reason Cole Beasley led the team in receptions last year: He's always open. Dak's nature is to take the path of least resistance instead of risking a pick on a throw to Dez.


Whereas we know what Tony Romo would do, as Troy Aikman reminded us Sunday. He'd give Dez a chance to make a play. More often than not, it worked.


For all the talk about the improved chemistry between Dak and Dez, it's not apparent on the field. And on days when teams go all in to stuff the run, it's up to Dak and Dez to make them pay for that overcompensation. If the Cowboys can't run or go downfield, it's going to be a long, ugly day at the office.


From here on out, I expect the offensive line will play closer to its reputation. Sean Lee won't whiff on tackles. Jason Witten won't drop touchdown passes. Zeke won't average next-to-nothing.


But Dak to Dez, particularly downfield? That's a connection still in question. Better make it soon, before Denver becomes something other than an aberration.