Sign in using your wsoc profile

Need a profile? Register now.

Welcome back. Please sign in

By submitting your registration information, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

We have sent a confirmation email to {* data_emailAddress *}. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your account.

We look forward to seeing you on [website] frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.

Click here to return to the page you were visiting.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Edit your profile

Sorry we could not verify that email address. Enter your email below and we'll send you another email.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

By: 
            			                                                                    Joe Bruno
                    ,                  			                                                                    Tina Terry
                                    			            

ROCKWELL, N.C. - A Davidson County deputy is accused of robbing the F&amp;M Bank on West Main Street in Rockwell Tuesday afternoon.

Davidson County Sheriff David Grice said Jeff Athey was arrested around 4 p.m., four minutes after walking into the bank he is accused of robbing with a semi-automatic weapon.

Davidson Co Sheriff's deputy Jeff Athey is accused of robbing a bank in Rockwell this afternoon. He has since been fired @wsoctv pic.twitter.com/3gFFhfn0Wn

"He was not on-duty during the time of this incident, but he was employed and scheduled to work later today," said Grice.

Grice told Channel 9 Athey has been fired.

 

The former Davidson County sheriff's deputy who is accused of robbing a bank this afternoon is silent as he enters the Rowan County Jail @wsoctv pic.twitter.com/rdir1fc2Pb

 

"I’m thankful that Mr. Athey did not injure anyone during this incident and that he did not resist arrest," Grice added. He told Channel 9 that a deputy spotted Athey at a stop light on Highway 52 and quickly arrested him. Deputies said he was coherent and very cooperative.

Grice also said Athey never gave any indication of this type of behavior when he employed as a deputy.



"I am as shocked and appalled as anyone else at Mr. Athey's behavior," Grice said.

Grice said Athey worked for the department for years, and also worked as a private contractor for Blackwater in Iraq and Afghanistan.

There is no word yet on a possible motive.

			
													                                				
											
			
				
				
                								Jeffrey Athey
			
		
											
“We have a lot of employees, a lot of other agencies and law enforcement. It reflects badly on everyone,” Grice said.

Rockwell Police Chief Hugh Bost said he thinks it may have been a cry for help.

Athey casually walked into the bank and didn’t try to hide his face when he walked up to the teller, police said.

"She said, ‘Do you want that out of checking or savings? I need some information for your account,’” Bost said. “And that's when he brandished the weapon and said, ‘Give me $1,000.’" 

Athey left, and instead of taking back roads, he drove down a main road in Rockwell before the deputy stopped him, police said.

Deputies said he was coherent and very cooperative.               

"I wonder if it was a cry for help,” Bost said. “I don’t know if he had problems at work, home, medical. When advised of his rights, he decided not to speak.”

"Never in my wildest dreams did I think a cop would do that," one resident told Channel 9.

Athey worked in the civil division, and one of his duties was transporting involuntary commitments, the sheriff said. Athey appeared before a judge Wednesday and asked for a court-appointed attorney.

The bank will reopen Thursday.

Read more top trending stories on wsoctv.com:

© 2018 Cox Media Group.

© 2018 Cox Media Group.


By using this website, you accept the terms of our Visitor Agreement and Privacy Policy, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.


This station is part of Cox Media Group Television.


Learn about careers at Cox Media Group.

