Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police are conducting an investigation after discovering an abandoned firearm and documents that created concern for Michigan houses of worship.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

FBI seal.
(Photo: Detroit Free Press archive)Buy Photo

Dearborn Heights police are conducting a joint investigation with the FBI and other local law enforcement agencies after the discovery of an abandoned firearm along with several documents that have “created concerns involving several Michigan houses of worship,”  they said in a news release on Tuesday.


“All of the religious organizations, none of which were located within the City of Dearborn Heights, that have been affected by this discovery have been notified along with their local law enforcement agencies out of an abundance of caution,” the police said in the statement.


Channel 4 (WDIV) reports that a Dearborn Heights man found a suspicious package containing an unloaded handgun and a map with “target” written on it and several circled addresses, including a mosque and the Westminster Presbyterian Church in Grand Rapids.


Read more:


If Amazon picks Detroit: Cable cars over the river and other possibilities


Plum Market, Zingerman's headed to Pistons' practice facility in Detroit


The Grand Rapids church posted on its Facebook page early Tuesday that it had been informed by the Grand Rapids Police Department on Monday that it was listed as a “target” and that the police indicated that the church was not in immediate danger.


The church said that it had closed several of its services on Tuesday including its downtown food pantry, child development center, and church offices. Church offices and programs reopened today, said Heather Colletto, director of communications and mission.


Masjid Bilal, a mosque in Canton, was informed by Canton Police on Monday that it was one of the targets, according to mosque attorney Khalid Kahloon. The mosque kept its doors open but arranged for a security guard to keep an eye on the mosque, Kahloon said.


"Given where we are in terms of the political rhetoric against immigrants and Muslims, in particular, the community is very concerned," Kahloon said.


The police said in its statement on Tuesday that there are no known credible threats to any churches or houses of worship at the time.


Contact Hasan Dudar at hdudar@freepress.com.
