Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Bar Louie, an American fare chain restaurant, is coming to the former Blackfinn location on South Main Street.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

A Bar Louie is planned for South Main Street in downtown Royal Oak.
(Photo: PR Newswire)

A Bar Louie is coming to downtown Royal Oak in the spot where the Blackfinn Ameripub bar and restaurant lived for 10 years until it closed last fall.


Franchise owner Anthony Marougi is promising to spend about $450,000 on remodeling the 7,400-square-foot building at 510-516 S. Main St., including new furniture, fixtures and equipment, according to city documents.


Marougi previously owned Bar Louie locations in Novi, Auburn Hills, Rochester Hills and Dearborn, the city police department said in a report to City Manager Don Johnson. The police department has recommended the City Commission approve a liquor license transfer for the restaurant.


The city documents did not include a timeline for opening of the new restaurant. Marougi could not be immediately reached by the Free Press for comment. 


More stories:


Blackfinn sports bar in Royal Oak closes, leaves Clinton Twp. only Michigan location


This Royal Oak restaurant closing after 19 years


It's 50 cents in Ferndale, $1.50 in Royal Oak


Bar Louie, founded in downtown Chicago in 1990, is an American-fare eatery offering appetizers, flatbreads, salads, burgers, sandwiches and full course entrees. The chain restaurant touts its signature handcrafted martinis and offers a wide selection of beer on tap. 


The Blackfinn sports bar closed last October in the midst of football season. City officials expressed surprise at the time, saying it appeared to be a viable business, although Mayor Mike Fournier noted Detroit and some other near neighbors had been siphoning off some dining revenues from Royal Oak.


People spill out of the packed Blackfinn Restaurant and Saloon in Royal Oak during the Detroit Red Wings vs. Pittsburgh Penguins game in June 2008. A Bar Louie is planned for the location. (Photo: MARCIN SZCZEPANSKI, Detroit Free Press)

The Bar Louie plans come at the same time that Andiamo's announced it is closing its downtown Royal Oak location after 19 years there. The Italian eatery blamed the rising popularity of the restaurant scenes in Ferndale and Detroit, as well as parking issues.


Want more stories from southeast Michigan? Sign up for our free Woodward 248 email newsletter and like our Facebook page.  


 
