
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

A Gloucester County grand jury has indicted a youth hockey coach on charges that he sexually assaulted two boys in the 1990s.

Walter W. Ferinden, 56, of Lansdale, Pennsylvania, was arrested in March on charges of sexual contact involving a 12-year-old in 1994. The victim played in a junior hockey league in Washington Township, where Ferinden served as a coach.

The alleged assaults occurred at Ferinden's Deptford apartment.

Also in March, Delaware authorities charged Ferinden with similar offenses involving two other minors in the 1980s and '90s.

Ferinden coached youth hockey and ran skating clinics in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, New York and Vermont in the 1990s and as recently as 2010.

The announcement of charges led to another alleged victim stepping forward.

In June, Ferinden was charged with abusing a boy in Shamong Township, Burlington County, in 1992.

The victim in the Deptford case told investigators Ferinden kissed him on the mouth, massaged his body and pressed his genitals against him, according to the criminal complaint.

A grand jury indicted Ferinden last week on four counts of second-degree sexual assault in connection with the Deptford and Shamong cases.

In the Delaware case, Ferinden is charged with nine counts of second-degree unlawful sexual contact with minors. The alleged abuse occurred in the greater Wilmington area, with some incidents taking place in a vehicle while others occurred in Ferinden's Delaware home, authorities reported in March.

Ferinden has remained on electronic monitoring since his arrest in March and had to surrender his passport. Prosecutors had sought to keep him in jail under "preventative detention," but Superior Court Judge M. Christine Allen-Jackson ruled that he be placed on home electronic monitoring.

He is ordered to have no unsupervised contact with minors and to perform no coaching.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        