




Shawnee Hills Mayor Pat Monahan is recommending village Police Chief Russell Baron be given a three-day suspension for misusing a car donated for undercover surveillance, drinking alcohol while using it, and lying about it.

The incident occurred Feb. 6, when Baron was seen by an undercover agent for the Ohio Bureau of Criminal Investigation inside the Bogey Inn in Dublin consuming two 16-ounce Pabst Blue Ribbon beers, according to Monahan's staff report sent last week to the village council. The report was based on a Delaware County Sheriff's Office investigation.

According to the report, Baron left the bar after about an hour and drove to Largos Pub in the village, where three members of the Delaware County Drug Task Force and a BCI agent observed Baron consume four additional beers before he left about 10 p.m.

A Delaware County deputy reported he stopped Baron about 10:30 p.m. because he was unable to see the vehicle's license plate.

Baron was driving a 2012 Ford Explorer donated by Nationwide Insurance to Shawnee Hills police to be used solely for undercover investigations into insurance fraud, according to a contract both parties signed.

According to Monahan, there was no evidence that Baron, who was off-duty at the time, was investigating anything or should have been drinking as part of an investigation.

Baron initially told Delaware County Deputy Charles Gannon that he had consumed one beer. After Gannon conducted field sobriety tests, he concluded that Baron was impaired, at which point Baron admitted to having 2 1/2 beers, according to the reports.

Baron twice refused blood-alcohol tests at the Delaware County Jail. Several hours after he was stopped, he tested at 0.04 percent, half the volume at which an Ohio motorist is presumed to be under the influence.

In March, a special prosecutor made a motion to dismiss the case due to lack of evidence. Both the drunken-driving and license plate charges were dismissed.

"He was wrong in consuming alcohol while driving that car," Monahan said. "But this is going to be on his record. And that is probably intimately worse to him than three days off."

Monahan emphasized that "mine is a recommendation [to suspend Baron for three days]. It will be up to council to make a determination."

Council is expected to decide at its July 9 meeting.

Baron, who is paid about $50,000 annually, has done a lot of good for the community, Monahan said. "But I told him if this happens again, there won't be a second chance. I looked him right in the eyes and said, 'If this ever happens again, you're fired.'"

Carol Kender, an 18-year resident, former candidate for mayor and publisher of the Village Gazette newsletter, said she was once a fan of Baron.

"I'm very disappointed," she said. "But I do think a three-day suspension is not adequate, as presented by the facts."

Baron is the second consecutive police chief in the small Delaware County village to face discipline. Sean LeFever lost his job about two years ago after pleading guilty to one count of theft in office, stemming from an accusation that he improperly paid himself during special duty assignments.

dnarciso@dispatch.com

@DeanNarciso


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.