The Denver metropolitan area may be attracting increasing interest from national hotel buyers, industry experts say, but there’s a gap between demand and quality supply that keeps high-profile transactions from happening. A new survey by the Lodging Industry Investment Council, which represents companies controlling more than $40 billion worth of hospitality real estate, shows that while 35 percent of more than 60 members surveyed think that total dollar volume for hotel transactions will decrease in 2018 relative to 2017, not a single person voted against Denver as a place to buy hotels.Denver was the only city on the survey that didn’t get a single vote as a place investors would not consider buying, said Mike Cahill, founder of Greenwood Village-based Hospitality Real Estate Counselors and co-chair of the Lodging Industry Investment Council.Investors like Denver because of its healthy and diverse economy, Cahill said. Hotels in Denver, especially downtown, are consistently busy and able to charge higher rates, and that makes it attractive, even when compared to cities that many consider to be similar in prosperity and atmosphere.Nashville, like Denver, is growing quickly, full of young talent and home to vast amounts of new development, but was the city chosen most by LIIC members - 33 percent - as a place they would not buy a hotel. "One thing I think people are scared about is new supply in Nashville and the city’s ability to absorb those rooms," Cahill said. "Denver probably has similar new supply. There have been a lot of hotel rooms built in the last 10 years and the market is still cranking. People think the new supply is justified because Denver is just more diversified. If you look anywhere from the sports teams to business to marijuana, Denver has that diversified base. Nashville has some of those components, but in a smaller amount."Average daily rate for rooms in downtown Denver increased slightly to $165 per night, according to the latest Rocky Mountain Lodging Report, produced by the Colorado Hotel and Lodging Association, while revenue per available room, or RevPAR, decreased slightly from $119 to $113 year-over-year in March, most likely due to the influx of approximately 1,200 new hotel rooms downtown in 2017."The hotel investment market in Denver is more attractive to investors than the national market as a whole," said Larry Kaplan, a Denver-based senior vice president with CBRE Hotels. "What’s driving that is the strong growth in the Denver economy. Denver is truly seen as a city with all three facets of demand working on all cylinders."Those facets are corporate, which includes business travel, leisure and conventions, Kaplan said.In addition to Denver’s low unemployment and high levels of tourism, the recently approved funding plan for the expansion of the Colorado Convention Center downtown has given hotel investors renewed confidence in the market, Kaplan said.In November, hotel owners in Denver approved a 1 percent lodging tax on themselves in order to fund the $233 million renovation and expansion of the convention center. Hospitality industry officials have said the renovation plan is key to maintaining Denver’s position for securing convention business.But in order for deals to get done, there needs to be supply as well as demand, and that’s where the Denver market runs in to problems."We don’t have the supply to meet the demand," Kaplan said. "When you look at trades downtown, historically there has not been a trade of any consequence since the Embassy Suites in November 2015."The downtown Denver Embassy Suites, which sits across the street from the convention center and includes a large attached parking garage, sold in 2015 among a spate of hotel trades for $170 million, setting a new pricing record in the process at $421,836 per room. Downtown Denver’s historic Brown Palace hotel is currently under contract, but until that deal closes, the Embassy Suites trade, which occurred more than two years ago, is the most recent large hotel sale downtown."That’s actually been a challenge for institutional investors," Kaplan said. "Lack of quality product is a problem."Some activity will make its way to the suburbs, Cahill said, as downtown owners hold on to their properties and prices continue to increase.Cahill pointed to the recent sale of a small Hampton Inn in the Louisville area that attracted enough interest that more than 150 parties signed confidentiality agreements to discuss.As for Kaplan, he sees a busy second half to 2018."I’m confident to say that we will see more trades of hotels in 2018 than we’ve seen in the last several years," he said. "We believe the floodgate will begin to open for hotel transactions in Denver."The rationale for that is two-fold, Kaplan said. First, he expects owners to decide to take advantage of the strong run-up in hotel values that has occurred in the last five years, and second, investors are likely to realize that Denver is a strong growth market where construction costs are on the rise, making it more cost-effective to buy a hotel than to build one.a.hover{text-decoration:none;} a.hover:hover{text-decoration:underline;}


 Find us on 

888-226-7404

Email Us

Winner of three Journalism Awards from the National Association of Real Estate Editors (NAREE)

Award-Winning News  