The NFL Draft is 24 days away and draft boards are beginning to take shape. With the first few waves of free agency now in the rear view mirror, team needs are becoming more clear. The question is, can a top-tier defensive player in this draft class fall to Baltimore, who hold the 16th pick in the 2018 NFL Draft. In this edition of Ravens draft room, we will look at how likely it is that Virginia Tech linebacker Tremaine Edmunds falls to the Ravens.

There are so many different scenarios that could result in this happening, but first we will look at the teams picking ahead of Baltimore, who could potentially be interested in Edmunds.

Chicago Bears - The Bears desperately need a quality linebacker like Edmunds to help bolster their defense. Although, Chicago has several other pressing needs, including offensive guard and right tackle.

San Francisco 49ers - San Francisco needs help in the secondary, but with Reuben Foster’s status still up in the air, they may be interested in Edmunds. 

Oakland Raiders - Despite signing Tahir Whitehead, the Raiders still need another inside linebacker. However, cornerback is, arguably, their biggest need. Last season, Oakland addressed this need by signing NaVorro Bowman, who is still a free agent. If a top-tier cornerback falls, Oakland may not be able to pass on him. 

Miami Dolphins - The Dolphins do not have a huge need at linebacker, but they could be looking to upgrade this position. Miami is rumored to be interested in selecting a quarterback, but they also need help on the defensive line. Although, reports have surfaced that they are interested in Georgia linebacker Roquan Smith.

Buffalo Bills - Buffalo has been rumored to be interested in selecting a quarterback and even trading up to get their ‘guy’. If they stay put and don’t select a quarterback, they will likely be looking at wide receivers and defensive backs.

Washington Redskins - Washington has a need for a rangy linebacker like Edmunds, but they also need help on the defensive line and in the secondary. It is worth noting, the Redskins have been linked to Washington defensive tackle Vita Vea.

Green Bay Packers - The Packers do not necessarily need a linebacker. Green Bay desperately needs help in the secondary and potentially at wide receiver. Although, they could use another edge rusher as well.

Arizona Cardinals - The Cardinals are another team that could trade up for a quarterback. However, some have anticipated that they may stay where they are and take Lamar Jackson, if he is available. In addition, Arizona needs help on the offensive line and in the secondary.

Teams picking after Baltimore that need help at linebacker: Cowboys, Steelers and Bengals

Now that we have identified the teams that could take Edmunds, below is a quick rundown of 15 players, in no particular order, that would have to be selected in order for Edmunds to still be on the board at the 16th pick.

12 players likely locked in to be selected within the first 15 picks

Three of the following players must be selected over Edmunds within the top 15 picks

Below is an example of a mock draft that would result in Edmunds being available at the 16th pick.

A couple things to note about this sample mock draft. Several teams have multiple players listed next to them. This is to show the different routes they could conceivably take in the upcoming NFL Draft. Also, the quarterbacks are interchangeable. Who goes where is irrelevant, as far as the Ravens are concerned. What is important for Baltimore is that at least four are selected within the first 15 picks.

Clearly, there are plenty of different scenarios that would result in Edmunds being on the board at the 16th overall pick. The question is, how likely is it to happen?