
                                SHERELLE JACOBS
                            


                            
                            Last updated 05:00, October 29 2017
                            

Dancing is an escape and can even help you get through difficult times. Perhaps that's why also thousands of Cubans do it every day.

''He's stood me up," I thought, standing on the sidelines without my partner, eyeing the salsaing couples jealously. Memories of a school disco when nobody asked me to dance on account of my bifocals and choice of dress flooded my mind. I shuddered at the memory, then started fidgeting in my present attire: a black, puffy frock over the knees, sensible rather than suggestive for meeting a stranger in a bar overseas. As the fabric stuck in the heat, the evening was starting to feel like a fail.


Then my phone buzzed. My date for the evening - Andres - was waiting outside.


It was an awkward, shifty greeting among the potted palms in the lobby of the Hotel Florida: "You're a little late," I said laughing, but snippy too.

In Cuba there's plenty of dancing in the street.

"I was waiting outside the whole time," Andres replied breezily. "Plus you said you'd be wearing red so I'd recognise you. You're in black."


"Hmmph. Well, OK." I looked around shiftily, then unzipped my handbag. "Shall I pay you now?"


READ MORE: * I visited the Dirty Dancing hotel and found a depressing tourist trap * Spend the night in Prague's Dancing House * Passenger stuck at airport does a dance video, then her music idol sees it

Cubans learning to salsa at a Havana dance school.

Andres was unfazed by my awkwardness. "Yes, splendid. I hope you're ready to dance!"


I was in Havana to learn salsa. Like many solo travellers, I was in need of a partner, and had hired a "taxi dancer" through a local dance school, Salsabor a Cuba, to teach me moves at a salsa haunt. Andres pulled me on to the dance floor before I had time to be nervous. I tried to remember the basic moves, mouthing them to myself silently with every exaggerated step. 


Andres jiggled my shoulders. "You know the steps, but right now you move like a crab. Think to yourself: I am a confident Cuban muchacha. And stop trying to lead. In salsa, the woman follows the man."

Rumba dancers in Havana, Cuba.

So there I was, trying to melt away my rigor mortis muscles and bossy feminist instincts with each one-two-three step, while concealing my struggle with a demented grin. But then my footwork became sprier; my hips found their attitude. It was just how I'd imagined it, all furious exuberance and fireball energy.


Disclaimer: for a school disco reject, I'm seriously into dancing. I've been doing ballet since I can remember. There's a rhapsodic state that I can only reach through moving to music. It's why I've found solace in it through difficult times. I have an inkling it's also why thousands of Cubans do, too.


I had an hour's lesson with Jose every afternoon at La Casa del Son salsa school over the space of four days. He was a great teacher and one move we practised over and over was Dile Que Si and Dile Que No - impressive-looking salsa steps where partners swap sides with each other while displaying elegant effortlessness. Again and again, we'd land on the same spot with such mechanical precision that I feared my heels would wear holes into the antique tiles of the classroom floor. Now, armed with a solid portfolio of salsa moves, I felt ready to take on the Cuban music scene properly.

A group of Indian women rehearse a Bollywood dance.

A night at the ballet at the Gran Teatro de La Habana in all its gilded splendour was inevitable. So was a trip to the trendy suburb of Vedado to listen to Cuban jazz until the early hours. One Sunday morning, I headed to the street-art-muralled Callejon de Hamel, for its weekly outdoor rumba festival, all dreadlocked hair flicking and quick-paced drums. I even witnessed a spot of reggaeton, which is fast supplanting salsa in the cool stakes among the Cuban youth, at Cafe Cantante. The club in the basement of the National Theatre was stuffed with twentysomethings in hipster glasses and hip-hop video attire.


Exploring the city between all my dance classes and concert hopping was thrilling. There was music everywhere, from the taxis blaring Latin pop to the locals practising the saxophone on their balconies. It seemed like on most street corners there were guitar crooners scratching at their battered strings.


I also fell in love with Havana's architecture. If the city was a woman she'd be an ageing Hollywood starlet who spurned the knife, or a Charles Dickens' Miss Havisham, with all her baroqueness and decay. I rode in candy-coloured Chevrolets with broken doors; I walked through wide boulevards punctuated by untouched 1930s theatres, I stared up in marvel at towering neoclassical buildings corniced with Grecian faces.

Young Brazilian dancing Frevo in Olinda. Umbrella movements and acrobatics are part of the dance which is done to a diverse range of musical styles.



My second stop was Santiago, Cuba's most "Afro-Caribbean" outpost. Oh, the rumours: Haitian street dances, glitter-smeared Caribbean festivals and Yoruba-infused religious bembes in the homes of Orishas, all herbal healing, warrior spirits and blood sacrifice. But arriving in the middle of summer, two months before the city's biggest carnival, at first I wondered if I'd made a big mistake. The streets were choked with dirty petrol from exhaust pipes of rusting Ladas. The sun burned ferociously all day. Frankly, I felt like an asthmatic who had just walked into a smoky bar.


I consoled myself with a conga-son-salsa fusion lesson at the Casa del Caribe cultural institute: a head-spinning but hilarious session of hip swaying, partner dipping and stepping against the rhythm to pounding percussive tunes. It was wickedly fun.


Evenings in Santiago were exceptional. I clinked beers with the locals at the Casa de La Trova while listening to guitar-clutching poets sing about doomed love. In the bar next door, I gawped as a 70-year-old woman dragged her husband by his wrists in a circle across the floor during a mambo number – before he sprang up and started busting moves like Bojangles.

Ole! People dancing flamenco in the streets of Malaga, Spain.

Peering through an open window on Pio Rosado street, I spied a group practising tumba francesa, a genteel dance that dates back to the 1790s. A man and a boy slammed on drums with thundering abandon. But the dance was all gentle bows and handsome strides with marionette-straight posture, the women coyly sashaying in ruffled frocks.


My final stop was Baracoa on the eastern tip of Cuba. It was like walking into a Gabriel Garcia Marquez novel: a town square painted in psychedelic colours, horses and carts slipping down mud-slicked roads, and locals having fist-shaking arguments across shocking pink art deco porches.


The main attraction for dance-seekers is the weekly party in the nearby village of Guirito - where, among the corrugated houses and cacao trees and over a feast of boiled pork in banana leaves, the indigenous Taino practise 200-year-old dances that have been almost lost: namely loose and quick kiriba, a precursor to salsa, and dragging, foot-stomping nengon, which mimics the traditional way to grind coffee beans.

Two tango dancers show off their moves in Buenos Aires.

But I'd also come to Baracoa because I'd heard it had one of the most welcoming small-town dance halls in Cuba. As an enthusiastic foreigner, I was in demand on the dance floor. With the help of everyone from the Converse-wearing cool kids to old senor mayors with dog-tooth waistcoats and a spring in their step, I worked on my rock steps, shoulder struts, and pelvic sass. Far from limiting myself to salsa, I dabbled in rumba, mambo, and even cha-cha. Bouncing from a mojito-fuelled sugar high. I left in the early hours.


DANCE YOUR WAY AROUND THE WORLD


1. Samba in Brazil


Ear-splitting. Erotic. Elaborate. Samba – once an obscure African priestess ritual, now one of the most famous dances on Earth – is difficult to ignore. On the surface it may seem all jangling percussion, jiggling hips and skimpy get-up that glitters like Christmas lights. But squint and you'll see it's a crucial part of Brazil's social fabric. To see samba at its best, head to Rio Carnival in February for spectacular street parties and fancy dress balls. The piece de resistance is a competition between samba schools from across the country in the humongous 70,000-seater sambadrome. Think Gladiator with sequins instead of swords. In the final run-up, these schools hold dance socials open to travellers. Don a rhinestone and feather plume outfit and perform at the main event if you dare.


2. Waltz in Vienna


Ball season in Vienna is the Ascot of a nation that hasn't forgotten how to dance. The tradition goes back to a posse of bored 19th-century aristocrats who threw waltz soirees during the eight months of peace negotiations that followed the Napoleonic wars. It's since exploded into a tuxedoed tumult of 400 balls across the city stretching through January and February, which take place in venues from the marbled ceremonial halls of the Hofburg Palace to the gold-and-ivory rooms of the Vienna State Opera house. Dance lessons are the focus in the daytime, and spending a few hours exploring Vienna's traditional fashion houses to hire a gown or top hat and tails completes the experience. The Viennese pull out the stops, so aim high to fit in with all the butter satin and white-silk gloves.


3. Flamenco in Andalucia


Historians are flummoxed about whether flamenco has Ancient Indian, Dorian, Moorish, or Jewish roots, but Andalucia - with its heaving tablaos and gipsy haunts - is its cultural heartland, without a doubt. A private lesson in Seville is just the ticket for beginners. In the evenings, hit the local bars for your fix of delirious footwork and distraught guitar riffs, or head to an upmarket dinner and dance show. The end goal is duende - an almost spiritual bond that flamencos insist performers and spectators alike can experience in the heat of it all. Bring your Kleenex, it could get emotional.


4. Tango in Argentina


It's quite something to take on the haughty, tortured immigrant dance tango, born on the patios of Buenos Aires' working class tenement blocks and bred in its 19th-century brothels. Argentina's capital is still the place to experience it, whether it be through nightly dance lessons with professionals, titillating live shows over candlelit dinners, or tango concerts that flirt with jazz, rock and folk in the city's hippest bars. Make time to visit one of the capital's community dance halls, or milongas; they offer travellers a thrilling window into the scene, from the young, hip joints booming tango nuevo tunes to the more refined affairs where men and women sit - in line with tradition - on opposite sides of the room.


5. Bollywood in Mumbai


One for those who have dreamed of dressing like an Indian film star, mastering the neck wiggle and being part of a dance stampede more synchronised than the Michael Jackson's Thriller crew. Aficionados can work on their hip struts and wrist twists as part of a one-on-one choreography lesson. It's a rite of passage to see live filming on a professional set. Recording your own Bollywood tune in a recording studio followed by a private screening of an Indian blockbuster completes the experience.



                
                     - The Telegraph
            

Inside Thailand’s new adults-only island retreat

Travel Homepage


            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            