

A second person of interest related to last year’s mass shooting at a Las Vegas music festival was identified as an ammunition dealer who sold to gunman Stephen Paddock, according to newly unsealed court documents.


The dealer, Douglas Haig, was named alongside Paddock’s wife, Marilou Danley, as a possible conspirer in the October massacre that left 58 people dead and hundred more injured, The Las Vegas Review-Journal reported. Haig, who is also an engineer, admitted to selling the ammunition, but denied knowing who Paddock was or that he planned anything nefarious.


The documents, unsealed by a judge on Tuesday, were prepared by Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department in October. They state that both Haig and Danley remain persons of interest “until the investigation can rule otherwise.”


It’s not clear whether Haig remains under investigation. Danley, who was in the Philippines at the time of the attack, is not expected to be charged, Clark County Sheriff Joe Lombardo said this month.



  
                  
        
          

                                    


He reportedly used a hammer-like tool to break out two windows at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino.

(Photo by David Becker/Getty Images)



Stephen Paddock was reportedly a high-stakes gambler that lived in a retirement community in Mesquite, Nevada.

(REUTERS/Las Vegas Sun/Steve Marcus)

His father was Benjamin Hoskins Paddock, a bank robber and former FBI Most Wanted Fugitive.

(FBI/Handout via REUTERS)

Paddock killed himself before authorities breached his hotel room and investigators say he acted alone.

(REUTERS/Las Vegas Sun/Steve Marcus)

Paddock's girlfriend, Marilou Danley, was in the Philippines at the time of the shooting but he reportedly used her identification to check in at the Mandalay Bay hotel.

(Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department/Handout via REUTERS)

Stephen Paddock lived in this home in Melbourne, Florida from 2013 to 2015.

(Joe Burbank/Orlando Sentinel/TNS via Getty Images)

Police said Paddock had no criminal record.

(Photo by David Becker/Getty Images)

NBC News reported that Paddock made several large gambling transactions in recent weeks, but that it wasn't clear if they were wins or losses.

(Photo by David Becker/Getty Images)

Paddock reportedly purchased firearms at  Guns &amp; Guitars, a gun shop in Mesquite, Nevada. 

(Photo by Gabe Ginsberg/Getty Images)

Paddock's brother, Eric, said his sibling belonged to no political or religious organizations, and had no history of mental illness.

 (Photo by Marcus Yam/Los Angeles Times via Getty Images)

Paddock's brother described him as a "wealthy guy" and said he liked to play video poker and go on cruises.

(Photo by Gabe Ginsberg/Getty Images)

He worked as an accountant and had real estate investments, according to the Washington Post. 

(Photo by Drew Angerer/Getty Images)

See Gallery

According to CBS News, authorities contacted Haig after investigators found an Amazon box in Paddock’s Las Vegas hotel room that had Haig’s address on it.


Haig has told media that he met with Paddock a few weeks before the shooting but that it was only to sell him ammo ― 720 rounds of tracer ammunition, to be exact.


“I couldn’t detect anything wrong with this guy,” Haig told CBS News. “He told me exactly what he wanted, I handed him a box with the ammunition in it, he paid me and he left.”


Haig said Paddock, who authorities said died of an apparent self-inflicted wound after the shooting, told him that he planned to put on a “light show” with the tracer ammunition, which leaves behind a visible trail when fired.


Records show that Haig owns the store, Specialized Military Ammunition LLC, The Associated Press reported. The store’s website, which lists it as closed “indefinitely,” boasts a variety of projectiles.



  
                  
        
          

                                    


Sonny Melton (pictured right) is seen with his wife Heather, who survived the shooting.

(Photo via Heather Gulish Melton)

Quinton Robbins, 20, is described by his aunt as "the most kind and loving soul."

(Photo via Kilee Wells Sanders/Facebook)

Jordan McIldoon (left), 23, of British Columbia, was confirmed dead by his parents as well as fellow concert-goer Heather Gooze, who said McIldoon died in her arms. 

(Photo via Facebook)

Jassica Klymchuk, a single mother of 4, was visiting Las Vegas from Alberta with her fiancé. 

(Photo via Facebook)

Lisa Romero worked as a secretary at her local high school in Gallup, New Mexico. 

(Photo via Facebook)

Denise Burditus, of West Virginia, was attending the concert with her husband, and died in his arms. 

(Photo via Facebook)

Adrian Murfitt was a commercial fisherman in Anchorage, Alaska, the Alaska Dispatch News reported. He was 35.

(Social media/Handout via REUTERS)

John Phippen of Santa Clarita, California, was a father of five, grandfather of one and owned a remodeling and repair company. 

(Photo via GoFundMe)

Angie Gomez was a 2015 graduate of Riverside Polytechnic High School in California.

(Photo via GoFundMe)

Dana Gardner (pictured left) was attending the concert with her daughter, according to a GoFundMe page set up in her memory.

(Photo via GoFundMe)

Hannah Ahlers is survived by her husband and three children.

Photo Credit: Facebook

Carrie Barnette, 34, was in Las Vegas for a friends 30th birthday party.

Photo Credit: Nicole Johnson

Sandy Casey had taught special education for 9 years at the Manhattan Beach Unified School District. 



Photo Credit: Manhattan Beach Unified School District

Victim of the October 1, 2017 mass shooting at the Mandalay Bay in Las Vegas, Sandy Casey, is seen in this undated social media photo

(Social media/Handout via REUTERS)

Thomas Day Jr. is survived by his four children who attended the Route 91 Harvest Festival with him. 

Photo Credit: Thomas Day Jr./Facebook

Bailey Schweitzer was only 20 years old and had just started working at Infinity Communications and consulting as a receptionist 7 months ago. 

Photo Credit: Infinity Communications and Consulting

Bill Wolfe Jr. was a loving husband and a wrestling coach in Shippensburg, Pennsylvania.


(Photo via GoFundMe)

Steve Berger was celebrating his 44th birthday with a group of friends, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported.

(Photo via EFS Advisors)

Brennan Stewart had a love for music and his family requested that the funds raised from a GoFundMe account set up in his honor be used for a local youth organization that is centered around the arts.

(Photo via GoFundMe)

Michelle Vo was attending her first country music concert, according to the San Jose Mercury News.


(Photo via Facebook)

Denise Cohen was a mother of two who was attending the concert with her boyfriend.

(Social media/Handout via REUTERS)

Victim of the October 1, 2017 mass shooting at the Mandalay Bay in Las Vegas, Jordyn Rivera, is seen in this undated social media photo.

(Social media/Handout via REUTERS)

See Gallery

Haig’s LinkedIn profile also lists him as a senior engineer for Honeywell Aerospace in Arizona. The company confirmed his position there to the Review-Journal. 


Haig, speaking to reporters on Tuesday outside his Mesa, Arizona, home, said he planned to hold a press conference on Friday.


This isn’t the first time that Haig has denied having known Paddock.


In October, he gave an interview with Newsweek, during which he said federal agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives interviewed him shortly after the Oct. 1 shooting. That interview was published on Tuesday for the first time.


“After about 20 minutes they left. Haven’t heard from them since,” he said. “I have to think that if it was really, really serious or there was something that they thought I did that was wrong, (the agents) would have been kicking my door down.”


BrainCharm

Boredom Therapy

Boredom Therapy

Honest To Paws

Honest To Paws

New Ravel

New Ravel

Scribol

© 2018  Oath Inc. All rights reserved.

Get breaking news and big stories on your desktop.

You can always change your mind later.

If you change your mind, here's how to allow notifications:

If you’d like to allow notifications, please go into your browser’s Website or Privacy settings and set the permissions for AOL.com to “Allow.”