
	«  |
	Main
	|  »


Must-Read:

Robert Waldmann: A Comment on the Return of “It’s Baaaack”: "Twenty years ago, Paul Krugman warned that the liquidity trap was not just an issue in the economic history of the 30s...

Paul Krugman: It’s Baaack, Twenty Years Later: "In early 1998 I set out to reassure myself... to show that if Japan was having troubles, it was simply because the Bank of Japan wasn’t trying hard enough...

Mark Thoma: Economist's View: Links for 02-19-18

Ezra Klein: Donald Trump, Mitch McConnell, and how democracies die: "Demagogues and authoritarians do not destroy democracies. It’s established political parties...

Jonathan Rauch and Benjamin Wittes: Wittes and Rauch: Boycott the Republican Party: "If conservatives want to save the GOP from itself, they need to vote mindlessly and mechanically against its nominees...

Paul Krugman: The Gang That Couldn’t Think Straight: "Puerto Rico[’s]... residents, almost a third of whom are still without power...

Should-Read:

Binyamin Appelbaum: Senate Confirms Jerome H. Powell as Fed Chairman: "Brown and other Democrats questioned the qualifications of Marvin Goodfriend... [who] repeatedly predicted after the 2008 financial crisis that the Fed’s actions were about to unleash higher inflation...

Ursula K. LeGuin (1973): the ones who walk away from omelas: "With a clamor of bells that set the swallows soaring, the Festival of Summer came to the city of Omelas, bright towered by the sea...

Michael Gerson: Trump and the Evangelical Temptation: "As the prominent evangelical pastor Tim Keller... wrote... '"Evangelical" used to denote people who claimed the high moral ground; now, in popular usage, the word is nearly synonymous with "hypocrite"...

Susan Pfeiffer et al.: Discernment of mortality risk associated with childbirth in archaeologically derived forager skeletons: "An obstetric dilemma may have been a persistent characteristic of human evolution...

Paul Krugman: Good enough for government work? Macroeconomics since the crisis: "hen the financial crisis came policy-makers relied on some version of the Hicksian sticky-price IS-LM as their default model; these models were ‘good enough for government work’...

Charlie Stross: Dude, you broke the future!: "If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it's probably a duck. And if it looks like a religion it's probably a religion...

Daniel Drezner: Saving Speaker Ryan?: "Now is normally the time when the hard-working staff here at Spoiler Alerts would bolster a counterintuitive defense of Ryan’s speakership...

David E. Broockman et al.: The Political Behavior of Wealthy Americans: Evidence from Technology Entrepreneurs: "American politics overrepresents the wealthy. But what policies do the wealthy support?...

Thomas Piketty (2015): Putting Distribution Back at the Center of Economics: Reflections on Capital in the Twenty-First Century: "until 1914, the French elite often justified its strong opposition to the creation of a progressive income tax by referring to the principles of the French Revolution...

Cory Doctorow: Let’s Get Better at Demanding Better from Tech: "In 2018, companies from John Deere to GM to Johnson &amp; Johnson use digital locks and abusive license agreements to force you to submit to surveillance and control how you use their products...

Elise Gould: Strong employment growth and promising participation, but wage growth continues to fall short: The economy added a strong 313,000 jobs in February...

Noah Smith: "Everyone in the econ world (or the politics world, really) should read this thread about Kevin Hassett: "@dynarski 'Is now a good time to talk about how Kevin Hassett stole the intellectual property of an untenured Harvard professor &amp; her grad student?'...

Robert Waldmann: A Dynamic Macroeconomic Model with Downward Nominal Rigidity II: "This note explores the implications of downward nominal rigidity...

Teddy Roosevelt (1907): Address on the occasion of the laying of the corner stone of the Pilgrim memorial monument: "It may well be that the determination of the Government (in which, gentlemen, it will not waver), to punish certain malefactors of great wealth...

Vachel Lindsay: The Congo: A Study of the Negro Race "Listen to the yell of Leopold's ghost...

Nick Bunker: Weekend reading: “Gluts, booms, and crashes” edition: "Michael Gee looks at troubling data from the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission...

Yascha Mounk: Why so many Westerners feel like democracy has failed them: "People no longer feel that the political system is actually delivering for them...

Ann Marie Marciarille: What older people should know about Medicare and Medicaid: "Not unlike both the 111th Congress that passed the Affordable Care Act and the 115th Congress that recently amended it with the new federal tax bill, we are often in the dark about our own health care and health insurance systems...

Cheri Jacobus: The Coming Monetization of Hope Hicks and Little White Lies: "Hope Hicks never really has been a communications director but rather... the 'comfort goat' placed in the stall of Secretariat to keep him calm...

Carmen M. Reinhart and M. Belen Sbrancia (2011): The Liquidation of Government Debt: "High public debt often produces the drama of default and restructuring...

Anupam B. Jena and Andrew R. Olenski: Reduction in Firearm Injuries during NRA Annual Conventions: "We identified emergency department visits and hospitalizations for firearm injuries during NRA convention dates...

Josh Marshall: A Note on TPM, Its Past and its Future: "This is a better model. It’s not just a necessity. It’s affirmatively better...

Mark Belko: As new apartments are built around Pittsburgh, older stock is feeling the pressure: "Pittsburgh is in the midst of a supply surge, with about 4,600 units being built within the last three years...

Ann Marie Marciarille: The Amazon Threat to Kill the Hungry Tapeworm: "Health industry stock analysts and observers have been wondering for some time about Amazon's potential to enter the marketplace for health care goods and services...

N. Gregory Mankiw, David Romer, and David Weil (1992): A CONTRIBUTION TO THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH: "This paper examines whether the Solow growth model is consistent with the international variation in the standard of living...

Greg Leiserson: U.S. Inequality and Recent Tax Changes: "Distribution tables provide a first-order approximation to the change in welfare...

Marshall Steinbaum: A tweetstorm on the recent intellectual history of monopsony: "Oh, one last thing: in... 2010... Syverson touched on the Chicago revolution in antitrust...

Gauti Eggertsson, Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold: Kaldor and Piketty’s Facts: The Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States: "The macroeconomic data of the last thirty years has overturned at least two of Kaldor’s famous stylized growth facts: constant interest rates, and a constant labor share...

Janelle Shane: Do neural nets dream of electric sheep?: "Neural network[s]... used for everything from language translation to finance modeling. One of their specialties is image recognition...

Jim Cramer (2000): The Winners of the New World: "You want winners? You want me to put my Cramer Berkowitz hedge fund hat on...

Jared Bernstein: Spending, work, and taxes: "Ed Lazear.... The part that didn’t make sense...

Kenneth Rogoff: Economists vs. Scientists on Long-Term Growth: "Most economic forecasters have largely shrugged off recent advances in artificial intelligence...

Tom Bartlett and Nell Gluckman: She Left Harvard. He Got to Stay: "[Jorge] Domínguez steadily climbed the ladder at Harvard. In 1995, he was selected as director of the Weatherhead Center...

Duncan Black: The Maggie Haberman Defense Squad: "Maggie took to Twitter last night...

Andrew Carnegie (1889):  Wealth: "The problem of our age is the proper administration of wealth...

Tim Duy: Fed Changing Its Tun: "Julia Coronado of Macropolicy Perspectives catches the topic of Federal Reserve Governor Lael Brainard’s speech next week...

Martin Wolf: Xi’s power grab means China is vulnerable to the whims of one man: "It had long been evident that... Xi Jinping... could not step down... too many enemies, particularly through his anti-corruption campaign...

Simon Wren-Lewis: Labour's embrace of a customs union could end the Brexit fantasy: "The UK was always going to stay in a customs union with the EU the moment that the EU put the Irish border as one of the three items to be settled at the first stage..

Nick Bunker: Weekend reading: “diminishing demand” edition: "The Family and Medical Leave Act... notes former U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin...

Katharine G. Abraham and Melissa S. Kearney: Explaining the Decline in the U.S. Employment-to-Population Ratio: A Review of the Evidence: "Within-age-group declines in employment among young and prime age adults have been at least as important...

Jonah Golberg: American Nationalists &amp; Russia: Where Is Their Outrage?: "For others, nationalism is basically code for white-identity politics...

Ramesh Ponnuru and David Beckworth: Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy &amp; Economic Reaction: "In practice, the Fed’s current inflation target is asymmetric: The Fed is less concerned about undershooting it than overshooting it...

Zachary Torrey: TPP 2.0: The Deal Without the US: "What’s new about the CPTPP and what do the changes mean?...

Willy Lam: China Paves Way For Xi Jinping To Extend Rule Beyond 2 Terms: "'Xi Jinping has finally achieved his ultimate goal when he first embarked on Chinese politics...

Steven K. Vogel: Marketcraft: How Governments Make Markets Work (019069985X): "Modern-day markets do not arise spontaneously or evolve naturally..

David Vines and Samuel Wills: rebuilding macroeconomic theory project: an analytical assessment: "We asked a number of leading macroeconomists to describe how the benchmark New Keynesian model might be rebuilt...

Tim Taylor: Some Thoughts About Economic Exposition in Math and Words: "[Paul Romer's] notion that math is 'both more precise and more opaque' than words is an insight worth keeping...

Henrik Kleven, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard: CHILDREN AND GENDER INEQUALITY: EVIDENCE FROM DENMARK: "Despite considerable gender convergence over time, substantial gender inequality persists in all countries...

BBC: Amazon buys rights to Iain Banks' Consider Phlebas: "With the help of Brad Pitt's Plan B production company... the first of Banks' novels to feature the Culture, an interstellar utopian society...

Adrien Auclert and Matthew Rognlie: Inequality and aggregate demand: "We explore the transmission mechanism of income inequality to output...

Bishnupriya Gupta: Falling Behind and Catching up: India’s Transition from a Colonial Economy: "India fell behind during colonial rule...

Johannes A. Schwarzer: Cost-Push and Demand-Pull Inflation: Milton Friedman and the "Cruel Dilemma": "In the 1950s and 1960s... many economists... emphasized the issue of a seemingly unavoidable inflationary pressure at or even below full employment...

Joseph P. Newhouse, Mary Beth Landrum, Mary Price, J. Michael McWilliams, John Hsu, and Thomas McGuire: The Comparative Advantage of Medicare Advantage: "We find differences in the distribution of beneficiaries across H[ierarchal ]C[ondition ]C[ategories]’s between TM and MA, principally in the smaller share of MA enrollees with no coded HCC, consistent with greater coding intensity in MA...

John Lukacs: The Duel: The Eighty Day Struggle Between Churchill and Hitler: "The principal force of the twentieth century is nationalism...

Susan Pedersen: Reviews ‘Bread for All’: "The welfare state emerges in this account as the culmination of a series of individual, sometimes problematic and sometimes heroic, engagements and commitments...

Kieran Healy: On Twitter: "This seems like a plausible two-dimensional space.… ": "This seems like a plausible two-dimensional space...

Claudia Goldin: Harvard economist Claudia Goldin studies why women earn less than men: "If there’s one thing men can do to improve women’s life at work, it would be…

Nick Bunker: Weekend reading: “A jolt in the markets” edition: "This week marks the 25th anniversary of President Bill Clinton’s signing the Family and Medical Leave Act into law...

Helge Berger, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Maurice Obstfeld: The Euro Area Needs a Fiscal Union: "Without more tangible elements of a fiscal union, the euro area will remain fundamentally vulnerable to shocks...

Center for American Progress: Medicare Extra for All: "'Medicare Extra for All'...

Michael Kades: Credit card competition case before U.S. Supreme Court leaves consumers and competition in the balance: "The Supreme Court next week will hear oral arguments in an antitrust case about competition and credit card merchants’ fees...

Will Wilkinson: Anti-Democratic Populism Caused the Dreamer Impasse: "The liberal position is simply the mundane small “d” democratic position...

Anna Stansbury and Lawrence Summers: On the link between US pay and productivity: "More rapid technological progress should cause faster productivity growth...

ProGrowth Liberal: Fiscal Stability or Dire Straits: John Cochrane’s Latest Rant: "John Cochrane babbles on incoherently on what should be a straightforward issue...

Bridget Ansel: The gender gap in economics has ramifications far beyond the ivory tower: "Given the extent to which every individual’s life is intertwined with the economy...

Henry Farrell: The father of consumer sovereignty: "[Even] the mainstream of Mont Pelerin was... problematic on apartheid...

Paul Krugman: Budgets, Bad Faith and ‘Balance’: "my anger is... directed at... enablers, the professional centrists, both-sides pundits, and news organizations that spent years refusing to acknowledge that the modern G.O.P. is what it so clearly is...

Daniel Thomas: London life proves hard to give up for Brexit relocations: "Brexit.... Some of the most important conversations were... but in the kitchens and living rooms of those learning their fates in the first wave of company relocations...

Doug Campbell: Relative Prices, Hysteresis, and the Decline of American Manufacturing: "This study uses new measures of real exchange rates to study the collapse of US manufacturing employment in the early 2000s in historical and international perspective...

Martin Wolf: Brexit has replaced the UK’s stiff upper lip with quivering rage: "In part, the UK is victim of its past successes...

Recent Links:

Live from the Gilded Age: Andrew Carnegie (1889): Wealth: "The problem of our age is the proper administration of wealth..."

Live from American History: Abigail Adams* (31 March - 5 April 1776): Letter to John Adams, : "Braintree March 31, 1776...

Live from the State with the Extremely Strong Democratic Bench: Alexei Koseff: Feinstein denied Democratic endorsement in CA Senate race: "Delegates at the California Democratic Party convention... the veteran lawmaker... received only 37 percent...

Live from the Orange-Haired Baboon Cage: So former Minnesota Congressman and Gingrich henchman Vin Weber was one of Putin's stooges in his attempt to keep Ukraine undemocratic and far from western Europe. This is somewhat of a surprise. But not too much of one. The rule of thumb is becoming: don't be surprised by anything somebody still a member of the Republican Party today will do or has done: Allegra Kirkland: Who Was In The Fateful Meeting That Rick Gates Lied To Mueller About?: "Just this month, Gates lied to Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s team and to the FBI about what transpired during a spring 2013 meeting...

Live from "Spukhafte Fernwirkung": Yoon-Ho Kim (1999): A Delayed Choice Quantum Eraser: "This paper reports a 'delayed choice quantum eraser' experiment...

Live from the Grove of Cognitive Philosophy Academe: Horsing around by reading the very wise and clever Scott Aaronson: The Ghost in the Quantum Turing Machine, instead of doing work this morning, has led me to be thunderstruck by an excellent insight of his: Newcomb's Problem is, in its essentials, the same as the problem of Self-Locating Belief, and the solution by Adam Elga: Defeating Dr. Evil with Self-Locating Belief makes as much sense as a solution of one as the other. (I think it makes enormous sense as a solution to both, but YMMV.) As Scott puts it...

Live from Spooky Action at a Distance: Question: Don't decoherent branches of an Everettian wave function recohere every time somebody runs a quantum eraser? In what sense is testing the existence of decohered states "hopelessly impractical"? Sean Carroll: Beyond Falsifiability: Normal Science in a Multiverse: "(3) There exist tests that are possible to do within the laws of physics, but are hopelessly impractical...

Live from Tarantinoland: Jules Winnfield: Pulp Fiction: Ezekiel 25:17. "'The path of the righteous man is beset on all sides by the inequities of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men...

Live from the Orange-Haired Baboon Cage: Trump is meaner in rhetoric than the orthodox Republicans, but not meaner than them in their lack of concern for the well-being of Americans: Jonathan Chait: Obama’s Gone, So Republicans Stopped Sabotaging the Economy: "During the Obama era, Democrats frequently believed, but only rarely uttered aloud in official forums, that the Republican Party was engaged in economic sabotage...

Live from Monticello: Humans... can be thought of... as rational beings, as rational_izing_ beings, and as debating beings.... Jefferson is that he was outsized and gigantic in all three of these aspects: Thomas Jefferson (1981): Notes on the State of Virginia, Query XVIII: Manners: "It is difficult to determine on the standard by which the manners of a nation may be tried, whether catholic, or particular...

Live from Rant Central: Charlie Stross has had it with you people—those of you people who abandon worldbuilding and the exploration of possible human civilizations different from ours in the future direction for spectacle, and warmed over Napoleonic or WWII stories in fancy future dress: Charlie Stross: Why I barely read SF these days: "Storytelling is about humanity and its endless introspective quest to understand its own existence and meaning...

Weekend Reading: Elizabeth Warrn: Address to NCAI: "I want to start by thanking Chairwoman Andrews-Maltais for that introduction...

Weekend Reading: Winston Churchill on January 27, 1942 on the War Situation

Weekend Reading: Adam Smith (1776): Publicly Funded Education: "In the progress of the division of labour, the employment of the far greater part of those who live by labour...

Comment of the Day: RW: Disrupting Education: "'Will we ever create tech (even for a few subjects) that will work as well as good one-on-one tutoring?'...

Comment of the Day: Meno: Disruptive Technology and Education: "The main example of "disruptive" technology Rogoff gives in education is replacing live lectures with filmed ones. Quite obviously this is 1940s technology...

Comment of the Day: Robert Waldmann: Fiscal Policy: "I think that Jared Bernstein puts much too little emphasis on caveat 2b—the FOMC...

Comment of the Day: Ethan: LIVE FROM GLOBAL WARMING GEHENNA: "We used to call it 'Global Warming'. Later we called it 'Climate Change'. I have long preferred to call it 'Excess Solar Energy Trapped in the Bio-sphere'..."

Books:

Economic History:




				March 11, 2018 at 01:22 PM in Streams: Equitable Growth, Weblogs  | Permalink
			


		
     
 | 


 | 
     

 | 
     
     
     

	

Must-Read:

Robert Waldmann: A Comment on the Return of “It’s Baaaack”: "Twenty years ago, Paul Krugman warned that the liquidity trap was not just an issue in the economic history of the 30s...

Paul Krugman: It’s Baaack, Twenty Years Later: "In early 1998 I set out to reassure myself... to show that if Japan was having troubles, it was simply because the Bank of Japan wasn’t trying hard enough...

Mark Thoma: Economist's View: Links for 02-19-18

Ezra Klein: Donald Trump, Mitch McConnell, and how democracies die: "Demagogues and authoritarians do not destroy democracies. It’s established political parties...

Jonathan Rauch and Benjamin Wittes: Wittes and Rauch: Boycott the Republican Party: "If conservatives want to save the GOP from itself, they need to vote mindlessly and mechanically against its nominees...

Paul Krugman: The Gang That Couldn’t Think Straight: "Puerto Rico[’s]... residents, almost a third of whom are still without power...

Please enable JavaScript if you would like to comment on this blog.

The purpose of this weblog is to be the best possible portal into what I am thinking, what I am reading, what I think about what I am reading, and what other smart people think about what I am reading...

"Bring expertise, bring a willingness to learn, bring good humor, bring a desire to improve the world—and also bring a low tolerance for lies and bullshit..." — Brad DeLong

"I have never subscribed to the notion that someone can unilaterally impose an obligation of confidentiality onto me simply by sending me an unsolicited letter—or an email..." — Patrick Nielsen Hayden

"I can safely say that I have learned more than I ever would have imagined doing this.... I also have a much better sense of how the public views what we do. Every economist should have to sell ideas to the public once in awhile and listen to what they say. There's a lot to learn..." — Mark Thoma

"Tone, engagement, cooperation, taking an interest in what others are saying, how the other commenters are reacting, the overall health of the conversation, and whether you're being a bore..." — Teresa Nielsen Hayden

"With the arrival of Web logging... my invisible college is paradise squared, for an academic at least. Plus, web logging is an excellent procrastination tool.... Plus, every legitimate economist who has worked in government has left swearing to do everything possible to raise the level of debate and to communicate with a mass audience.... Web logging is a promising way to do that..." — Brad DeLong

"Blogs are an outlet for unexpurgated, unreviewed, and occasionally unprofessional musings.... At Chicago, I found that some of my colleagues overestimated the time and effort I put into my blog—which led them to overestimate lost opportunities for scholarship. Other colleagues maintained that they never read blogs—and yet, without fail, they come into my office once every two weeks to talk about a post of mine..." — Daniel Drezner

Looking Forward to Four Years During Which Most if Not All of America's Potential for Human Progress Is Likely to Be Wasted

With each passing day Donald Trump looks more and more like Silvio Berlusconi: bunga-bunga governance, with a number of unlikely and unforeseen disasters and a major drag on the country--except in states where his policies are neutralized.

 Nevertheless, remember: WE ARE WITH HER!

More...

"I now know it is a rising, not a setting, sun" --Benjamin Franklin, 1787

Scratch | HIGHLIGHTED ONLY | HIGHLIGHTED LIST | 
THE HONEST BROKER | 
EQUITABLE GROWTH | 
RSS FEED | Short Biography | 
Talks, Presentations, and Events | 
Edit Posts | 
Edit Pages | 
Edit Content | 
Berkeley Open Access | 
Subscribe to Grasping Reality's Feed... | 
Books Worth Reading | 
Discussions |||| 

AFFILIATIONS: 
Equitable Growth - Manifesto  | 
Berkeley - Blum Center | 
NBER |||| 

OTHER STREAMS:
Readings and Reviews | 
DeLong FAQ | 
The Honest Broker | 
Ann Marie Marciarille | 
Across the Wide Missouri... | 
Liveblogging History | Storify | 
On Social Media | This.!  | Mark Thoma | Paul Krugman | Noah Smith and Steve Randy Waldman | Zeynep Tufekci | Oliver Willis | Marginal Revolution | Cosma Shalizi | Worthwhile Canadian Initiative | Angry Bear | Antonio Fatas | 
