Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:53 pm

Angel King, of Hayti Heights, Mo., said there are many unanswered questions about the 2011 death of her 25-year-old son at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center, a large state prison in Bonne Terre. Officials said Michael Lorenzo King died from excited delirium syndrome, a controversial condition. He'd been restrained by a cell extraction team of corrections officers. Photo by Jesse Bogan, jbogan@post-dispatch. 

The Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center is a large prison in Bonne Terre, Mo., 60 miles south of St. Louis. Photo by Jesse Bogan, jbogan@Post-Dispatch.com. 

A photo of Michael Lorenzo King hangs in his mother's home in Hayti Heights, Mo., on Oct. 31, 2017. King died in 2011 from a bizarre condition, excited delirium syndrome, after being restrained by a cell extraction team at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center in Bonne Terre. His family questions the official ruling. Photo by Jesse Bogan, jbogan@Post-Dispatch.com. 

One page from the Missouri Department of Corrections investigative report that was released to the Post-Dispatch about the death of inmate Mike King at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center in Bonne Terre. 

Undated family photo of Michael Jerden, who died at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center. 

Booking photos at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center in Bonne Terre. Michael King, left,  parole officer recommended he be placed in a residential mental health treatment program 

Angel King, of Hayti Heights, Mo., said there are many unanswered questions about the 2011 death of her 25-year-old son at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center, a large state prison in Bonne Terre. Officials said Michael Lorenzo King died from excited delirium syndrome, a controversial condition. He'd been restrained by a cell extraction team of corrections officers. Photo by Jesse Bogan, jbogan@post-dispatch. 

The Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center is a large prison in Bonne Terre, Mo., 60 miles south of St. Louis. Photo by Jesse Bogan, jbogan@Post-Dispatch.com. 

A photo of Michael Lorenzo King hangs in his mother's home in Hayti Heights, Mo., on Oct. 31, 2017. King died in 2011 from a bizarre condition, excited delirium syndrome, after being restrained by a cell extraction team at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center in Bonne Terre. His family questions the official ruling. Photo by Jesse Bogan, jbogan@Post-Dispatch.com. 

One page from the Missouri Department of Corrections investigative report that was released to the Post-Dispatch about the death of inmate Mike King at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center in Bonne Terre. 

Undated family photo of Michael Jerden, who died at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center. 

Booking photos at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center in Bonne Terre. Michael King, left,  parole officer recommended he be placed in a residential mental health treatment program 

BONNE TERRE, Mo. • Deep inside the enormous prison here, the morning Michael Lorenzo King died, a call was made up the chain of command. Somebody wanted an option to use force.

King, 25, an inmate in the administrative segregation unit, was amped up more than usual, medical personnel would tell investigators. He refused to lower his arms. For two hours, he was crying, trembling, making incoherent statements and harming himself.

It was decided that King needed to be moved to the mental health unit for his safety.

That’s when the “goon squad” came for him. The special team of corrections officers is informally named for its grim responsibilities and intimidating uniforms: black jumpsuits, helmets and tactical gloves.

In the event an inmate won’t comply with verbal commands, the squad rushes in. One officer pins the man down with a large shield while four other officers have a specific arm or leg to grab and help hogtie him.

Missouri’s prison system relies on these teams to help extract inmates from cells and maintain control. But the incident with King turned out disastrously.

And nearly all of it and the follow-up happened away from the public eye.

At a time when the Missouri Department of Corrections has been under fire for anything from its parole board toying with inmates to quietly paying out millions of dollars in damages to female corrections officers who alleged they were harassed by co-workers, the Post-Dispatch took a look at how death in the prison system is investigated.

Not only is the agency responsible for the care and treatment of some of the state’s most mentally troubled residents, the corrections department often polices itself by handling inmate deaths internally. The release of information is tightly controlled. No video. Even the warden’s name can be blacked out of documents.

“It’s a secret world,” Jim Bruce, a civil rights attorney in southeast Missouri, said of dealing with the corrections department. “Only the people who are in charge have control of the records.”

About 100 people die in prison each year, mainly of natural causes. The handling of two unusual deaths inside Missouri’s largest prison shows that investigations can be frustrating for families and inconclusive.

According to an incomplete narrative of events provided about King’s case, he didn’t cooperate with the squad. Shortly after King was delivered to a padded cell in restraints, a nurse noticed he wasn’t responsive. Prison workers yelled and threw water on him but he didn’t flinch.

Efforts to resuscitate him were unsuccessful. So were family efforts to get answers from the corrections department about his bruised corpse. Years later, the family’s basic question remains unanswered:

What happened to Michael Lorenzo King inside the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center on the morning of March 23, 2011?

According to his death certificate and autopsy report, King died from excited delirium syndrome, a controversial cause-of-death determination that forensic pathologists and emergency medicine physicians sometimes associate with people who were in a state of acute psychosis and were restrained by police. The underlying processes resulting in death are unclear. Civil libertarians caution that excited delirium, which accounts for about 250 deaths a year in the United States, has been used to justify lethal use of force, while police groups say it is indeed a condition.

Acute psychosis and schizoaffective disorder are listed as contributing factors in King’s death.

“He had a mind of a sixth-grader,” said his mother, Angel King, of Hayti Heights, in the Bootheel region of the state. “You could say the word ‘suppose,’ he couldn’t tell you the definition.”

She remains skeptical about her son’s death.

“It doesn’t add up,” she said. “It still doesn’t.”

A public records request submitted by the Post-Dispatch about the King case came back with an investigative report that had entire sections blacked out.

Details seemed to justify the option to use force but didn’t provide information about moving King. Yet the agency found probable cause to believe some employees violated five departmental policies in the incident, including: Be truthful and report inappropriate actions or misconduct.

The corrections department wouldn’t elaborate.

“The original report includes protected security, personnel and offender medical information that can’t be disclosed, so we’re unable to go into great detail,” agency spokeswoman Karen Pojmann wrote in an email. “The investigation resulted in appropriate disciplinary actions up to and including dismissal. One employee was dismissed following completion of the investigation. Several other staff members were disciplined for policy violations not directly related to the death.”

King’s family said they didn’t know the agency took disciplinary action.

The investigative report also did not mention the following details verified by the Post-Dispatch through interviews and family records:

• Six months before King died, his parole officer recommended he be placed in a residential mental health treatment program. He had violated parole on a robbery conviction.

• The squad sent to move King used a shield to subdue him that had a shocking mechanism as an added feature. Investigators wanted to know if the shield caused his death, but the pathologist ruled that it was not lethal. The corrections officer who used it, Scott McFarland, was fired. “He fought a lot,” McFarland, 45, said in an interview. “He was hard to control.”

King’s case turned up in a review of 34 deaths mainly at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center, 60 miles south of St. Louis, where local police allow the prison to investigate its own matters.

St. Francois County Coroner James Coplin is the exception. He determines the cause and manner of death of each case by relying on autopsies, corrections department investigators and his own analysis.

Of all the prison deaths he has handled, he said a 2008 case stands out more than any other: Michael James Jerden. The 47-year-old’s neck was cut while he lay in bed. Jerden’s cell, which didn’t have a door, opened to a bay shared by multiple inmates.

Coplin said the crime scene wasn’t handled well.

“It wasn’t secured from the get-go,” he said.

According to the investigative report, suicide was a possibility, but a weapon was never found.

“That’s very questionable,” said Coplin.

Like the King family, Jerden’s sister Felicia Jerden, of St. Ann, feels like the corrections department left her in the dark and didn’t aggressively investigate.

“They didn’t do their job,” she said.

Her brother had paranoid schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and was in prison for weapons charges. Tattoos marked him as the member of a white prison gang.

“He was a sick man, but he didn’t deserve to go out the way he went out,” Jerden said. “We have no peace with this. Somebody can kill and get away with it.”

Nearly a decade after Jerden died, Coplin said the manner of death — homicide or suicide — remains undetermined.

Corrections officers who responded to the incident didn’t believe Jerden could have committed suicide because his head looked nearly cut off.

That no weapon was recovered from the scene was “certainly a cause of concern for everyone involved,” former St. Louis University forensic pathologist Jane Turner said in a telephone interview from Canada.

Turner used to do most prisoner autopsies in eastern Missouri as part of a contract SLU had with the corrections department.

“The initial focus was on saving his life,” Turner said about the missing weapon. “The implement used could be lost in all the chaos, especially if it’s something that was improvised.”

Ultimately, she did not decide on manner of death.

“Looking at the whole picture,” she recalled, “a suicide seemed more likely than a homicide.”

Several “concerns, errors and problems” were listed in a 2009 debriefing memo about the Jerden incident sent from warden Steve Larkins to the central office in Jefferson City. Among them:

• A paramedic used a cellphone to take unauthorized pictures of the body.

• Three or four offenders were able to exit the cell area with an ice cart. “This was not noticed until the next day and consequently the weapon could possibly have been removed from the wing in that manner.”

• A review of videotapes indicated the prison wing was “likely being run by a black gang.”

• Jerden had “fairly significant” mental health issues that hadn’t been addressed by a psychiatrist at the prison, even though he had threatened to kill everyone and cut their heads off at a previous facility.

This summer, the corrections department said it completed talks with local law enforcement agencies near prisons and the Missouri Highway Patrol about taking the lead or assisting in investigations where foul play is suspected.

Bonne Terre Police Chief Douglas Calvert said he hasn’t been asked to help investigate crimes inside the prison at the edge of the old mining town.

“It’s never really been a matter of discussion,” he said. “Most of the institutions take care of their own problem.”




The St. Louis Community Release Center is a 550-bed facility for people coming out of the state prison system. An internal investigation alleges all kinds of mishaps.  




It recommends investing $189 million in development and funding 'array' of community-based mental health and substance abuse treatment programs. 

Jesse Bogan is a reporter for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.


                                    
                                        Whenever Jesse Bogan posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.



Get breaking news delivered to your inbox as it develops.