Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy with a slight chance of thunderstorms. High 89F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:54 pm

Terrell Dobbins

Terrell Dobbins

CHRISTIANSBURG — Terrell Antonnio Dobbins told investigators that he didn’t intend to hurt anyone when he held out a knife and demanded money at the Check Into Cash office in Christiansburg, a prosecutor said Monday in Montgomery County Circuit Court.

Dobbins, 32, said that he had been laid off and couldn’t find the loan he needed to pay his expenses and help his mother and grandmother until he was called back to work, Assistant Commonwealth’s Attorney Chris Dorsey said, recounting the evidence against the Radford resident. Check Into Cash had turned down Dobbins’ request for a loan, so he came back and took the money anyhow, Dorsey said.

Dobbins now realizes that was a big mistake, Dobbins’ attorney, Bev Davis of Radford, said outside the hearing.

Facing Judge Robert Turk, Dobbins said that he was sorry. He pleaded guilty to robbery and to eluding police officers, and in a plea agreement received a sentence of 10 years in prison, to be suspended after he served two years and five months.

Turk said that Dobbins will be supervised by the probation office for 10 years after his release and must pay court costs, plus restitution of $5. The small amount is because all the rest of the money that Dobbins took was recovered by police, Davis noted.

Dobbins also must avoid any contact with Check Into Cash worker Lucinda Kinzer, who he’d threatened with a knife, Turk said.

Dorsey recounted the details of the May 2 robbery as part of the plea process, saying that someone in the Check Into Cash parking lot thought Dobbins looked suspicious as he got out of his Dodge Durango because he was dressed all in black and had a bandanna over his face. The witness took a picture of Dobbins’ license plate and later gave it to police.

Kinzer told investigators that she was in the store and heard the door close, then the click of its locking mechanism, Dorsey said. She looked up and saw Dobbins, who stands well over 6 feet tall, approaching with a knife. He asked where the money was and she showed him the cash drawer. Dobbins looked inside and asked where the rest of the money was, Dorsey said.

With the knife held against her back, the woman led Dobbins to a desk where more money was kept. Dobbins then told the woman to sit in a chair, and left with money, Dorsey said.

Police quickly spotted Dobbins’ Durango and a chase ensued along Radford’s Rock Road with speeds reaching 100 mph, Dorsey said. Officers stopped pursuit to prevent someone being injured but Radford police tracked down Dobbins at his home. Soon Christiansburg police Inv. David Moye was interviewing Dobbins, who confessed to the robbery.

“Terrell is a good man who made a bad mistake,” Davis said outside the hearing. “He accepted the plea offer because it was fair and he didn’t want to put any more stress on Ms. Kinzer or his family. Terrell will pull his time and become a productive member of society upon his release.”

Terrell Dobbins

Mike Gangloff covers crime, breaking news and courts in the New River Valley. 



                                    
                                        Whenever Mike Gangloff posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
