


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A judge declined to limit Daniel Morse's law practice as a condition of his probation, leaving that up to Office of Lawyer Regulation

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Daniel Morse
(Photo: Milwaukee County Sheriff's Office)

After 39 years of practicing law, Daniel Morse was reduced to begging a judge for his own career Tuesday.


"I'm devastated," he told Milwaukee County Circuit Judge Joseph Wall. "My character and integrity have been challenged. It's as bad as it gets for a 64-year-old lawyer." 


He said if he couldn't work as a lawyer, he didn't know how he would support his family, including his 91-year-old mother in Florida.


Morse of Fox Point was charged last year with five felonies and three misdemeanors for transferring money from a Dodge County estate of Mary Gass to his personal and business accounts. He was the personal representative and attorney for the estate in 2014. 



	
LIKE  US ON FACEBOOK: Get the latest Journal Sentinel news in your feed
	
	

In January, he pleaded guilty to the three misdemeanor counts of theft in a business setting after the state agreed to dismiss the felonies.


Part of the plea deal called for Assistant District Attorney Bruce Landgraf to recommend a suspended jail term of one year and two years of probation, with the condition that Morse not work in any fiduciary capacity —  including as a lawyer.


And if Morse ultimately got a much lesser sanction from the Office of Lawyer Regulation, which is also prosecuting Morse for ethics violations, Morse could seek a reduction of the condition time in the theft case.


But Wall chose not to impose the condition, meaning that, for now, Morse can continue to practice. He was ordered to do 40 hours of community service and faces a possible six months in the House of Correction if he violates any other conditions for the one year of probation Wall imposed, one less than the plea deal.


Wall cited Morse's history of law practice without any complaints, his family support and record of work in his church. Morse began tearing up as Wall read from his adult children's letters, and a bailiff handed him tissues.


After the hearing, the same bailiff, shook his hand and said good luck. Morse went to the jail later with his attorney to provide a DNA sample.


Before the plea agreement, Morse moved to dismiss the charges on the grounds that as a personal representative, he was the owner of the money at issue and he couldn't steal from himself. If the heirs of the estate suffered any damages, they could bring a civil action against Morse or the bond he posted as personal representative, in a separate action, he argued.


Wall, however, agreed with the prosecution that such an interpretation would irrationally allow every personal representative to take estate assets before probate was complete and denied the motion.


During the past two years, while Morse was first facing regulatory and then criminal charges, he has been able to practice law because his license remained in good standing in Wisconsin and Florida, where he also maintains an office.


RELATED: Convicted lawyers still practicing 


William Weigel, Office of Lawyer Regulation litigation counsel, said the office did not ask the state Supreme Court to immediately suspend Morse’s license before a regulatory hearing was conducted. Weigel noted that at the time Morse had denied several of the regulatory charges brought against him. In June 2016, the regulatory agency charged Morse with six counts of misconduct, including conduct involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit and misrepresentation in his handling of the Gass Estate.


“There are a lot of people who we charge with very serious misconduct,” Weigel said, noting that “many are able to continue practicing unless or until there is Supreme Court action” to suspend or revoke the lawyer’s license.


OLR, which is the state Supreme Court's policing arm, is asking that Morse's license be suspended for two years, records show.


The OLR complaint states that bank records for the Gass estate "reflect that Morse wrote checks and made electronic fund transfers totaling over $25,000 to himself or his law office," noting those records were obtained by a second lawyer hired by the Gass heirs.


After an order by the probate court in Dodge County, Morse repaid the estate $26,037, though he did not produce the estate's financial records, the complaint states.


The OLR can ask the Supreme Court to suspend an attorney’s license before its disciplinary process is completed if the agency believes "that the attorney's continued practice poses a threat to the public and to the administration of justice," Weigel said in an email.


It can also seek immediate suspension if the lawyer is convicted of a serious crime that regulators expect will result in a suspension of at least six months, he said, but rarely does.  The Supreme Court  last year issued a summary suspension against Milwaukee attorney Michael Krill, who is being investigated by the FBI for fraud.


In Morse's case, the OLR action was suspended in May after the criminal charges were filed.  


If Morse continues to defend the OLR action, it will likely take more than a year for the process, which includes a hearing before a court-appointed referee, to conclude with a ruling from the Supreme Court on what discipline, if any, it should impose.


Consumers could find information about the regulatory complaint on legal websites, though the information was not easily accessible.


If a person clicks on Wisbar.org, the popular lawyer search tool maintained by the State Bar of Wisconsin, they would find that Morse is an attorney in "good standing." Those words are highlighted in green.


Kristen Durst, the bar's public relations coordinator, said in an email that “we do very clearly provide a link to the (Supreme) court’s database … that houses this information” about a lawyer’s disciplinary record and pending regulatory charges.


Until Tuesday, however, that link did not appear on the page where an individual attorney is profiled, only in smaller print at the bottom of the previous page that lists only a lawyer and his address. It was added to the top of the profile page and made more prominent on the previous page after the Journal Sentinel pointed out its absence.


Keith Sellen, OLR executive director, said in an email that he talked to the State Bar several years ago about posting information regarding pending or past charges brought against individual lawyers but the bar chose not to do so.


“I have not raised the issue again,” Sellen said.


Weigel said consumers can conduct their own Google searches to check a lawyer’s record. Pending regulatory or criminal charges may appear on those searches, he said.



	
Sun Prairie firefighter killed by explosion that destroyed his own bar





Tensions boil in tiny Northwoods school district after board member asks about finances




	
'Pivot counties' will be key in fight for Senate control



 
