


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Terence Jannke, 50, was also ordered to serve 10 years of extended supervision after his release in the death of Holly Nehls, 42.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Terence Jannke
(Photo: Courtesy of Dodge County Sheriff's Office)

A Watertown man was sentenced to 20 years in prison Monday for supplying heroin to a woman who died in Dodge County after injecting the drug, authorities said.


Terence Jannke, 50, was also ordered  to serve 10 years of extended supervision after his release in the overdose death of Holly Nehls, 42, according to the Dodge County District Attorney's Office.


Nehls died May 31, 2016, after injecting heroin for the first time, according to a criminal complaint.


Jannke was found guilty of first-degree reckless homicide, maintaining a drug-trafficking place and the possession with intent to deliver heroin, according to state court records.


Gabriel Joseph Brandl, 31, of Clyman, was sentenced in January 2017 to seven years in prison and 13 years of extended supervision in connection with Nehls' death, according to court records.


Brandl pleaded no contest and was found guilty of first-degree reckless homicide/delivery of drugs.


He and Nehls obtained the heroin from Jannke at Clyman Park. After Nehls died, Brandl drove around with her body before dropping it off at Watertown Memorial Hospital, according to a criminal complaint.


Jason Twaite, 35, of Watertown, who shared a home with Jannke, was convicted of maintaining a drug-trafficking place in connection with Nehls' death, according to court records.


He received a stayed 12-month jail sentence and was placed on two years of probation, according to the records.



	
Sun Prairie firefighter killed by explosion that destroyed his own bar





Tensions boil in tiny Northwoods school district after board member asks about finances




	
'Pivot counties' will be key in fight for Senate control



 


 
