A car trying to pass plowed head-on into an oncoming car with four people in it, killing one and injuring four others. The driver of the car was booked into jail for investigation of vehicular homicide.

A 31-year-old woman was killed and four others — including two children — seriously injured in a head-on collision late Saturday on State Route 109, three miles northwest of Hoquiam, according to the Washington State Patrol.

Troopers booked the driver of one of the vehicles — the only person not injured in the wreck — into the Grays Harbor County Jail for investigation of vehicular homicide. The WSP said alcohol was believed to have been involved in the accident.

The patrol identified the driver from Belfair, however, The Seattle Times generally does not identify crime suspects until they’ve been charged.

A passenger in that man’s car, identified as Guenevere Fletcher, 30, was airlifted to Harborview Medical Center, where she was in serious condition.

The state patrol said the man was driving a 1998 BMW 540 sedan northbound on Highway 109 when he tried to pass another vehicle, which was not involved in the crash, about 9:40 p.m. He struck a 2002 Dodge Neon driven by 29-year-old Brian Jasper of Aberdeen head-on, then went off the left side of the road and rolled over. The Jasper vehicle ended up blocking Highway 109 for more than six hours while troopers investigated.

Jasper was taken to Grays Harbor Community Hospital in Aberdeen with serious injuries, according to the state patrol.

The woman who was killed was a passenger in Jasper’s car, as were a 12-year-old boy, who was airlifted to Mary Bridge Children’s hospital, and a 6-year-old girl, who was taken by ambulance to the community hospital.

The identities of the dead passenger and injured children were withheld by the state patrol at the request of family, according to a state patrol news release.


          The opinions expressed in reader comments are those of the author only, and do not reflect the opinions of The Seattle Times.
          