By Thomasi McDonald



                                            tmcdonald@newsobserver.com
                                        


                        
                            October 12, 2017 05:29 PM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

 Former N.C. State basketball star Anthony Grundy has been arrested in New York and jailed under a more than $1 million bail after failing to appear in a Wake County courtroom six years ago on charges of being a habitual drunken driver.

Grundy, 38, now lives on W. Muhammad Ali Blvd in Louisville, Ky. He was arrested at the Kew Gardens Courthouse in Queens, N.Y., and charged with failing to appear in court on felony charges of habitual impaired driving, five misdemeanor counts of failing to appear in court and two misdemeanor counts of misdemeanor probation violation, a spokesman with the Wake County jail reported.

Grundy arrived at the Wake County jail from New York on Oct. 6. He is being held in lieu of a $1,135,000 bail, the jail spokesman said.

Grundy was an All-ACC guard who played his final season with the Wolfpack in 2002. He was charged with being a habitual impaired driver on Feb. 2, 2011 during a traffic stop. 

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

Grundy had three prior DWI convictions and a pending charge in Wake County at the time of the 2011 traffic stop.

Grundy, who played pro basketball in Europe after his college career, was pulled over shortly after 1 p.m. by a Wake County sheriff’s deputy, according to court records. The deputy reported that Grundy’s blood alcohol content was .16, or twice the legal limit.

Grundy, then 31, was stopped on U.S. 401 South by Deputy J.C. Fisher II The deputy reported that he noticed a 2006 Dodge Charger weaving in and out of traffic at a speed higher than the posted speed limit. The driver of the Dodge also failed to use his signal lights, Fisher reported.

Fisher reported that Grundy, the driver, had “red, glassy eyes” and that he “admitted alcohol consumption,” court records show.






In 2004, Grundy was found guilty of the offense after he reportedly had a .15 blood alcohol content. He was convicted again in 2006 and sentenced to 12 months in prison. The active jail sentence was suspended, however, by a judge who ordered that Grundy be placed on supervised probation for 18 months, surrender his driver’s license and submit to random urine tests, court records show.

Grundy was again convicted of the offense in July 2010. A judge sentenced him to two years in prison, but again suspended the active jail sentence and placed Grundy under 24 months of probation, court records show.

State court records show that at the time of that sentencing, Grundy already had another DWI charge pending from the month before. 

On Aug. 18 of that year, Wake District Court Judge Jane Gray allowed Grundy to travel overseas during his probation term to play professional basketball in Athens, Greece. The judge ordered Grundy to maintain monthly contact with his probation officer and to report to his probation officer when he returned to the United States, according to records filed at the Wake Clerk of Courts Office.

Last Friday, upon Grundy’s arrival in Raleigh, Wake County District Court Judge Jennifer Knox ordered Grundy to surrender his passport as a condition of his release

Grundy was scheduled to appear in court on Feb. 24, 2011 for the habitual impaired driving charge. A warrant for his arrest was issued the following day.

Grundy was named first team all-ACC during his senior year in college. He signed a 10-day contract with the NBA’s Atlanta Hawks and played 12 games during the 2005-06 season. Grundy traveled overseas in 2007 and played the next six years for teams in Italy, Greece, the Philippines, Turkey and Iran.

If Grundy is convicted of being a habitual impaired driver, North Carolina statutes stipulate that he must serve at least 12 months in prison, and that sentence cannot be suspended.

Grundy remained in custody Thursday at the Wake County jail. He is scheduled to appear in district court Friday at 9 a..m., court records show.

Thomasi McDonald: 919-829-4533, @thomcdonald



                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    