نستخدم ملفات الكوكيز لنسهل عليك استخدام مواقعنا الإلكترونية ونكيف المحتوى والإعلانات وفقا لمتطلباتك واحتياجاتك الخاصة، لتوفير ميزات وسائل التواصل الاجتماعية ولتحليل حركة المرور لدينا...اعرف أكثر
                    

We use cookies to personalize content and ads , to provide social media features and to analyze our traffic ... Learn more
                    

An Iraqi interior ministry official said ISIS's head Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is alive and being treated at a field hospital in Syria after being wounded in an air strike.

"We have irrefutable information and documents from sources within the terrorist organization that al-Baghdadi is still alive and hiding" in Syria's northeastern Jazira region, said intelligence and counterterrorism department head Abu Ali al-Basri, quoted today in the government daily As-Sabah.

ISIS retains a significant presence in the desert plains of northeastern Syria's Hasakeh province despite having lost most of its cross-border "caliphate" which once also covered a third of neighboring Iraq. Basri said that Baghdadi was suffering from "injuries, diabetes and fractures to the body and legs that prevent him from walking without assistance".

The militant chief had been wounded in "air raids against ISIS strongholds in Iraq". Iraqi authorities last week published a list of "internationally wanted terrorist leaders" headed by the self-proclaimed ISIS "caliph", born in 1971, under the name Ibrahim Awad Ibrahim Ali al-Badri al-Samarrai.

Last June, Russia said it had probably killed Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in a late May air raid near Raqa in Syria, but later said it was still trying to verify his fate. In September, an American military chief said the jihadist chief was still alive and probably hiding in eastern Syria's Euphrates Valley.

An Iraqi news agency reported that ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi has fled from Iraq in a yellow taxi towards Syria ...

In the wake of its several military losses recently —namely the loss of Sirte (in Libya) in December 2016, Ramadi ...

A Hezbollah-run media unit said on Friday the ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was reported to have been in the Syrian ...

The United States is still trying to verify a purported recording of ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who had been ...