By Rory Tingle For Dailymail.com  


 Published: 09:29 EDT, 26 June 2018  |  Updated: 06:07 EDT, 27 June 2018  





 6

View  comments




From Route 66 to the hurricane-battered heritage of Puerto Rico and the earliest homes built by freed black slaves in Connecticut: these are America's 11 most endangered historic places of 2018, according to the National Trust for Historic Preservation.


The annual list highlights architectural and cultural sites that the National Trust deems at risk from development or neglect, and has included nearly 300 places since it was launched 31 years ago. Out of these, just five per cent have been lost.


Route 66, which winds for 2,400 miles through eight states between Chicago and California, opened in 1926 but has since fallen on tough times, with roadside diners and motels suffering as motorists are lured onto faster Interstate highways.


America’s most storied road, which winds for 2,400 miles through eight states between Chicago and California, opened in 1926 but has since fallen on tough times. Pictured: A file photo of a neon motel sign on Route 66

The Trust believes Larimer Square in Denver (file photo) is threatened by an inappropriate development proposal that calls for partial demolition of several buildings and the potential construction of two towers

Ashley River Historic District in Charleston exemplifies the Palmetto State's layered cultural heritage. But it is threatened by an annexation proposal that could lead to zoning changes. File photo

Annapolis' City Dock Area, pictured in a file photo, is soon to be redeveloped, and the National Trust fears this could damage its heritage value

America's most storied road is up for designation as a National Historic Trail, which the National Trust says would bring 'recognition and economic development' to historic sites along the road. 


But the legislation must be signed by the President by the end of 2018, so time is running out.


In Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, the National Trust said last year's hurricanes damaged thousands of historic and cultural properties, including more than 3,000 churches.


Many of the other sites on the list are due to be redeveloped in a way the charity believes threatens their heritage value.


These include Larimer Square, Denver's oldest commercial block and first historic district, which the Trust says is threatened by proposals to build two towers and partly demolish several buildings.


The charity also highlighted a proposal to build a gas compressor station across from Mount Vernon, adjacent to Piscataway National Park in Accokeek, Maryland.


Elsewhere in Maryland, the National Trust says a proposal to rezone parts of the Colonial Annapolis Historic District threatens the City Dock area's views, heritage tourism and more.


In South Carolina, the National Trust says an annexation proposal could lead to zoning changes and development that might damage the landscape of the Ashley River Historic District outside Charleston.


Named after the first Native American licensed to practice medicine in the United States, the Dr. Susan LaFlesche Picotte Memorial Hospital in Walthill, Nebraska on the Omaha Reservation in Nebraska is facing an uncertain future

The Isaiah T. Montgomery House in Mound Bayou (file photo) was built by the former slave in 1910

The Trust is concerned that a new natural resources development could blight views from Mount Vernon (seen in a file photo)

The National Trust is concerned about historic buildings in Puerto Rico that were damaged during hurricane Maria. Pictured: A church is destroyed after Hurricane Maria at Monte Sol in Bayamón, Puerto Rico on September 21, 2017

In Los Angeles, the National Trust is calling attention to proposals to modernize schools that would include demolishing 'almost all historically and culturally significant buildings' on the Roosevelt High School campus.


The school was a central setting for activities related to the 1968 East L.A. Chicano Student Walkouts, which helped catalyze the national Chicano Civil Rights Movement and symbolized the era's student activism.


The Trust included three historic sites on its list that are in urgent need of rehabilitation: an early Modernist house called Ship on the Desert in Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Salt Flat, Texas; the Mary and Eliza Freeman Houses in Bridgeport, Connecticut, which were part of a unique pre-Civil War community of free African-Americans; and the Isaiah T. Montgomery House in Mound Bayou, Mississippi, built by a former slave who established one of the first all-black municipalities after the Civil War.


In Nebraska, the Trust noted that the Dr Susan LaFlesche Picotte Memorial Hospital in Walthill is 'unoccupied and facing an uncertain future.' The site is named after the first Native American licensed to practice medicine in the U.S.


The Mary and Eliza Freeman Houses in Bridgeport, Connecticut, were built in 1848 and widely considered the oldest houses built by African Americans in the state. They are now derelict and crumbling

The Theodore Roosevelt High School, one of the so-called 'Walkout Schools' that played a key role in the 1968 East L.A. Chicano Student Walkouts, which helped catalyze the national Chicano Civil Rights Movement. File photo

Royalton, seen in a file photo, is one of four towns in Vermont's Upper Valley that the Trust believes are at risk from development

Located within Guadalupe Mountains National Park, in the high desert landscape of West Texas, the Ship on the Desert modernist house in Texas has suffered from deferred maintenance and is not currently open to the public. File photo

In addition to the 11 endangered places, the National Trust put four towns in rural Vermont's Upper Valley - Royalton, Sharon, Strafford and Tunbridge - on 'watch status' because of a development proposal calling for a 'planned community.'


The list can mobilize support and funding for preservation. But listings can also be controversial. Saving neglected historic properties is expensive.


And when the National Trust advocates halting proposals to develop a site, local residents and officials may disagree, citing a need for modernization or economic growth. 


1. Annapolis' City Dock Area; Annapolis, Maryland


A plan to redevelop portions of the Colonial Annapolis Historic District threatens to damage the area's heritage, as well as permanently diminish its charm and unparalleled views, the National Trust says.


2. Ashley River Historic District; Charleston, South Carolina


The district exemplifies the Palmetto State's layered cultural heritage. But it is threatened by an annexation proposal that could lead to zoning changes and development that could irreparably damage the landscape, the Trust says.


3. Dr. Susan LaFlesche Picotte Memorial Hospital; Omaha Indian Reservation, Nebraska


Named after the first Native American licensed to practice medicine in the United States, and believed to be the first hospital constructed for any Indian reservation without federal funding, the Memorial Hospital is currently unoccupied and facing an uncertain future. 


4. Hurricane-Damaged Historic Resources; Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands


The 2017 hurricanes damaged thousands of historic and cultural resources throughout Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 


5. Isaiah T. Montgomery House; Mound Bayou, Mississippi


Established by former slave Isaiah T. Montgomery, Mound Bayou was one of the earliest all-black municipalities, located in the Mississippi Delta following the Civil War. Today, Montgomery's home is in urgent need of stabilization.


6. Larimer Square; Denver, Colorado


The Trust believes Larimer Square is threatened by an inappropriate development proposal that calls for partial demolition of several buildings and the potential construction of two towers.


7. Mary and Eliza Freeman Houses; Bridgeport, Connecticut


Built in 1848 and widely considered the oldest houses built by African Americans in Connecticut, the Freeman Houses help to tell the unique story of the free black community in the North prior to the Civil War. They are now derelict and crumbling.


8. Mount Vernon and Piscataway National Park; Mount Vernon, Virginia, and Accokeek, Maryland


Dominion Energy has proposed constructing a gas compressor station directly adjacent to Piscataway National Park. This project has the potential to negatively impact the historic view from Mount Vernon, the Trust says


9. Route 66; Illinois, Kansas, Missouri, Texas, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Arizona, and California


Known as America's 'Mother Road,' Route 66 is an internationally significant symbol of the country's romance with the open road. Route 66 opened in 1926, connecting eight states between Chicago and California. Legislation to protect the road must be signed by the President before the end of 2018.


10. Ship on the Desert; Salt Flat, Texas


Located within Guadalupe Mountains National Park, in the high desert landscape of West Texas, this striking early Modernist house has suffered from deferred maintenance and is not currently open to the public. 


11. Walkout Schools of Los Angeles; Los Angeles, California


The Walkout Schools are five historic campuses that played a key role in the 1968 East L.A. Chicano Student Walkouts, which helped catalyze the national Chicano Civil Rights Movement. They are: James A. Garfield High School; Theodore Roosevelt High School; Abraham Lincoln High School; Belmont High School; and El Sereno Middle School. The school district has called for some of the buildings to be demolished.


12 Watch Status Site: Four Towns of Vermont's Upper Valley; Royalton, Sharon, Trafford, and Tunbridge, Vermont


The charming village centers and idyllic surrounding farms and forests in four historic towns would be permanently altered by a development proposal calling for construction of a new planned community, the Trust says.


Source: National Trust for Historic Places

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group