By

Associated Press


and 
Snejana Farberov For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  19:10 EDT, 22 March 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  13:17 EDT, 23 March 2018







           8

View  comments

Police in suburban Chicago have released 30 hours of body-camera and dashboard camera footage showing the circumstances surrounding the fatal shooting of a knife-wielding woman by an officer on an Illinois interstate.


Decynthia Clements, a 34-year-old mother-of-one, was shot and killed following an hour-long standoff with Elgin police on the morning of March 12. The victim was black, and the decorated 19-year veteran on the force who fired the fatal shots was white. 


On Thursday, the local police department made public all of the video recordings related to the office-involved shooting, as well as a 21-minute summery video. 


The Elgin Police Department on Thursday released 30 hours of body-camera and dashboard camera footage (pictured) showing a officer-involved fatal shooting

Police caught up with DeCynthia Clements on Interstate 90 in Elgin, Illinois, on the morning of March 12 after trying, and failing, to pull her over earlier   

Not cooperating: Video shows an officer ordering the 34-year-old woman to get out of the car. She refuses and instead lights up a cigarette 

Officers are heard prior to the shooting calling Clements 'Cynthia' and telling her to get out of her burning vehicle. She responds, but officers appear to have difficulty hearing Clements because the SUV windows are up.


As officers approach the vehicle, one is heard saying 'get the Tasers set, get her out.' Seconds later, Clements opens the door as smoke pours from the SUV. Officers yell 'let me see your hands' and 'put the knife down' before she is shot as she exits the vehicle with the knife in her hands.


Earlier in the video, an officer can be heard saying of Clements, 'she's got the knife to her neck. She's got the knife to her neck.' 


According to the police department’s narrative of the incident, it began unfolding at 12.34am on March 12 when police approached a suspicious vehicle in the area of Cedar Avenue in Elgin. 


The driver, later identified as Clements, fled the scene. Police tried to stop her but quickly ended the pursuit.


during the one-hour standoff with police, Clements tossed a couple of burning items into her backseat, setting her SUV ablaze 

Police cars boxed in Clements' smoking car to prevent her from driving any farther 

A short time later, Clements’ SUV was located westbound on Interstate 90 near Route 25. Officers came up to the driver’s side window and observed that the woman had a steak knife in her possession.


In the video released by the department on Thursday, officers repeatedly ask Clements to open the door, but the woman refuses. She is seen calmly rummaging through her back to retrieve a cigarette, which she proceeds to light it up and smoke.


One of the responding officers tells his co-workers that he had observed drug paraphernalia in Clements’ SUV, as well as some white powder on her hands, which he speculated was possibly crack-cocaine. 


An hour-long standoff with police followed, during which Clements would periodically move her car several feet along the road.


At one point, officers noticed a fire ignited inside the vehicle after Clements tossed some burning items into the backseat.


Deadly force: When heavy smoke begins pouring out the vehicle, Clements exits the driver's side armed with a knife (left) and appears to run in the direction of the cops

Suspect down: She gets shot with a gun and a Taser at almost the exact same moment and collapses to the ground

The mother-of-one is pictured lying mortally wounded on the ground after being shot

When heavy smoke begins pouring out the vehicle and flames are seen shooting out of the backseat window, officers converge on the SUV to extract Clements after discussing several different scenarios, including ordering her to lay down on the ground and deploying a Taser to subdue her.


Clements then opens the door and is heard screaming, She stumbles out of the SUV, lunges in the direction of the officers and gets shot with a Taser and a gun at the same time.


Mom: Clements leaves behind her 19-year-old son, who is a college students 

Swoboda said she was armed with two knifes, but only one is seen in the video.


Clements was transported to St. Alexius Hospital in Hoffman Estates, where she was pronounced dead.


The officer who fired the fatal shots has been identified as 19-year department veteran and current SWAT team member Lieutenant Christian Jensen. He has received 22 commendations and awards between 2002-2017.


'Seeing uncensored video of a life ending is something that should make all of us feel uncomfortable,' Elgin Police Chief Jeff Swoboda said at the end of the compilation. 'It's cases like this, though, that also forces some tough conversations and I want the community to know that the Elgin Police Department is ready to have those tough conversations. Together, we will get through this.'


But lawyers representing Clements' family said her death raises questions about tactics used by the police department.


'This situation did not have to escalate to such a degree that cost a young woman her life,' attorneys Antonio Romanucci and Andrew Stroth said in a statement made in response to the body-camera and dashcam video. 'As we move forward with this lawsuit, those responsible for DeCynthia's death must be held accountable.'


Officers need more training on how to de-escalate situations to avoid using deadly force, Stroth added.


The officer who shot the mother-of-one (right) was identified as 19-year department veteran and current SWAT team member Lieutenant Christian Jensen (left)

During a protest held outside the Elgin Police Department on Thursday, activist Corey Battles questioned the officers' decision to deploy deadly force, instead of using non-lethal tools that were at their disposal, reported Chicago Daily Herald. 


'This should never have happened,' said her father, Charles Clements, who joined a few dozen protesters at the rally.


Activists are planning to continue protesting through the weekend.  


The woman is survived by her 19-year-old son. Her sister-in-law, Holly Clements, has launched a GoFundMe campaign to raise money for her funeral, saying that the college student cannot afford to lay his mother to rest.


Illinois State Police are investigating and the case will ultimately be presented to the Cook County State’s Attorney. Swoboda said in a statement that his department also will conduct its own a review to determine if officers on the scene followed policies and procedures.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group