ELGIN, Ill. (AP) — The Latest on the fatal shooting of a knife-wielding woman by police in Illinois (all times local):

5:15 p.m.

Lawyers for the family of a knife-wielding woman fatally shot by a police officer along a Chicago-area interstate say her death raises questions about tactics used by the Elgin Police Department.

The attorneys issued a statement in response body-camera and dashcam video that showed events leading up to the shooting. Police released the video publicly on Thursday.

Attorney Andrew Stroth said that officers need more training on how to de-escalate situations to avoid using deadly force.

Stroth and Antonio Romanucci say in the release that they also are moving ahead with a lawsuit following the March 12 death of 34-year-old Decynthia S. Clements of Elgin.

Police say Clements' death on Interstate 90 followed an hourlong standoff with officers. An Elgin officer shot her after she got out of her vehicle while holding the knife.

Illinois State Police are investigating.

__

4:30 p.m.

Authorities have released video showing the fatal shooting of a knife-wielding woman by a police officer along a Chicago-area interstate.

The footage released Thursday includes police body-camera and dashcam video. Elgin Police Chief Jeff Swoboda also released a summary video detailing events leading up the shooting along Interstate 90, including smoke and fire pouring from the interior of the woman's SUV.

An officer also can be heard saying, "she's got the knife to her neck. She's got the knife to her neck."

Police have said an officer fired at 34-year-old Decynthia S. Clements after an hourlong standoff along the interstate on March 12.

Swoboda released a statement Thursday warning that the video footage could be "very troubling to view." But he says releasing the videos "is one step we can take toward transparency and accountability."

Illinois State Police are investigating the shooting. There have been calls for an outside group to investigate from activists, residents and a city council member.

___

10:30 a.m.

Police say they will release video showing the officer-involved fatal shooting of a woman armed with a knife along an interstate outside Chicago.

Elgin Police Chief Jeff Swoboda said Wednesday evening that more than 30 hours of video from police body cameras would be released Thursday along with an 18-minute summary video. The video is to show the shooting and events leading to it and include footage from various police camera angles.

Police have said the officer fired at 34-year-old Decynthia S. Clements of Elgin after an hourlong standoff on March 12. Swoboda says her family and community leaders will have a chance to view the video before it is released publicly.

Illinois State Police are investigating. There have been calls for an outside group to investigate from activists, residents and a city council member.