

By Jasper Scherer

Caption


Close

Click through the slides to learn more about the Bexar County candidates for the 2018 Republican and Democratic primaries endorsed by the San Antonio Express-News Editorial Board.

Click through the slides to learn more about the Bexar County candidates for the 2018 Republican and Democratic primaries endorsed by the San Antonio Express-News Editorial Board.

A lineup of competitive federal, state and county races — including the contentious bout for the district attorney nomination — drew far more Democrats than Republicans during early voting in Bexar County, a trend that extended across Texas’ largest counties.

Democrats will seek to maintain the momentum Tuesday, when months of campaigning come to an end for most races on Election Day.

The high Democratic turnout likely comes from a combination of anti-Donald Trump sentiment and the unusually competitive nature of some Democratic races, said Brandon Rottinghaus, a University of Houston political science professor.

“In a midterm, you can count on the ire of the ‘out’ party’s opposition trying to unseat the party of the president,” he said. “It’s not surprising Democrats are coming out against Trump generally, but especially in a midterm.”

During the 11 days of early voting that ended Friday, Democrats outnumbered Republicans in Bexar County for the first time since 2008. About 10,000 more Democrats than Republicans voted early at the polls and by mail, tallying 49,532 votes to Republicans’ 39,533, according to the secretary of state.

The reported figures make for a roughly 23,500-vote swing from 2014, the most recent midterm election year, when 13,500 more Republicans voted than Democrats. Among the 15 largest counties in Texas, Democrats outpaced Republicans, 465,245 to 420,329, after being vastly outnumbered four years ago.

Rottinghaus added that a competitive election is “the best driver of turnout. … You’ve got multiple candidates priming multiple Democratic audiences.”

Meanwhile, Republican voters have turned out at high rates for years, winning every statewide race in Texas since 1994. Democrats therefore have a lot of ground to make up, Rottinghaus said.

“The Republican Party has to some degree maxed out among their total voters,” he said. “They’ve identified the Republican voters and are really effective at turning them out to vote. The problem is that there’s a ceiling on that number.”

Bexar County’s 293 polling sites are open Tuesday from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. Voters may cast ballots after 7 p.m. as long as they arrive at the polling place by that time.

The early voting figures will see a modest change when the county’s Elections Department incorporates the “five buckets” of mail-in ballots it received Monday, Elections Administrator Jacque Callanen said. In 2014, the previous midterm election year, Bexar County’s official results contained about 1,000 more early votes than the Secretary of State’s totals.

Atop the ballot, Sen. Ted Cruz is expected to win his five-person Republican primary, while Rep. Beto O-Rourke, D-El Paso, is likely to oppose him.

What to know on Election Day


Voters seeking shorter lines should aim to cast ballots between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. Election officials typically see a rush in the morning as people vote on the way to work. The lines pick up again around 3 p.m. when parents drop in on the way to picking up kids at school.


If no candidate receives 50 percent plus one vote in a race, the contest will head to a runoff between the two candidates who received the most votes.


The runoff will take place on May 22, and voters must stick with the party they aligned themselves with in the primary.


Voters must bring an acceptable form of identification to the polls, which can include a driver’s license, passport or an election identification certificate from the Department of Public Safety.


Those lacking one of the seven ID options may use a utility bill or bank statement, among other options, if they can explain why they could not obtain a photo ID.

At the congressional level, both parties will decide contested primaries for retiring Rep. Lamar Smith’s 21st District, which covers parts of San Antonio, Austin and the Hill Country. While four Democrats are vying for their party’s nomination, 18 Republicans — many political newcomers — are on the ballot, with both races expected to reach a runoff.

In the neighboring 23rd Congressional District, five Democrats are seeking the nomination to challenge Rep. Will Hurd, who is expected to survive a primary challenge from Uvalde dentist Alma Arredondo-Lynch. The district runs along the U.S.-Mexico border, covering area from San Antonio to El Paso.

Atop the state ballot, Gov. Greg Abbott, facing two little-known challengers, will likely face the winner of a nine-person Democratic gubernatorial primary race. Former Dallas County Sheriff Lupe Valdez and Houston investor Andrew White are seen as the frontrunners.

Other notable state races include the Republican primary for land commissioner, where the incumbent, George P. Bush, has drawn criticism from his challenger and predecessor, Jerry Patterson, for avoiding forums and allegedly mismanaging the Alamo.

Leading a slate of competitive Democratic races around Bexar County is a bruising contest for the district attorney nomination between incumbent Nicholas “Nico” LaHood and defense attorney Joe Gonzales.

Running on a more progressive platform than LaHood, including a push for cash bail reform, Gonzales could receive a bump from the higher Democratic turnout, which Rottinghaus said typically favors more liberal Democrats.

LaHood has criticized Gonzales for defending clients accused of sexual abuse and receiving contributions from a political action committee funded by liberal hedge fund magnate George Soros. Gonzales has said his defense work allows the justice system to function, and that as a prosecutor, he put people behind bars for the same crimes.

Some Bexar Democrats will also decide a three-person race for the Precinct 2 seat on Commissioners Court. Longtime incumbent Paul Elizondo, 82, is seeking his 10th term on the court. One of his opponents, Mario Bravo, 42, said he doubts Elizondo will finish the term, while accusing the commissioner of running a pay-to-play system on the court. Bravo has put health care atop his campaign platform.

Queta Rodriguez, 47, has run on her experience managing the county’s Veterans Service Office, while claiming Elizondo’s accomplishments have done little to improve conditions in the precinct. He’s shot back, saying his opponents have a limited understanding of how the court operates and defending his record of achievement.

Voters will also decide a handful of competitive state House races around San Antonio, including a Republican primary between state Rep. Lyle Larson and his District 122 challenger, Hollywood Park Mayor Chris Fails. Gov. Greg Abbott has intervened in the race, campaigning and running ads for Fails, while Speaker Joe Straus has contributed to Larson’s campaign.

Larson believes Abbott is retaliating for ethics reform legislation he introduced last session. The governor has attacked Larson for being insufficiently conservative, though Larson claims his record paints a different picture.

Claire Barnett, an education consultant, is running uncontested in the Democratic primary.

With Straus retiring, the open seat in his north Bexar County district has drawn six Republicans, including a former Straus challenger, Matt Beebe. Other candidates are Steve Allison, Carlton Soules, Adrian Spears, Charlotte Williamson and Marc Whyte. Democrat Celina Montoya is running unopposed.

On the West and Northwest Sides, state Rep. Diana Arévalo faces a primary challenge from her predecessor, Trey Martinez Fischer, who gave up the District 116 seat when he ran for state Senate. Martinez Fischer has argued his knowledge of House rules would give Democrats a better chance to impede the Republican agenda next session, while Arévalo, claiming Martinez Fischer “has sided with outside special interests,” said he left when Democrats needed him.

Martinez Fischer on Sunday said Arévalo has resorted to “gutter politics” by pulling a photo of himself at his daughter’s birthday party in an attack ad. The winner will face Republican Fernando Padron in the general.

The ballots also feature a range of judicial races. Democratic and Republican voters will decide contested district court races for the 226th and 288th districts; Republicans also will choose from a crowded five-person field for the 187th district, while two Democrats are running for the 290th district.

Voters on both sides will also decide their next party chair. Among the five Republicans running for the position is Dwight Parscale, whose son Brad recently took the reins of Trump’s re-election campaign. Other candidates are Cynthia Brehm, Jo Ann Ponce Gonzalez and Andres Holliday.

Incumbent Chair Mark Dorazio, who took over when former Chair Robert Stovall resigned to run for Congress, is not running.

Meanwhile, Democratic Party Chair Manuel Medina is fending off a challenge from San Antonio paralegal Monica Ramirez Alcantara. She’s picked up endorsements from several prominent Democrats, including former state Sen. Leticia Van de Putte and state Reps. Diego Bernal and Ina Minjarez.

They have taken issue with Medina’s tendency to pick sides in primary races and for affiliating with Republicans during an unsuccessful mayoral campaign. Defending his record, Medina has touted the party’s electoral success in 2016.

Jasper Scherer is a San Antonio Express-News staff writer. Read more of his stories here. | jscherer@express-news.net | @jaspscherer