Re: "'Of the people, by the people, for the people' — Lincoln pleaded at Gettysburg for 'us the living' to uphold democracy, George B. Forgie says," Wednesday Viewpoints.

Regarding the University of Texas professor's editorial on the Gettysburg Address, I ask what is government "of, by and for the people"  when in November 1863, essentially only white men had the right to vote or hold office? Abraham Lincoln never advocated for women's voting rights. Regarding blacks, he said maybe those who fought in his army and "the most intelligent" would gain the right to vote.


Stating our nation was "brought forth" four score and seven years ago (July 4, 1776) is false, as the Declaration of Independence declared that 13 British colonies were now 13 free, independent and sovereign states. The Constitution of 1787 established a republic, not a consolidated nation with a powerful federal government. 


Lincoln turned a voluntary association of states into an involuntary union using military force that killed 750,000 Americans, which is equal to 6 million people today. The professor says the South attempted to "overthrow" the U.S. government. Again, false, as the states peacefully withdrew from the Union with no plan to attack. Lincoln said in 1861, he had no plan to abolish slavery, only to invade the South to collect the tariffs.


Richard Brock, Dallas


Re: "4 rescued from cave as operation races rains — Divers prepare to go back for 8 boys, coach still trapped," Monday news story.


I am convinced that we need something to cheer, and my hope is that the world will be able to shout out with joy once those boys are rescued from that flooded cave system in Thailand.

With all the dismay and disgust we see 24/7 on all the news media, I am heartened at how we are rallying to throw our emotional support behind the youngsters and their coach, who got caught by raging floodwaters while exploring those caves.


May the rescuers succeed. May the boys recover emotionally. May the coach be free of recrimination.


Our prayers are with you all.


John Peter Kanelis, Fairview


Re: "Group paves way for Trump — Texas Rep. Granger among delegation in Moscow for meetings," Wednesday news story.


As President Donald Trump gets set to go to Europe for a couple of summits,what are the chances that they will have the same result as the G7 summit in Montreal two months ago? I would venture to say that while in the United Kingdom, Trump will probably chastise the Muslim mayor of London. He will probably put down Prime Minister Theresa May for whatever reason, and as far as the queen is concerned, anything can happen.

The result is most certainly predictable when it comes to meeting the leaders of NATO. Most of the leaders, especially Angela Merkel of Germany, will be admonished, as well as NATO itself. 


Meeting his friend Vladimir Putin of Russia in his last leg of the summits will be very interesting. Why meet with Putin anyway? What are they going to discuss? Most certainly they will not discuss Russia's meddling in the 2016 election. Perhaps Trump will demand Putin get out of Crimea, Ukraine, Georgia — to name a few places. 


We know that those topics won't be brought up. So, why is Trump meeting Putin alone, one on one? Lifting the sanctions — that sums it up!


Bassim Nathan, Dallas


I'm a 70-year-old retired educator. I spend the better part of two days a week supporting the campaign of Beto O'Rourke for Senate. Why? 



1. O'Rourke doesn't believe in taking PAC money or money from corporations, who often want favors in return for donations. His campaign is fueled by small donations and dedicated volunteers. 


2. He believes in term limits, which is rare since he is a sitting congressman representing the El Paso area. 


3. He's visited all 254 counties in Texas, holding town halls and meeting potential voters in large and small venues. 


4. He has reached across the aisle to pass legislation to guarantee needed mental health care for veterans. He will work with anyone to reconcile differences for the common good. 


5.  He is open with his agenda and is responsive to Texans from both parties.


I tend to be a moderate voter. I vote across party lines. O'Rourke makes sense to me. He embraces diversity and diverse thought. Join me in supporting a new direction for Texas. 


Lee Alvoid, Farmers Branch


Re: "Global warming 'is in our living room' — Warnings 30 years ago of a hotter Earth have come to pass, scientists say," June 24 news story.


Yes, temperatures have gone up just a couple of degrees here in Texas, but as you head northward the temps are rising way more — 4.8 degrees F in Minneapolis since 1970, more than 8 degrees F in Barrow, Alaska. 


Soon there will be no reflective white ice in the Arctic in summer, and glaciers are melting at a crazy rate. 


We must do something now, and the Citizens' Climate Lobby's "fee/dividend" is the most conservative first step. Imagine paying just 38 cents more per gallon of gasoline, but then getting a yearly $2,000 dividend. 


About 70 percent of Americans will benefit from this policy. And this policy is supported not by just many Republicans, but also by many corporations, including Exxon Mobil and Shell.


So vote for those conservatives willing to be a conservative.


Steven O. Spurger, Carrollton


Re: "Policy made with little forethought — Sources: Family separation result of poor planning, communication gaps," July 2 news story.


On June 26, U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar said, "I could at the stroke of keystrokes ... within seconds could find any child within our care for any parent." Now HHS has begun DNA testing the children and has asked for more time to reunite migrant children with their families. 


It appears that HHS had no tracking system to reunite these children with their parents. How could the administration separate these families with no means to bring them back together? It's heartbreaking.


Karen Ondocsin, Plano


Re: "For Republicans, a moment of decision — Some will flee, others will stay and try to reclaim once-great party, Max Boot says," Monday Viewpoints.


Max Boot asks whether conservatives should leave the GOP. Would you leave the Masters with nine holes to go and a five-shot lead? Would you quit the New England Patriots before the conference title game? Would you throw away the winning lottery ticket rather than cashing it? 
Why would anyone leave a winning organization during a win streak? 


Max is mad!


Biff Loeder, Dallas/Medical District

©2018, The Dallas Morning News Inc. All Rights Reserved.