The following new tours were announced. Check the Tour Dates category every day for more.

JACK WHITE

Jack White’s live shows have been pretty awesome lately, and he just added a few more dates to his extensive tour. The newly-added shows are in Shreveport, Tulsa, Lubbock, and El Paso. All dates and tickets here.

MIGUEL

R&amp;B crooner Miguel will be in Brooklyn for Afropunk in August, and he plays a few other festivals like Made In America, Hopscotch, and Life Is Beautiful. Today, he announced a tour with a bunch of headlining shows around those festivals too. All dates here.

HANNIBAL BURESS

Hannibal Buress, who you may have recently seen in new comedy Tag alongside Jon Hamm and Jeremy Renner, will be on a standup tour this fall, hitting Midwest, Southwest and West Dates before his appearance at the Adult Swim Festival in Los Angeles. Head to Hannibal’s website for all dates and tickets.

88RISING

Hip hop label 88rising (home to Rich Brian, Higher Brothers, and more) are putting out a crew album, throwing their own fest in LA, and now also throwing a tour with most of their roster including Rich Brian, Higher Brothers, Keith Ape, Joji, Kohh, Niki, August 08, Don Krez and more in select cities. All dates (including NYC’s Pier 17 on 10/3) and more info here.

ELVIS COSTELLO &amp; THE IMPOSTERS

Elvis Costello has a TBA new album coming later this year, and he just announced a fall tour supporting it.

BRIAN FALLON / CRAIG FINN

The Gaslight Anthem frontman Brian Fallon and The Hold Steady frontman Craig Finn are going on a solo tour together this year.

MITSKI

Mitski is “doing a little local run of shows” before her new album drops on August 17. Those shows are in the Northeast and with Sidney Gish. Her proper tour will hit NYC for two shows at Brooklyn Steel in late fall. All dates/tickets are here.

FOXING

Foxing just announced their highly anticipated third album, released the excellent first single, and announced a tour.

LAURYN HILL TOUR OPENERS

Lauryn Hill revealed the openers for her upcoming The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill 20th anniversary tour: Nas, M.I.A., A$AP Rocky, De La Soul, Big Boi, SZA, Santigold, Shabazz Palaces, Talib Kweli, Dave Chappelle, Busta Rhymes, and more.

GREAT LAKE SWIMMERS

Canadian indie folk band Great Lake Swimmers are releasing their new album The Waves, The Wake on August 17 via Nettwerk, and they’ll support the album on tour after it comes out. They mostly have Canadian dates coming up, but they started adding US shows like NYC’s Mercury Lounge on 10/4 (possibly more dates TBA). All known dates here. Listen to the new single:



NEW ORDER

Ahead of their appearance at the Music Tastes Good Festival in Long Beach, CA, post-punk/synthpop greats New Order will be playing a few North American shows.

WORRIERS

Melodic punks Worriers were added to some dates of Jeff Rosenstock’s tour with AJJ singer Sean Bonnette (including Asbury Park on 7/24), and they also added their own hometown show happening at Brooklyn’s Baby’s All Right on 7/31. All dates and tickets here.

IONNALEE/IAMAMIWHOAMI

Elusive Swedish art pop artist iamamiwhoami (aka Jonna Lee) started putting out music as ionnalee last year, and though she doesn’t play shows too often, she’s playing select US shows this August (seemingly under both monikers). She plays Chicago, LA, and NYC, and she says it’s her debut LA show. More info and tickets here.

Subscribe to Brooklyn Vegan on 

MONSTER MAGNET

NJ riff rock vets Monster Magnet announced a fall tour supporting this year’s Mindfucker.

ARCADE FIRE

Arcade Fire continue to expand their tour and just added more California shows: LA with The Zombies and Berkeley with Grizzly Bear.

JIM JAMES / ALYNDA SEGARRA

Jim James‘ new album, Uniform Distortion, is out June 29 via ATO and he’s just announced a “unique, career-spanning solo acoustic concert tour” which will happen in November with Alynda Segarra from Hurray for the Riff Raff joining him on all dates.

FOSTER THE PEOPLE

Foster the People are opening Paramore’s tour as we speak (along with Soccer Mommy on leg one and Jay Som on leg two), and just in case you’d like to see them somewhere WAY smaller than the venues they’re playing on this tour, you might wanna know they’re doing a series of free-with-RSVP intimate shows in select cities. For Brooklyn, they’ll be at Elsewhere’s 200-capacity room Zone One the same night they play the 19,000-capacity Barclays Center with Paramore. That show has local support from The Brittanys and Nervous Dater. All dates here.

Browse our Tour Dates category for even more tours you may have missed.

More Galleries


			It appears that you already have an account created within our VIP network of sites on .
			To keep your personal information safe, we need to verify that it's really you.
			To activate your account, please confirm your  password.
			When you have confirmed your password, you will be able to log in through Facebook on both sites.
		




			Enter your password
			
			Forgot your password?
		

It appears that you already have an account on this site associated with . To connect your existing account just click on the account activation button below. You will maintain your existing VIP profile. After you do this, you will be able to always log in to http://www.brooklynvegan.com using your original account information.



Please fill out the information below to help us provide you a better experience.




			Zip
			
					



Not a member? Sign up here

BrooklynVegan brought to you by:



Sign up for BrooklynVegan quickly by connecting your Facebook account.  It's just as secure and no password to remember!

BrooklynVegan brought to you by: