
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

An Army staff sergeant who received a Purple Heart in combat, a social worker with a master’s degree, an aspiring firefighter, and a couple who overcame domestic violence and saved their marriage are among those who received pardons this week from Gov. John Hickenlooper.

For many, the pardons took decades of perseverance.

“It’s been a long fight,” said Julie Schiltz, who received one of the pardons. “It’s going to open a bunch of doors for as far as my career and education goes. Everybody deserves a second chance.”

Hickenlooper’s office announced the 17 pardons on Thursday, publicizing letters written to each person that outlined their crimes and their accomplishments and offered encouragement in pursuing their goals. During his tenure, the governor has pardoned 40 people out of 170 applications.

Of the 17 who were offered pardons, nine had been convicted of drug crimes. Others had served time for crimes such as burglary, criminal trespassing and assault.

Each letter ended with “By continuing to live a productive life, you will improve not only your life, but also the lives of your family and community members. Others who have experienced circumstances similar to yours will look to you for guidance and inspiration. Show them how it’s done.”

Schiltz, who was addicted to methamphetamine for 14 years, was arrested in 2003 in El Paso County for possession of a controlled substance. After she served time behind bars, she spent 16 months in rehab and has been sober ever since, she said.

Schiltz regained custody of her three children, moved to California and began working in corrections and earned an associate’s degree. Her drug conviction held her back from becoming a parole or probation officer — something she wants to do because of her own experience.

She landed an administrative job in a prison, but after six years, her employer discovered the conviction. She was put on administrative leave and then transferred to a regional office.


“The only way for me to advance in that career was to get that pardon so I could go behind the gates of where I had been,” Schiltz said.

She applied for a pardon in 2013.

“Every year since I kept re-applying, kept calling, kept following up,” Schiltz said.

Finally, on Thursday, the governor’s office called with the news.

“Tears,” Schiltz said.

Others who received pardons on Thursday include Brian J. Clear, who committed eight crimes as a juvenile in Mesa County in 1994. In his letter, Hickenlooper described his “destructive behavior.”

“Your criminal actions as a juvenile were quite serious and certainly gave me pause,” the governor said. “However, I am very impressed by the choices you have made since your convictions more than 20 years ago and your commitment to following the right path after making some bad decisions.”

Clear wants to become a firefighter, but his criminal background has prevented him from doing so, the letter said.

Dennis C. Hiser overcame an El Paso County drug-distribution charge and now has a master’s degree in social work, according to the letter he received. And he recently was promoted to a management position at his job. The governor wrote that the pardon should allow him to reach even higher.

Justin Campbell joined the Army after his 2005 criminal trespassing charge in Adams County. Since then, he has married, has been deployed overseas for combat, has received the Purple Heart and has been promoted to staff sergeant. He wanted a pardon so he could have better career opportunities when his military service ends, the letter said.

“Anyone would be impressed by your accomplishments, and I thank you for your service,” Hickenlooper wrote.

Then there are Dustin Weaver and Janeah Weaver, each convicted of charges in 2003 in Larimer County because of violence in their marriage. Dustin Weaver pleaded guilty to assault, and Janeah Weaver pleaded guilty to harassment.

They received counseling, got involved in church and worked out their problems. They started a family, raised foster children and pursued educational goals, their letter said.

Hickenlooper remarked on how difficult it can be for couples to overcome domestic violence.

“Domestic violence convictions present a particularly difficult decision for pardon applications, but you both present compelling circumstances in your applications,” the letter said.

Read the pardon letters