
    
        
            By Michaelangelo Conte


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

JERSEY CITY -- A 24-year-old Pennsylvania man was arrested in a Kearny public-housing complex on Monday after police found he had an unlabeled bottle containing 15 hydrocodone pills and $4,660 in cash, police said.

Jason A. Montanez-Medina, of Erie, was charged with drug possession, possession with intent to distribute within 500 feet of public property and within 1,000 feet of property belonging to Harrison High School, the criminal complaint says.

The incident began when police pulled over a vehicle for minor motor vehicle infractions and then saw Montanez-Medina, a passenger, stuff what appeared to be a prescription bottle between the passenger seat and center console, the complaint says.

Hydrocodone, known by the brand name Vicodin, is considered a semi-synthetic opioid similar to drugs like morphine, codeine and oxycodone. Medicinally, it's used in combination with other products to treat pain and coughs. 



Montanez-Medina made his first appearance on the charges yesterday in Criminal Justice Reform Court in Jersey City via video link from Hudson County jail in Kearny.

At the hearing, the state moved to detain him through the course of his prosecution. A detention hearing is scheduled for Friday before Hudson County Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale in the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        