;        
        .fc-pinned-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/WGRZ.png') calc(100% - 45px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
        .fc-dialog-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/WGRZ.png') calc(100% - 20px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
     



Buffalo Weather Summary: 80 degrees

BUFFALO, N.Y. — Stephanie Christiano can look in the mirror and see a new person. She spent several years in-and-out of jail for drug-related crimes. She gives credit to Erie County Sheriff's deputies for playing a role in her recovery.


Christiano started drinking alcohol in middle school and smoking marijuana in high school. By age 19, she was experimenting with pills.

It was during a toxic relationship with a man who introduced her to heroin when she saw her life on a downward spiral. She began stealing and going to jail.


"I had my first arrest because I stole some jewelry that was part of my family and my mom pressed charges on me. It was her only way to protect me," she said.


Drug court in Amherst was a start, but Christiano admits she "wanted it as a get out jail free card. I didn't want to utilize it for the tools and resources that are there."


Stephanie knew she needed to make a change. A year long stay at New Hope Manor Residential drug abuse treatment center in Barryville, New York was instrumental. 


It was the role of Erie County Sheriff's deputies at the Correctional facility that played a role in helping Christiano see the need to do better.


"They validated that I was a human being, that I wasn't just an inmate," she said "it definitely helped boost my self-esteem at a time when I had little to no self-esteem because it made me think about what can I achieve that's better than this."


It was the genuine interest and compassion and empathy from deputies in the jail that Christiano said she will never forget.


In a Facebook post to the Erie County Sheriff's Department, Christiano wrote: "This might be a little silly or you may be unable to do so because of ethical/legal reasons but if possible please send my appreciation to some of your staff members." She named the deputies who were there when she was in-and-out of jail for drugs. "When I was at my lowest times they listened and gave some positive advice as well as encouraging me to stop what I was doing. I'm one of the few that have made it out and truly changed my life through lots of work and perseverance."

Last week she was able to meet up with the Sheriff's deputies and say thank you in person.


Correctional Officer Daniel Gilbert said it's the first time in his career he was named for having a positive impact on an inmate.


"When we see people at their lowest it's definitely beneficial to see someone work through that," he said.


Deputy Stacey Sowinski remembers the goal-driven Christiano.


"She was just stuck, so it was easy to have a conversation with her and ask her, how are you, why are you back here?" she said.


Sgt. Jennifer Howell of the Sheriff's Dept. said the inmate "needed a little push to know that she was capable of change, that she did deserve it." She recalls Christiano as an inmate going to the library and researching things she wanted to do.


Christiano recently celebrated two years of recovery from drugs. She will be the the first to tell you drug addiction  "does not discriminate, it doesn't matter where you come from or how much money you do or don't have. I wouldn't wish it on my worst enemy. Nobody is exempt."


Christiano is now working as a hair stylist. It's a profession she has a passion for and enjoys.