


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Police arrested two men and a 14-year-old boy found riding in a car that was stolen from a woman who was shot and killed on a Thanksgiving Day.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Live Black Friday coverage, Christmas parades in Rutherford, Wallington, Denville and Morristown and a trip back in time on the Morris Canal - all in "6 things to know this weekend in New Jersey."
    John C. Ensslin

Police car
(Photo: stock)

NEWARK — Authorities arrested two men and a 14-year-old boy found riding in a car that was stolen from a woman, who was shot and killed during a Thanksgiving Day robbery.


Supreme A. Allah Jr., 18, of Newark, was charged with murder, felony murder, robbery, carjacking, unlawful possession of a handgun, possession of a handgun for an unlawful purpose, and conspiracy to commit murder.


A 14-year-old juvenile was charged with the same offenses.


Driver Antonio L. Torres, 20, of Newark, was charged with eluding the police.


The Friday arrests followed an investigation by the Essex County Prosecutor's Homicide Task Force. The Essex County Prosecutor Office and Newark Public Safety Director Anthony F. Ambrose released the adult suspects' names and their charges on Saturday.


According to authorities, Shuri Henry, 40, of Newark, was shot about 11 p.m. Thursday during a robbery on South 20th Street. Henry's young nephew was in the car with her but apparently wasn't injured, police said.


The assailants then fled in the victim's 2015 Kia Sorrento, authorities reported.


Just hours later, early Friday, Newark patrol officers spotted the victim's car, which was occupied by three males.


As the officers attempted to stop the car, the driver refused to stop, but police eventually apprehended the three occupants after a brief pursuit, according to authorities.


Allah and Torres are lodged in the Essex County Correctional Facility, pending an appearance in Essex County Central Judicial Processing Court. The juvenile, whose name is being withheld due to his age, is lodged in the Essex County Youth Detention Facility.


The investigationwas continuing and additional arrests were possible, Chief Assistant Prosecutor Thomas S. Fennelly of the Prosecutor's Homicide Unit reported Friday.


The Associated Press contributed to this article.


Email: proctor@northjersey.com


 Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. iPhone app | iPad app | Android app | Sign up for our newsletter | Subscribe| Find us on social media: Twitter | Sports Twitter  | Facebook | Instagram | Food Instagram