
    
        
            By Taylor Tiamoyo Harris

tharris@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

A Newark mother last seen in early May a few days after a fight with her former boyfriend has been found dead in Irvington and authorities have charged her ex with killing her, officials said Tuesday.

Julia Vega was 30 years old.

Her body was found behind an abandoned house Friday, the Essex County Prosecutor's Office announced Tuesday. Dental records led to her identification.

She had two children with Gualberto L. Lebron, 33, who she dated in the past and is now charged with murder. His brother, Gilberto Lebron Jr., 34, is charged with conspiracy in the killing, the office said.

Vega was last seen was May 9 when she left her job at a daycare around lunch time to go walk her family dog.

Authorities issued an arrest warrant for Gualberto L. Lebron on the same day, police have said, following a domestic violence dispute between the two on May 5. Police say Gualberto Lebron attacked and choked Vega, but she managed to escape.

Gualberto Lebron also faces conspiracy, robbery, burglary, stalking, witness tampering, hindering prosecution, desecrating human remains, eluding police, aggravated assault, and drug violations.

His brother, Gilberto Lebron is charged with conspiracy to hindering prosecution, conspiracy to desecrate human remains, unlawful possession of a handgun and possession of firearm on school property.

The office did not elaborate exactly when or where Gualberto Lebron allegedly killed Vega, or how exactly she died.

The brothers will remain in Essex County Correctional Facility until their detention hearing, which has been scheduled for Friday. 

Taylor Tiamoyo Harris may be reached at tharris@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @ladytiamoyo. Find NJ.com on Facebook


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        