Evangelist Acton Bowen, 37, was arrested on seven new sexual assaults charges, according to AL.com. 


On early Tuesday morning, Bowen was sent to Etowah County Detention and placed on a bond for $500,000.


UPDATE: Etowah County Sheriff’s Office says new charges against Evangelist Acton Bowen are based off accusations from 4 new victims. Several are now adults. @abc3340 https://t.co/gT4ENWWy3q


— Stephen Quinn (@StephenQ3340) April 17, 2018


He faces two counts of second-degree sodomy, two counts of enticing a child for immoral purposes and three counts of second-degree sexual abuse, according to jail records.


Sheriff Todd Entrekin, said Bowen abused minors between the ages of 12-17. The abuse occurred over several years, and the survivors are all adults now. His new charges involve more than one person.


Previously, Bowen, was charged with molesting a young boy.  Hoover police Capt. Gregg Rector said on Tuesday that these new allegations are making his worst nightmare come true.


“While working this case, our detectives developed great working relationships with investigators from the Etowah County Sheriff’s Office, as well as several other agencies,” Rector said. “When we met with the first victim, our worst fear was that there could be more young boys who had been by molested and preyed upon by Acton Bowen. It appears our worst fears are now becoming reality.”


Bowen, is the founder of Acton Bowen Outreach Ministries, and has described himself as visionary. In defense, he denied all allegations against him. In a statement, Bowen said, “I have not done what I am accused of and have not acted inappropriately in any way,” he said. “My family and I trust the legal system and the people who are entrusted with the duty of protecting each of our rights. I believe the truth will stand and I will be vindicated of this false accusation. We ask that each of you keep everyone involved in this process in your prayers.”


His wife, Ashley Bowen, has since filed for a divorce.


