Life's a leech.

An Alabama sheriff has been pocketing excess jailhouse food funds in order to buy himself a home on the water — and he admits it.

Speaking with AL.com, Etowah County Sheriff Todd Entrekin didn't deny that he's taken in over $750,000 in the last three years, his ethics disclosure forms labeling the amount as "compensation" from "Food Provisions."

However, Entrekin and other Alabama sheriffs believe that a pre-World War II state law entitles them to keep any excess funds marked for providing food for inmates.

"As you should be aware, Alabama law is clear as to my personal financial responsibilities in the feeding of inmates," said Entrekin. "Regardless of one's opinion of this statute, until the legislature acts otherwise, the sheriff must follow the current law."

Following that current law has meant that the head of the Etowah County Sheriff's Office was able to purchase a four-bedroom beach house with an in-ground pool for $740,000 in September.

Additionally, Etowah County resident Matthew Qualls revealed that he once got paid to mow Entrekin's lawn with a check labeled "Sheriff Todd Entrekin Food Provision Account."

Money in the account originates from federal, state and municipal governments and is provided to feed people in the Etowah County jail.

"I saw that in the corner of the checks it said 'Food Provision,' and a couple people I knew came through the jail, and they say they got meat maybe once a month and every other day it was just beans and vegetables," Qualls told Al.com.

"I put two and two together and realized that that money could have gone toward some meat or something."

After Qualls spoke out againstEntrekin, he found himself under arrest just four days later and charged with drug trafficking.

He was subsequently released from jail following a public outcry and accepted a plea deal that allows him to avoid the trafficking charge for possessing marijuana butter, used for making cannabis-infused foods.

Meanwhile, Entrekin is also facing opposition at the ballot box over his pocketing of food funds.

"I believe the funds belong to the taxpayers and any excess funds should go toward things that benefit the taxpayer," said Rainbow City Police Chief Jonathon Horton.

A former member of the Etowah County Sheriff's Office, Horton is running against Entrekin in this year's race for sheriff.

Said Horton, "There's been a tremendous amount of money left over that shouldn't be used as a bonus check."

Accordingly, part of his platform involves a promise to not use any funds meant for feeding inmates for himself.

Entrekin failed to respond to a Daily News request for comment as to whether he will be making a similar pledge.