By The N and O Editorial Board


                        
                            May 18, 2018 11:00 AM
                        
                    


                        
                            
                               
                            
                        
                    

Todd Lamont Caveness died two years ago after spending three weeks in the Wilson County jail. State law requires jails to provide a written report within five days of an inmate death.

So why didn't the jail file a report on Caveness' death within five days? Because he didn't die in the jail; he died two days after being taken from the jail to the hospital. His death was from a blood clot in his lungs caused by dehydration and malnutrition; he had refused to eat or drink in the jail, fearing someone would poison him.

It was the kind of death that the state Department of Health and Human Services would investigate to see if the jail followed state regulations for supervising inmates. And the department did investigate — but only after local news reports revealed Caveness' death and the state asked the jail to file a report. The state found the jail had not checked on Caveness in accordance with state regulations.

Our journalism takes a lot of time, effort, and hard work to produce. If you read and enjoy our journalism, please consider subscribing today.

Rep. Donny Lambeth, R-Forsyth, and co-chair of the oversight committee, said recently he was unaware of the high percentage of supervision failures tied to inmate deaths. He said he wanted to learn more. "Sounds like we didn't ask the right questions," he said. Indeed. 


▪ Make clear that jail infirmaries are not medical facilities, as one judge claimed so that a jail could shield details of a death settlement. 


▪  Make clear that private medical providers working as contractors in jails should not be allowed to keep secret settlements. 

▪ Make SBI investigations into jail deaths public, and give the agency more authority to charge when there are clear cases of negligence, recklessness or malfeasance. Give more authority to DHHS to call in the SBI to assist with investigations. 


                        
                            View More Video
                        
                    