Gallery: DiIonno Column:Sam Nash


    
        
            By Mark Di Ionno

mdiionno@starledger.com,


Columnist, The Star-Ledger

In the wide halls of Essex County College, Samuel Nash's voice booms and reverberates off the tile floors and plaster walls.

It's hard not to hear him. And equally hard not to see him. His body is massive, encased in a suit size normally reserved for "World's Strongest Man" contestants or sumo wrestlers. At the peak of this human mountain is a curious little captain's hat Nash wears.

He may not look or sound like a scholar, but he is now a strong candidate for an alumni award given by the state's Educational Opportunity Fund (EOF) and named for Gov. Tom Kean, who began the program during his administration in the 1980s.

"He is exactly what this program is about," said Joanna Romano,  director of the state's largest EOF program at Essex County College (ECC). "It gives extra tutoring, extra counseling and, yes, extra money to give people who need help a chance at an education."

Nash, 63, grabbed that chance. He graduated from ECC with honors and went off to New York University, where his academic performance earned him the honor of flag-bearer at NYU's School of Continuing Studies' convocation in 2014.

"He has an amazing story of academic success," Romano said.

MORE: Recent Mark Di Ionno columns  

Nash is now teaching and volunteering at ECC. Hanging off his shoulder when he walks the halls is a weathered satchel stuffed with articles about black history and social justice heroes, from Frederick Douglas to Martin Luther King. This collection includes his favorite subject, The Harlem Renaissance. People greet him as "professor."

Nash once went by the name Glorious King Sau. While it sounds like something out professional wrestling, it was his street name for a fight of another kind. The serious, life-or-death street fight for the souls of teenagers in Newark's toughest neighborhoods.

He is still at.

At ECC, Nash is a teacher in the Gateway to College program for Newark high school students who have fallen behind and want to catch up.

"He's a good black male role model for kids in the program," said Nikki Burnett, the Gateway to College director. "He speaks about his adversity not as a victim, but as opportunity he took to better himself and offer hope for others."

Nash agrees with that, but adds this dimension: Every day he does something positive and with every kid he helps get off the streets, he is extracting "revenge" on the conditions that claimed the life of one son and almost killed another.

"I could have been a better father," he said. "I admit that. I could have been stronger for my sons. But what I do now, that's my way of getting revenge without having to hurt anyone."

Nash's first activism was as a founding member of a youth-rescuing group called the Street Warriors, formed with Earl Best, the "Street Doctor" in 2003.

"We got tired of watching the kids die," he said. "It was up to us, black men, to stop it."

The group had a drop-in center downtown, and created programs at the Essex County Juvenile Detention Center. With grants, it began education and recreation programs in the neighborhoods. Best, too, is still at it.

In 2007, the epidemic of street violence hit home for Nash.

His son, Saud Goosby, 25, was killed when rival gang members opened fire on a parked car he was sitting in.

"He was in the game," Nash said, acknowledging his son had multiple convictions and was partnered with the leader of a Bloods sect that operated in Newark and Elizabeth.

Another son, Isa Rollins, was 18 when he was shot six times in Vailsburg in 2015 but survived. He, too, had been arrested on weapons charges prior to being targeted.

At the time Rollins was shot, Nash was forming a group called Men Against Murdering Our Children. He was also finishing up a degree at NYU.

In the Gateway program, Nash tries to reach boys and girls like his sons.

"He is always very positive, never negative Burnett said. He exudes warmth. These kids know he cares about them."

Israel Bobien, 17, is one of Nash's students. He was at University High but "kind of stopped going" before being referred to Gateway. Now he's engaged in school and plans to go to college.

"He (Nash) shows us the possibilities, good and bad," he said. "He shows what could happen to any of us, positive and negative.

"I've had four cousins shot. I don't want to go that route."

William Burgos, 17, was also a University student but found the environment "too stressful." At Gateway, he said, learning was easier and the one-on-one dealings with Nash helped him focus.

"I now know how to properly construct a college essay," he said.

Bobien, Burgos and Marcelles Curtis, 17, who was a Weequahic student, were all motivated to go to Gateway because they wanted to change direction.

"There was a lot of peer pressure at Weequahic," Curtis said. "There were a lot of fights. Everybody wants to prove something to somebody. This is a safer environment to learn."

Safer, for Nash, is the operative word.

"Without that, nothing good is going to happen," he said. "I give them what I have, the experience of losing a son, the experience of getting an education, to let them know their life doesn't have to end that way, that they are worth more than that.

Mark Di Ionno may be reached at mdiionno@starledger.com. Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @StarLedger and find us on Facebook.




            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        