Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

✓ Unlimited access to trib.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (866) 981-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Widely scattered showers or a thunderstorm this evening. Then partly cloudy. Low around 65F. Winds W at 10 to 15 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Widely scattered showers or a thunderstorm this evening. Then partly cloudy. Low around 65F. Winds W at 10 to 15 mph. Chance of rain 30%.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 6:27 pm

Crime and Courts Reporter

The Wyoming Supreme Court decided Wednesday the state transportation department could not be sued in the case of a 7-year-old who was killed by a licensed driver with a visual handicap.

Sandra Pennock, who had one glass eye and glaucoma in the other, was driving in 2015 through Riverton with a valid license when she hit and killed Sophia Archer. Pennock said she never saw the girl.

Pennock was sentenced to a year in jail after pleading guilty to vehicular homicide. She was 78 at the time.

Although Pennock successfully completed a Wyoming Department of Transportation eye exam and was granted her license, the eye exam “would have been impossible for her to pass,” according to the supreme court.

Archer’s family sued the Wyoming Department of Transportation, the City of Riverton, Fremont County School District No. 25 and employees of the various agencies in district court alleging wrongful death.

A district court judge in 2016 dismissed all claims brought by the family. Judge Norman Young ruled that a Wyoming law granting the government immunity from most civil suits protected WYDOT and the City of Riverton from the family’s legal action.

After the family appealed the case to the state supreme court, the high court agreed with Young’s ruling.

The Wyoming Governmental Claims Act prevents state and local agencies from being sued for damages in many cases. However, the law does provide exemptions, including the improper operation of gas, electricity or water service.

The Wyoming Supreme Court ruled the eye exam was not exempted from the law.

The Archer family argued that Riverton served as a public utility by providing the crosswalk where the girl was killed. The court decided that providing a crosswalk is not a public service for which the state Legislature chose to waive governmental immunity. The state law specifically protects the government for liability for defects in design of roads, the court noted in its decision.

Follow crime reporter Shane Sanderson on Twitter @shanersanderson



RIVERTON — A state judge has ruled that the Wyoming Department of Transportation cannot be held legally responsible for the death of a 7-year-…

Crime and Courts Reporter

Shane Sanderson is a Star-Tribune reporter who primarily covers criminal justice. Sanderson is a proud University of Missouri graduate. Lately, he’s been reading Cormac McCarthy and cooking Italian food. He writes about his own life in his free time. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Shane Sanderson  posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Grant governments immunity but hold government employees responsible when negligence and incompetence is evident.

Why not name the plaintiff attorney who got smoked in this deal.   For the most part, the family did nothing in this case.  Some attorney pumped them up and sold them on a settlement with a contingency deal.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 