
    
        
            By Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

A 50-year-old man pleaded not guilty Wednesday to charges of attempted rape and sexual abuse in an attack on a teenager as she slept in the basement of a Northeast Portland home last month.

Thomas Williams Johnson, described in court records as a transient, also is accused of coercion, strangulation and burglary in the Aug. 31 attack.

The 18-year-old was staying at her boyfriend's home on Northeast 49th Avenue when she awoke about 1:15 a.m. to find a strange man on top of her with his pants down, according to court records. His hand was squeezing her throat.

The man wore a brown women's swimsuit top and red thong underwear and ordered the teenager to be silent if she wanted to live, Multnomah County Deputy District Attorney Todd Jackson wrote in a probable cause affidavit.

The man threatened the young woman, saying: "I swear to God stop yelling. You have to do what I say if you want to live through this ... if you don't want to die,'' according to the affidavit. He told her that he had never been with a teenager before.

The boyfriend walked in on the attack and struggled with the man, who fled out a basement door, police said.

The 18-year-old said she tried to scream but couldn't because the man would squeeze her neck tighter, the affidavit said. He spit at her several times, put his fingers in her mouth and shut off the light in the room, Jackson wrote in the affidavit.

The attacker left a black duffel bag behind outside the home, which contained women's underwear and pornographic magazines, the affidavit said.

Police received a report about 12 hours later about the attack and responded around 1:30 p.m., the prosecutor said.

An officer recognized the description of the suspect. It matched that of a man taken into custody earlier that morning.

Police had been called to do a welfare check and an officer found Johnson dressed in only an orange nylon a towel and took him to the Portland Police Sunshine Division, a food pantry and clothing outlet, for help.

About the same time, police also responded to a vandalism call about someone who had broken a toilet in an office in Northeast Portland, causing water to leak through a floor into the SouthFork restaurant below on Northeast Fremont Street. The suspect matched Johnson's description.

Police booked Johnson into the downtown jail at 12:27 p.m. on criminal mischief allegations in the vandalism case.

He was indicted this week in the attempted rape case after he told police that the duffel bag found outside the home belonged to him, according to court reports.

Johnson pleaded not guilty to a six-count indictment charging him with two counts of coercion and one count each of attempted first-degree rape, strangulation, first-degree sex abuse and first-degree burglary.

He has one prior misdemeanor conviction for possession of stolen property, according to court records.

He's being held on bail totaling $332,500 at Multnomah County's Inverness Jail.

-- Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com 503-221-8212 @maxoregonian


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        