Clear skies. Low 73F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear skies. Low 73F. Winds SE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 6:52 pm

Julie Cahlaway

Julie Cahlaway

A woman last year deceived her lover and his mother in a successful effort to get $279,000 from them, Douglas County law enforcement authorities said.

She feigned a pregnancy, medical problems and resulting surgical procedures and invented an investment in an oil field, the Douglas County Sheriff’s Office said.

Julie Cahlaway received the money from Sharon Schwarz, who believed that Cahlaway was carrying her grandchild. Mitchell Schwarz of Fremont was the father of the unborn baby, a girl, according to the Cahlaway concoction.

Sharon A. Schwarz reported to a sheriff’s deputy that she gave Cahlaway $279,000 in 15 transactions. Schwarz said they were to be loans, and the money was to be used to pay bills associated with the pregnancy and for an investment opportunity. Cahlaway instead spent the money on high-end clothing and to support an online exotic tropical fish business she operated, according to a description of the crimes prepared by a sheriff’s deputy that was filed in Douglas County Court.

Cahlaway, 38, was charged in late January with two felony counts of theft by deception. She was booked on Tuesday at the Douglas County Jail. Thursday, Douglas County Judge Craig McDermott set Cahlaway's bail at $500,000, meaning she would have to pay 10 percent, or $50,000 to be released from jail.

The Sheriff’s Office alleged that the crimes occurred in 2017.

Cahlaway met 36-year-old Mitchell Schwarz online. She targeted Schwarz “as a lonely and recently divorced male, and solicited funds of sympathy for her alleged legal and medial problems,” Lt. William Rinn wrote in an affidavit. In November, she moved from Chicago to Fremont.

Sharon Schwarz also wired to Cahlaway $75,000 that Schwarz intended to be used in an investment opportunity. The Sheriff’s Office alleged that Cahlaway used the money to purchase a BMW sport utility vehicle.

Rinn wrote that he reviewed records that suggested Cahlaway’s trickery extended beyond the Schwarzes.

“It appears Cahlaway uses various online dating forums to meet men, gain their confidence, and solicit funds in a quasi-Ponzi scheme format,” he wrote.

Cahlaway suggested to her boyfriend and his mother that her assets and bank accounts were frozen because of outstanding legal proceedings. She previously was convicted of loan fraud in Illinois.

One of the theft charges filed in Douglas County is connected to the sale of a vehicle to another couple.

The Schwarzes could not be reached for comment Wednesday.

Julie Cahlaway

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Lock her up and throw away the key!


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


