

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

A man fired at Seattle police officers and a SWAT vehicle during a stand-off Saturday in North Seattle. He's now charged with first-degree assault.

A man fired at Seattle police officers and a SWAT vehicle during a stand-off Saturday in North Seattle. He's now charged with first-degree assault.

A 56-year-old man was booked into jail and charged with assault Monday after an eight-hour Saturday night standoff in which authorities say he exchanged gunfire with cops at his North Seattle home.

Richard May, Jr., who was struck in the back during the confrontation, was hospitalized at Harborview Medical Center before being booked into King County Jail Monday night.

Prosecutors charged May with with first-degree assault for allegedly shooting at officers with a 12-gauge shotgun early Sunday morning.

The incident started about 9:30 p.m. Saturday in the 11200 block of Fremont Avenue North. A neighbor later told officers he was outside with his children when he heard May yelling something close to, "Shut those f**king kids up!" from the other side of a fence.

RELATED: Robbery suspect barricades himself in Ballard boat

The neighbor claimed he told May not to speak of his children in that manner and headed toward May's house to talk to him, police reports say.

A 56-

As he approached May's house, he heard a loud gunshot and saw May in his driveway, standing unsteadily and holding a rifle or shotgun at his side, according to the incident report.

The neighbor headed back to his own house to call 911. Other neighbors also called, reporting loud arguing between neighbors and hearing one gunshot, reports say.

Police officers arrived and contained May's residence until SWAT arrived with a hostage negotiation team.

Hostage negotiators and SWAT members tried to persuade May to come out of his house, but he refused. SWAT officers used an armored vehicle to remove nearby neighbors who could be in the line of fire should May shoot out of his house, according to court records. Police learned that May allegedly possessed "several handguns and long guns" in his house, reports indicate.

SWAT members issued flash grenades to try to force May out of his house, Seattle police reported. The armored vehicle was parked just feet from the front door.

About 4:25 a.m. Sunday, May allegedly emerged from the front door and fired a shotgun at the armored vehicle's windshield, hitting it four times. Three officers were sitting in the vehicle at the time.

RELATED: Police: Robbers in cop shooting stole food and beer

One SWAT officer returned fire and hit May in the lower back, prompting him to retreat inside his house, according to court records.

SWAT members told May that medics stood by to offer him medical treatment, but he reportedly refused to leave and told them to "f**k off," according to police.

May finally relented and was taken into custody about 5:39 a.m. Medics treated him at the scene and took him to Harborview Medical Center for treatment of a gunshot wound.

Later that afternoon, May allegedly admitted to carrying a pellet gun when he interacted with his neighbor and that he was angry about the kids' noise coming from their yard, according to the incident report. He also reportedly admitted to shooting at the SWAT officers in the armored vehicle with a Remington 1100 12-gauge shotgun because he was angry about the flash grenades that blew out his windows.

May is jailed on $500,000 bail.