A Virginia mother is blaming herself after authorities say her 17-year-old son, labeled an "alt-right killer," fatally shot his ex-girlfriend's parents.

Scott Fricker and Buckley Kuhn-Fricker were killed in their Reston home on Dec. 22. A teen, who has struggled with mental illness, is in custody.

"I wish it would have been us, not them," the alleged killer's mother told the Washington Post in an interview published Tuesday. "They truly didn't deserve it. It comes back on me."

The suspect, who suffered a self-inflicted gunshot wound, is being held at the Fairfax County Juvenile Detention Center after being hospitalized. He has still not been identified by police because of his age.

Investigators believe that the defendant shot the Frickers following an argument. The teen's mother told the Washington Post that she knew something was wrong when her son disappeared from their home early in the morning.

She said she contacted the ex-girlfriend's mother.

She received a text, according to the Washington Post: "He is here. We are calling police."

When she drove to their home, there was a massive police presence. She would find out that her son was injured, and that two people were dead.

"Your son has a serious head injury," a doctor told her, according to the Washington Post. "He shot himself and he shot two other people."

As doctors worked to save her son, she said, "Why are we saving him because he killed two people?" according to the newspaper.

It is believed that the teen's girlfriend broke up with him because of his neo-Nazi beliefs. The Southern Poverty Law Center said the teen has "associated" with the neo-Nazi hate group Atomwaffen Division online.

The teen's mother said he battled mental illness for a large part of his life. She told the Washington Post that she did not know the extent of his hate beliefs until after the shootings.

The courts will determine whether he is competent to stand trial, according to the Washington Post, and whether he will be tried as an adult.

The alleged killer's mother was thrilled that her son had a girlfriend, but the girl's mother, Buckley Kuhn-Fricker, almost immediately became concerned.

"Almost on day one of them dating this summer [my daughter] told me that [the teen] is very good at history and she said, 'Did you know that the Jews are partly to blame for WWII?" Kuhn-Fricker wrote in an email to the school administrator not long before she was killed, according to the Washington Post. "I thought it was a mistake and corrected her. Little did I know it is [the teen's] obsession."

In September a school administrator wrote, according to the newspaper, that "I think we have a potential Romeo and Juliet situation that we need to be alert to. These two kids are in my estimation — high risk — for any number of things."