Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Authorities say the former judge worked with a woman to steal money from a program for drug addicts in recovery.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Former Nashville Judge Casey Moreland was arrested Thursday by the FBI on new federal charges of obstructing justice.
    Michael Schwab

Nashville Judge Casey Moreland was booked into the Grayson County, Ky., jail on March 28, 2017.
(Photo: Grayson County (Ky.) Detention Center)

Federal authorities prosecuting former Nashville General Sessions judge Casey Moreland on obstruction and theft charges have now charged a woman accused of working as his accomplice in an embezzlement scheme.


Moreland has been under investigation for corruption for more than a year. Authorities say he worked with Nan Casey to steal money from a program for drug addicts in recovery. Then, when the FBI began to investigate his conduct, prosecutors say he told Casey to destroy evidence of their crime.


Moreland has been charged with theft and obstruction in connection with the alleged scheme. On Thursday, prosecutors charged Casey with conspiracy and destruction of records.


► More: Former Nashville judge Casey Moreland faces five more federal indictments


► More: Casey Moreland to stay in jail after second round of obstruction charges


All together, authorities said, Moreland and Casey pocketed more than $15,000 meant for the Davidson County Drug Court Foundation from spring 2016 to January 2017.


Moreland ran the misdemeanor drug court connected to the foundation. Casey was director of the Drug Court Foundation Center, which helped link suspects in the court with treatment.


Moreland had previously been charged with interfering in the corruption investigation in 2017. He is in custody awaiting trial.


Reach Adam Tamburin at atamburin@tennessean.com and 615-726-5986. Follow him on Twitter @tamburintweets.


 
