




This summer, some felons from Franklin County and Ohio's nine other most-populous counties won't be going to a state prison.


"Prison is never the ultimate outcome," said Susan Bedsole, deputy director of Franklin County Common Pleas Court.


Historically, convicts are sent to state prison for felonies such as murder, rape and kidnapping. Those convicted of misdemeanors, if incarcerated, are held in county jails for crimes such as theft or minor drug offenses.


Starting July 1, though, a state law requires the 10 most-populous counties and approximately 40 volunteering counties to keep criminals convicted of fifth-degree felonies in county jails or jail-alternative programs rather than send them to state prisons.


Targeting Community Alternatives to Prison, or T-CAP, was imposed by state lawmakers to, depending on their perspective, either:


• Reduce the state's prison population and transfer the cost of housing those "F5" inmates from the state to the counties, or;


• Give local authorities flexibility to help those battling addiction or mental-health issues by providing treatment programs they might not have access to if they served a prison sentence of up to the maximum of one year for a fifth-degree felony, Ohio's lowest-level felony. Probation is often given to those convicted of F5 felonies, which include drug possession, forgery, vandalism and breaking and entering. 


The F5 offenders eligible for the T-CAP program cannot have ever been convicted of a violent crime or a sex crime and cannot have a conviction that mandates a prison sentence.


The Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction acknowledges that a goal of T-CAP is to reduce the state's 49,000 prisoners by about 3,400. Those are the F5 offenders, and they include women — the fastest-growing prison population —  and T-CAP candidates whose crimes often are addiction-related.


Department director Gary Mohr sees T-CAP as a seminal program that he insists will be better for the criminal and society. "I believe that we are on the cusp of making a real difference in folks' lives," Mohr said.


Franklin County has been using jail-alternative programs for several years, Bedsole said, resulting in only about 50 F5 convicts being sent to prison annually.


Sending addicts to state prison, Franklin County officials believe, is less successful than keeping them in the county jail. They can be placed in the county jail or on probation with conditions that can include drug treatment, sober housing and work-release and other programs that assist those dealing with overcoming addiction or coping with mental-health problems.


T-CAP is and should be, at least partly, about economics, Mohr said.


His department employs 12,288, one-quarter of all state employees, Mohr said, and has a $1.8 billion annual budget. Those numbers are unsustainable, Mohr said, but he added that he thinks T-CAP is more about helping people.


Even if F5 criminals are sentenced to prison for the maximum of one year, Mohr noted that they spend months in a county jail until their cases are resolved, and they then serve only the balance of their sentences in a state prison. That leaves too little time for prison programs to help, but plenty of time for them to be taught about crimes by professional criminals, he said.


Supporters say county programs are cheaper than the annual cost of a state prisoner: $26,365, or $72 per day.


Not everyone is happy with T-CAP. The County Commissioners Association of Ohio, an advocacy group for Ohio's county governments, "views this program as being designed by the state for the state to keep its prison population down at the expense of the counties. This program should be eliminated."


Prisons are state institutions meant to house all felons, and T-CAP is a "major paradigm shift" transferring those responsibilities to counties, said the association's legislative counsel, John Leutz. Plus, he said, counties already help pay for felons by housing them in county jails until they are sent to state prisons.


As an inducement for T-CAP, the correction department is providing money to participating counties.


Franklin County is getting $2.25 million. Half will go to hiring more probation officers to provide individual programming for each criminal under T-CAP and to require more accountability than criminals could face in prison. That includes random, frequent drug tests, perhaps an ankle monitor and programs to deal with the underlying issue that officials hope to address before the criminals are released back into the community.


The other half will pay for food and medicine for F5 inmates in the county jail.


"This will help us continue those services we've always provided, but now we're providing those for more people," Bedsole said.


 


kperry@dispatch.com


@kimballperry


 


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.