Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.


✓ Unlimited access to billingsgazette.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

LIMITED TIME OFFER Save 30% with an annual subscription ✓ Unlimited access to E-Edition✓ Unlimited access to the billingsgazette.com website and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (800) 762-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Sunny. High near 85F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mainly clear. Low 61F. Winds NE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:53 pm

A frame from a dashboard video camera shows Billings police as they investigate a fatal carjacking near Lewis &amp; Clark Middle School on Sunday, June 10, 2018.

Gray

William 'Billy' Joy

Justice Reporter

Gray

A frame from a dashboard video camera shows Billings police as they investigate a fatal carjacking near Lewis &amp; Clark Middle School on Sunday, June 10, 2018.

Police were still searching Monday for the knife used in a fatal stabbing a week ago, when prosecutors say a North Carolina man looking for a ride back east carjacked an elderly ex-cop leaving the post office.

Police have asked for the public’s help in locating the weapon, described as having a black handle and sheath and a 5.5-inch steel blade. It’s thought to be between Grand and Broadwater avenues and 13th and 28th streets West, a nearly square-mile area.

Donald Mack Gray Jr., 58, was charged on June 12 with killing 81-year-old William Joy, a former Big Horn County sheriff and the father of Billings City Councilwoman Denise Joy.

William 'Billy' Joy

Gray told police he stabbed William Joy in the chest multiple times when Joy tried to attract attention after pulling over in his black SUV near Lewis and Clark Middle School. 

Gray has been in the Yellowstone County jail since June 10.

In 2001 in Dare County, North Carolina, Gray was charged with first degree burglary, robbery with a dangerous weapon and two counts of first degree kidnapping. Prosecutors say he broke into a beachfront home and used a gun to threaten the homeowners, stealing $5,000 in the process.

A jury acquitted him on all counts.

Friends and family held a vigil Friday and funeral Saturday for Joy at St. Patrick Co-Cathedral.

Joy grew up on Billings' South Side in the 1930s and ‘40s. He spent 25 years in law enforcement, including decades as a Hardin city cop and one term as Big Horn County sheriff, from 1983 to 1987.

He enlisted in the Marines out of high school and completed basic training but was medically discharged due to flat feet, his daughter Denise Joy said.

The former lawman converted to Catholicism later in life, becoming a Franciscan brother in 2017, his daughter said. He spent 14 years serving communion as a Eucharistic lay minister to patients at Billings Clinic.

William Joy was adopted into the Crow Tribe and given the name “Compassionate One,” which friends and family said was apt.

To help friends and neighbors in need, Joy would buy gas and groceries, pay phone bills and help with child care, speakers at the Friday vigil said. He bought clean clothes and a bus ticket home to the Hi-Line for a man he met through his hospital ministry. He once donated blood to a prisoner with a rare blood type that was compatible with his own.

“He spent 25 years bringing people to account for their criminal behavior, but he also understood the nuances of (their) circumstances,” Denise Joy said in an email.

William Joy had three children, four grandchildren and a great-grandchild, among other family.

Amid the shock and grief of William Joy’s death, Denise Joy said some family members felt a touch of pride that he died “with his boots on.”



Gray

At the sentencing for a man who stabbed a well-known Billings photographer to death last year, no one except the murderer and his lawyer spoke…

Justice Reporter

Justice reporter for the Billings Gazette.


                                    
                                        Whenever Phoebe Tollefson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 

Then let your friends know they should vote for your photos. The contest voting period is July 17-23. 