Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.


✓ Unlimited access to billingsgazette.com and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

LIMITED TIME OFFER Save 30% with an annual subscription ✓ Unlimited access to E-Edition✓ Unlimited access to the billingsgazette.com website and apps✓ No more surveys blocking articles

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call (800) 762-6397 to upgrade your subscription.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Mainly sunny. High 84F. Winds NE at 5 to 10 mph..

Clear to partly cloudy. Low 61F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 7:53 am

Justice Reporter

The Lame Deer jail, built for just 19 inmates, regularly houses 45. Last year it saw as many as 62 inmates in a single day, more than triple what it was designed for. And while crowding has gotten worse over the years, it’s been a problem almost since the federal government began tracking it back in 1998.

The number come from a recent Bureau of Justice Statistics’ annual Jails in Indian Country report. 

The Lame Deer jail has been operating above capacity since 1999, a year after the BJS began collecting data on Indian Country jails. That year its midyear count was 20, or one person above capacity, and its peak count was 42. (Peak count is measured on the busiest day in June each year.)

The numbers have climbed since. The average daily population had reached 23 by 2004, 32 by 2010 and hovered at 31 in 2015. (The reports were not issued in 2005 or 2006.)

The Northern Cheyenne jail was built in 1964 and renovated in 1987.

The BIA had “definite” plans to build a new jail in Lame Deer by 2003, according to the annual report issued in 2000, but that never happened. A BIA spokeswoman declined to comment on why. 

Most tribal jails in Montana are owned by the BIA and operated by the tribe, but the Northern Cheyenne jail is both owned and operated by the federal agency.

No other tribal jail in Montana has the same level of crowding, and nationally, most tribal jails are operating with empty beds, at just 62 percent of capacity on average, the report found.

What’s more, the growth in tribal jail capacity has outpaced, by more than double, the growth in inmate populations. In other words, officials have added twice as much space for inmates as was necessary in the past decade and a half.

Yet the small jail in Lame Deer has not seen relief for its crowding. Part of the problem is that with no Crow jail currently in operation, members of that tribe who are arrested on the reservation are held in the Lame Deer jail.

When asked about the crowding, BIA spokeswoman Nedra Darling said inmate populations fluctuate daily and the agency’s Office of Justice Services relocates inmates to other facilities “as warranted.”

That could include the county jail in Basin, Wyoming, which has a contract with the BIA. Overflows at Lame Deer might also get transported to the Blackfeet Detention Center in Browning, or the Wind River Detention Center in Fort Washakie, Wyoming.

The five other tribal jails in Montana had 101 empty beds last year, on average. Darling, the BIA spokeswoman, declined to clarify why the facilities weren't used more often to ease crowding at the Lame Deer jail. 

The crowding could soon come to an end, however. In November, the BIA announced it would reopen the privately-owned Two Rivers Detention Facility in Hardin by January. The 464-bed prison was built in 2006 with $26 million in bonds, and has since collected debt. 

The facility’s opening comes as good news to Crow Chief Judge Leroy Not Afraid, who wrote a letter to Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke pushing for the agency to reopen the Hardin prison, and protesting the conditions at the Northern Cheyenne jail.

“This overload is a violation of prisoners’ rights, a health problem and a violation of federal prison standards,” Not Afraid wrote.

The judge said the BIA had repeatedly failed to transport Crow inmates from the Lame Deer jail to court hearings in Crow Agency in a timely manner. The trip is roughly 45 miles both ways.

“Our complaints to the BIA have been ignored, and the BIA has failed and refused to make immediate and necessary changes to correct these problems,” Not Afraid wrote.



Montana ranks among the worst states in the country for workplace injuries and illnesses, for reasons that continue to elude state officials. 

Justice Reporter

Justice reporter for the Billings Gazette.


                                    
                                        Whenever Phoebe Tollefson posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Read about 40 the the best and brightest local business professionals under forty years of age in this year's 40 Under Forty. 

Visit 406 Sports for the latest news and scores from Montana sports. 