By

Jennifer Smith For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  17:54 EDT, 22 September 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  01:54 EDT, 23 September 2017







         180

View  comments

The meth addict accused of killing Holly Bobo in 2011 has been found guilty of her murder. 


Zachary Adams, 33, was convicted of first degree murder, rape and kidnapping at a courthouse in Savannah, Tennessee, on Friday.


Lawyers previously told the court the man was in a 'dark world' of methamphetamine when he abducted, raped and murdered Bobo in April 2011 along with his brother John, who is awaiting a trial date. 


The pair were arrested along with their friend Jason Autry after Bobo's decomposed remains were found near Adams' property in 2014, three years after she vanished. 


On Friday, a jury convicted him of eight counts which included felony rape, felony murder and especially aggravated kidnapping. 


He now faces the death penalty. Jurors will return to court to begin deliberations for his sentencing on Saturday.   


Scroll down for video 


Guilty: Zachary Adams, 33, (left on Friday) has been convicted of murdering nursing student Holly Bobo (right) who vanished from her Tennessee home in 2011

As the verdict was read out on Friday, Bobo's parents Karen and Dana hugged other relatives who had gathered in the courtroom.   





During the two-week trial, Bobo's mother Karen collapsed as she identified items which belonged to her daughter. 


The nursing student's brother Clint, who was the last person to see her alive apart from her accused killers, also gave evidence as did her grandfather and father.  All were convinced of Adams' guilt. 


In their closing arguments, prosecutors told in graphic detail how Bobo was gang-raped and shot dead in April 2011. 


'They ripped Holly's clothes off -- her blue jeans and her panties -- and one by one they lined up. They took turns,' prosecutor Jennifer Nichols said on Thursday. 


Autry, who said he served as 'lookout' for the Adams brothers who as they disposed of Bobo's body, took the stand last week to tell how they rolled her body up in a rug. 


He said he watched as Adams shot her in the head after she moved unexpectedly from inside the carpet. 





Karen Bobo, Holly's mother, hugged relatives as the verdict was announced on Friday 

Karen Bobo then hugged state prosecutor Jennifer Nicols in a show of her appreciation 

Dana and Karen Bobo, Holly's parents, are pictured hugging as the verdict was read out 

Holly's parents Karen and Dana Bobo (seen above on Tuesday) were present throughout the trial 

Bobo, 20, was studying to become a nurse when she disappeared from the family's home in 2011 




Adams' attorneys argued there was no physical evidence Bobo had been inside his home and said the prosecution's case was weak because it depended on Autry's testimony which hinged on him receiving immunity. 


They pointed the finger at a known sex offender called Chester the Molester (real name Terry Britt) and even called on witnesses who claimed to have listened to him confess to Bobo's killing. 


Adams is pictured in his 2014 mugshot. Police said he was in a dark world of methamphetamine when he killed Bobo 

The former lead detective on the case from the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation said he was convinced that neither of the Adams brothers were involved before he was removed from it in 2013.  


There was also a sensational claim from the former lead investigator from the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation who said Adams was not Bobo's killer. 


He said he had ruled out Adams and his brother after examining cell phone data.   





'I was wasting my time investigating these idiots,' Dicus said, referring to the trio of men. 


He also focused his attention on Britt whose lengthy criminal record includes multiple convictions for sex crimes.   











Adams (above on September 16) now faces the death penalty. He pleaded not guilty throughout the trial and claimed prosecutors had the wrong man 

Several of Adams' friends testified against him including one who said he'd once boasted of Bobo: 'I couldn't have picked a prettier b****, could I?' 

Britt was ruled out after blonde hair found inside his home was tested and was found not to belong to Bobo. 


Several of Adams' acquaintances testified against him. They described his erratic, drug-fueled behavior and told how he behaved strangely whenever Bobo's name was brought up. 


Anthony Phoenix, who was friends with Adams and often took drugs with him, said he once told him: 'I couldn't have picked a prettier b***h, could I?' 


The jury also heard from Shawn Cooper, who was being held at the Chester County Jail in March 2014 in an unrelated case when Zachary Adams was brought there after being charged in Bobo's killing.


Cooper was awaiting transfer to Obion County Jail when he says Adams told him he was involved in the 'Holly Bobo murder case.'


Cooper said Adams told him his brother was being held in Obion County Jail, and asked him to relay to John that he should stay quiet or he would 'put him in a hole beside her.'


Cooper said those statements upset him. 


Prosecutors showed photographs of the gun they say Adams used to kill Bobo in 2011

 Jason Autry was also charged in the killing but he testified in exchange for immunity. John Dylan Adams (right) is awaiting his first court date 

Autry is pictured testifying at Adams' trial. He drew a map for the court which he said depicted the route he and Zachary Adams took on the day of Bobo's murder

Others told how he asked them if God would forgive him for 'the Holly killing' and that he also made reference to a knife which they believe he used to hurt her.   


The young woman was in her home on April 13, 2011, when she was last seen alive. 


Her brother Clint told the court how he watched as she walked into the woods behind their home with a man dressed in camouflage. 


He believed it was her boyfriend at the time and saw no reason to be alarmed but a neighbor who heard screams coming from the home suspected foul play. 


She called Bobo's mother, who was at work at the time, to tell her her daughter had been abducted. 


Bobo was never seen alive again despite a huge, state-wide hunt.  


Shawn Adams, who came across Adams in county jail, said he'd admitted to being 'involved' in Bobo's killing 

Jamie Darnell, a former friend of Adams', said he'd once fired a gun at his girlfriend's head 

Christopher Swift, another of the defendant's acquaintances, said he'd asked him if God would forgive him 'for the Holly killing' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group