

Drew Costley

Did you know that these history-making African Americans have history in the Bay Area?

Oakland native Ryan Coogler, director of Marvel's "Black Panther," is breaking records and making history with his vision of the superhero king of the fictional land Wakanda.

The film, which grossed $192 million in the U.S. during its opening weekend, became the fifth-highest-grossing debut ever, behind "Star Wars: The Force Awakens," ''Star Wars: The Last Jedi," ''Jurassic World" and "The Avengers." Its opening weekend became the largest-ever opening in February and ranked among the top-15 global debuts for a film.

It's nearly impossible to ignore Coogler's ties to the Bay Area in his work. Oakland is featured prominently as a setting in "Black Panther." And his directorial debut was "Fruitvale Station," about the 2009 fatal shooting of Oscar Grant by BART police officer Johannes Mehserle.

But there are a ton of African Americans with Bay Area ties who have made history, either in the Bay Area, the state of California, the U.S. or globally, who you might not know about.

Caption


Close

Bonus: Here are a few more to hold you over in a leap years, when February has 29 days.


There are a ton of African Americans who have made history and have ties to the Bay Area. So many, in fact, that we couldn't include them all in this gallery. Here are a few more for those years when Black History Month is a bit longer.


They are (top row, l to r) En Vogue, one of the top-selling female musical groups of all time, Marshawn Lynch, the record-breaking running back for Oakland Tech and Cal football, Belva Davis, the first African American TV news reporter on the West Coast, David Blackwell, the first African American professor to receive tenure at UC Berkeley, (bottom row, l to r) Mildred Howard, an award-winning visual artist, Boots Riley, a legendary rapper and award-winning screenwriter, Debra Pryor, the first female firefighter and fire chief in Berkeley and Warren Widener, Berkeley's first African American mayor.


Bonus: Here are a few more to hold you over in a leap years, when February has 29 days.

There are a ton of African Americans who have made history and have ties to the Bay Area. So many, in fact, that we


There's Maya Angelou, for starters. The legendary author, born Marguerite Annie Johnson, moved to Oakland when she was a teenager and was the first African American woman to conduct a streetcar in San Francisco (check the slideshow above for an even cooler connection she has to SF).

How about Eloise Westbrook? She isn't well-known outside of the Bay Area, but she was a legendary housing rights activist for the African American community in the Hunter's Point-Bayview community in SF.

And then there are people like Bill Russell, who is known by Bay Area residents as a native son. He made history before leaving the Bay Area for Boston, though, when he lead the University of San Francisco to back-to-back NCAA national championships in basketball in the 1950s.

Regardless of their level of fame, there is a rich history of African Americans either being raised in the Bay or coming to the Bay and going on to make history. Check out the slideshow above to find out more about them.