Facebook

Matthew Minkler, a 17-year-old boy from Las Vegas, died from a gunshot wound during an alleged game of “Russian roulette”.

According to police, Minkler’s body was found on Friday, June 8, in an abandoned house in Henderson, Nevada. Henderson is a suburb roughly 16 miles outside of Las Vegas. The Henderson Police Department says that 16-year-old Jaiden Caruso is facing a charge of murder with a deadly weapon. In addition, 17-year-old Kody Harlan is facing charges of accessory to murder after the fact and destroying evidence.

However, while the suspects are claiming it was a game of Russian Roulette, Minkler’s mother believe he was murdered. Minkler’s mother, Jamie Shanklin, told the Las Vegas Review-Journal: “We know this wasn’t Russian roulette. My kid was shot in the chin, like they were shutting him up.”

The Henderson PD’s arrest report says that Minkler’s body was dragged to a downstairs closet after being shot dead in the kitchen.

via Fox News:

The pair are being charged as adults and are being held at Clark County Detention Center after initially being booked into the county’s juvenile detention center. Police said a homicide investigation began earlier on Friday after officers tried to pull over a vehicle that was being driven recklessly near East Sunset Road and Green Valley Parkway.

The vehicle drove through a red light and crashed at the intersection, at which point several teenagers attempted to flee. When they were taken into custody, at least one of them revealed information about the homicide. Minkler’s body was subsequently found in the abandoned house on Cool Lilac Avenue.

According to the Las Vegas Review-Journal, it is not clear how long the house has been empty, but county property records show that it was sold in January for $390,000 to a limited liability company.

A GoFundMe set up by Minkler’s cousin Leah Robbins-Golden has raised more than $6,400 for his funeral expenses.

Henderson Police are asking anyone with information on the homicide contact them at 702-267-4911 or Crime Stoppers at 702-385-5555.


						© 						COED MEDIA Group LLC.
						 All Rights Reserved.


						Powered By 						Wordpress.com VIP
					