Intervals of clouds and sunshine. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


 

HOUSTON — It was all setting up perfectly for the Oakland A’s. They had just completed another late-inning comeback to take the lead in extra innings, giving way to their automatic All-Star closer. It was similar to the movie we’ve seen plenty of times this season. But this one had a twist ending. 

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

“Boying Up: How To Be Brave, Bold and Brilliant” by Mayim Bialik 

Stop the courthouse project and fund drainage upgrades 

Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr.

Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr.

Authorities have identified the woman whose body was dumped outside Mission Regional Medical Center early Saturday morning by a man believed to be her boyfriend.


Palmview Police Chief Chris Barrera said charges against 39-year-old Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr., which are related to the death of 28-year-old Cydnie Lauren Herrera, are pending. They include tampering with evidence and possible abuse of a corpse charge.


Treviño was arrested by Mission police Saturday on a warrant on an outstanding criminal trespass charge.

Preliminary autopsy results suggest Herrera died from an overdose, Barrera said, and police are working to obtain a search warrant for Treviño’s vehicle. It’s unknown whether drugs will be found inside the car.


The pair was at the Palmview Inn Motel at the time of Herrera’s death, according to the chief.


Treviño remains in Hidalgo County jail and his bond has yet to be set.

msmith@themonitor.com


This story has been updated to reflect the correct date of the incident and arresting agency.



Jaime Sandoval Treviño Jr.


                                    
                                        Whenever Molly Smith posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.