By

Eve Buckland For Mailonline






  Published:
  16:08 EDT, 21 November 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  18:40 EDT, 21 November 2017







          25

View  comments

She heralded her upcoming appearance in the latest series Celebs Go Dating with a showstopping rainbow and a canary yellow outfit.


But Tallia Storm put on an uncharacteristically understated display as she attended the Rosewood London charity Christmas party on Tuesday.


The aspiring singer, 19, flashed her toned abs in a knitted slate grey bardot crop-top, which also emphasised her slender waist. 


Scroll down for video 


Ab flashing: Tallia Storm put on an uncharacteristically understated display as she attended the Rosewood London charity Christmas party on Tuesday

She paired the ab-skimming top with a pair of high-waisted jeans with silver tassels adorning the waistband, which shimmered as she struck a series of playful poses and flaunted her trim legs.


The star added height with a pair of navy and silver glittery ankle boots and threw on a blush pink furry jacket.


Her blonde tresses were styled in an elegant bun while she went for full on glamour with her make-up with smoky eyeshadow, false lashes, liner and a slick of taupe lipstick completing her look.


She accessorised with glittering diamond studs and a bejewelled clutch bag. 


Playful: The aspiring singer, 19, flashed her toned abs in a knitted slate grey bardot crop-top, which also emphasised her slender waist, in a more low-key look than her rainbow inspired ensemble the day before at the Celebs Go Dating launch (R)

Shimmer: She paired the ab-skimming top with a pair of high-waisted jeans with silver tassels adorning the waistband, which shimmered as she struck a series of playful poses and flaunted her trim legs

The event was held to celebrate the launch of Rosewood mini wishes, in aid of Great Ormond Street Hospital Childrens Charity.


Tallia's appearance came one day after she confirmed her appearance on E4's Celebs Go Dating, joining a star-studded line-up including Gemma Collins, Mike Thalassitis and Sam Thompson.


As for romance, in recent months Tallia discussed her secret teenage love affair with Brooklyn Beckham.


The Scottish beauty explained although she and Brooklyn kept their romance very private, she was introduced to his superstar parents; fashion designer Victoria, 42, and former footballer David, 41, and used to hang out at their home.


Fluffy: The star added height with a pair of navy and silver glittery ankle boots and threw on a blush pink furry jacket

Support: The event was held to celebrate the launch of Rosewood mini wishes, in aid of Great Ormond Street Hospital Childrens Charity

Buffet: Tallia looked delighted as she lined up to get some barbecue food 

'We dated, it was puppy like,' Tallia told MailOnline. 'We kept our love all very private. We were only spotted together once.


'He came to see me perform. We kept it very private. It was real. We spent a lot of time together.


His dad used to drop him off at my house and I'd go to his. I have nothing but respect for his mum and dad.'


Discussing the end of their romance, she added: 'It came to an end when I saw him in the papers with another girl. I was like, "Oh my goodness".


Tallia admitted she channeled her heartbreak into songwriting, and revealed during the summer that her single, Still In Love, is all about her 'puppy love' with Brooklyn. 


Sweet like candyfloss: Tallia's appearance came one day after she confirmed her appearance on E4's Celebs Go Dating, joining a star-studded line-up including Gemma Collins, Mike Thalassitis and Sam Thompson

Kaleidoscope: Tallia posed up in front of some halogen lights at the event

Festive: She later joined a glam pal for a fun photo at the charity event 

Wow factor: Nicole Scherzinger also performed at the event and pulled out all the stops with her outfit







Glittering: Nicole showed off her toned figure in sequin embellished leggings and a backless top, paired with a furry red jacket

Love; Nicole made a heart sign as she flashed her toned legs in the glittery leggings

Soulful: Nicole was putting her heart and soul into the performance at the event

Smile: Nicole couldn't contain her euphoria at performing as she greeted her fans

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group