‘You can never go home again, but I guess you can shop there.’ says John Cusack’s character in Grosse Pointe Blank when he discovers that his childhood home is now a mini-mart.

British Television's main production hub is now a branch of Soho House.White City House

After university, my first job was at the B.B.C. As of this week, not only can I go back to Television Centre, but I can have an acai bowl with bee pollen and a hemp-oil enhanced smoothie, take a swim in the rooftop swimming pool or pummel away with Theragun in a 24,000ft gym. For £120 a night. 

The Allis is on the ground floor and open to the public.White City House

 
 

The BBC opened Television Centre in 1960 at White City, a then forlorn corner of West London. Built in Graham Dawbarn in a defiantly modernist circular design, it was, and I write from experience, perfectly possible to walk round and round the building, getting increasingly lost but knowing that television history was being made behind nearly every door. 

One of the 'small' bedrooms at White City House.White City House

Doctor Who was filmed here, as was cult childrens programmes such as Play School and Blue Peter. Top of the Pops was also filmed there, which saw performances from Diana Ross, Stevie Wonder, the Rolling Stones and Madonna.  Now, it’s the latest outpost of Soho House. White City House opened last week.

The furniture of the rooms reference the 1960sWhite City House

Back in my day, after performing on Top of the Pops, if the most famous pop stars in the world wanted a drink, they’d have to head to the BBC Club house and hang out with the electricians and production staff. Banner name actors would queue up in the canteen for meals. Now, there are a series of spaces to choose from. The Allis  is a public area on the ground floor with a kale-and-comfort-food menu; there’s also a branch of the Electric Cinema. 

The 9th floor is reserved for members and hotel guests.White City House

Reserved for members and those staying in the hotel rooms, are the club’s 8th, 9th, and 10th floors, with a series of performance areas, snugs and bars. The top floor, the most mellow, has an outdoor area plus Soho House’s now obligatory rooftop pool. There are a series of open kitchens including one with both a pizza and a duck oven; Sunday service will include a dim sum trolley, all coated in a 1960s-inspired furniture and art that references Television Centre’s production heyday. 

A rooftop pool has become a Soho House fixture.White City House

Even though most of the club area is in a new built, elements of BBC heritage have been woven in. The main lifts have panels designed to look like daleks from Doctor Who. Artist Peter Blake has produced a riff on his Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band cover in art works that feature some of the shows and characters created by the BBC at Television Centre. 

A 'big' bedroom at White City House.White City House

And then there are the 45 rooms. They’re in the original Grade I listed circular building on the 2nd and 3rd floor. They have been fashioned from what were production offices, a warren of rooms where programmes such as Fawlty Towers and Monty Python’s Flying Circus were commissioned and nurtured. Prices start at £120 for a ‘tiny’ room and like the rest of White City House, there’s careful reference to the 1960s in furniture. You won’t, incidentally, be booking in for the view, but the best ones look into the ring of the building.  

The 24,000 sq ft gym has nightclub-style lighting.White City House

Along with Television Centre, White City has been transformed in recent years. There’s a Westfield shopping centre across Wood Lane (a deceptively rural name for an arterial road that leads towards Heathrow) and the BBC hasn’t abandoned filming at Television Centre completely. Shows, such as Graham Norton are still filmed there, other production companies, including rival ITV have offices there. It’s just that now guests will have somewhere rather more congenial than the canteen to hang out.   

The White City House gym has a boxing area, a yoga studio and a hamman.White City House

The Soho House format has been tweaked slightly for its location. At the moment, 50 per cent of White City’s membership is under 27. There’s no spa because the rationale is the millennial market would rather put their cash towards partying. Or working out at the gym. 

The indoor lap pool at White City House.White City House

The floorspace given over to fitness is by far the biggest in the Soho House empire. Spreading out across 24,000 square feet, with moody night-club level lighting, there’s a boxing area, hamman, yoga studio, sauna and a lap pool.  For it would seem that you can go back, but it might be a good idea to bring your gym kit.  