
                                SHANNON TONKIN
                            


                            
                            Last updated 16:36, May 11 2018
                            

The piles of clothes were stacked so high the children would have to step onto them to use the toilet, which itself was caked in faeces, police said.



WARNING: GRAPHIC MATERIAL BELOW


A woman from the region of Illawarra, Australia has faced court on child neglect charges after her three young children were found living in extreme squalor.


New South Wales police officers who arrived at the house in October last year to check on the children's welfare described the living conditions as "near uninhabitable".  They said the house was covered in human faeces, there was a drawer full of rotting food, unwashed clothing was piled high and there was an infestation of flies and cockroaches in multiple rooms.

Police say they were overwhelmed by the presence of faeces and urine stains throughout the house, including on this couch in the lounge room.



The officers, many of whom are seasoned members of the force, said they were so overwhelmed with the "disgusting" conditions they immediately contacted Family and Community Services (FACS) to have the children removed.


READ MORE: * Parents injected children with heroin as feel-good medicine, police say * Baby boy born in Auckland boarding house dies just days later


Considering the case in Wollongong Local Court on Thursday (local time), magistrate Mark Douglass said it was one of the worst examples of child neglect he'd ever seen.

There was rotting food in the kitchen drawers, police said.



"I'm struggling to imagine a worse case in relation to children," he said.


"It's perhaps one of the worst cases of neglect that's been brought before me in a criminal form."  Court documents detailing the extent of the filth said that urine and faeces stains were present on almost every surface in the house and officers were left dry-retching while documenting the scene.


"The bedrooms were absolute squalor with stained mattresses, nil bedding and putrid floors covered in soiled nappies," police wrote.

Police found excrement on the wall next to a cot in one of the bedrooms.



"One of the children's bedrooms contained a cot covered in faeces ... the mattress was soiled to the point of being completely brown.


"The wall alongside the cot was covered in faeces where the child had apparently taken off his nappy and wiped his faeces over the wall.


"There was a mattress under the cot which was also covered in faeces."


Police said the bathroom was piled high with unwashed clothes, meaning the children were forced to stand on the clothing to use the toilet, which itself was covered in grime and hardened faeces.


"All of the floor within the house had urine and faeces stains and there were a large number of flies and cockroaches scattered around the house."


The court heard FACS had attended the house three times in as many months before October and had even paid to have the home extensively cleaned and fumigated, but it returned to its filthy state within weeks of each visit.


A FACS report tendered to the court said the children's risk of neglect was rated at nine out of 10.


However, when asked by FACS about the state of the house, the mother appeared full of excuses.


"I'm sure every home has a problem with mould," she responded when asked about the presence of the health hazard in the bathroom.


She was equally dismissive when questioned about cockroaches seen crawling on the childrens' bedding. "You can't tell me no house has cockroaches," she said.


And finally, when asked if she felt the current state of the house was OK for the children to be living in, she said: "Yeah."


The mother was charged with one count each of neglecting a young person in care and taking action that results in health/physical damage, to which she pleaded guilty in court on Thursday.


She had been due to be sentenced at 2pm but left the courthouse at lunchtime and did not return for the afternoon's proceedings.


The magistrate adjourned the case to Friday for sentencing. The woman is not required to be in court.


 



                
                     - Sydney Morning Herald
            

A snowy cold snap moves through Australia's New South Wales

World Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        How Musk moved in on the cave
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        The will to live: New cave rescue details
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Remarkable Thai cave survivor
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Trump lashes out at Nato allies
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys salute from hospital
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescues that gripped the world
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Why we care for the Thai boys
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Urged suicide 'free speech'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Rescue almost went horribly wrong
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Hero cave doctor's tragic loss
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Amid the Brexit turmoil
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys given sedative
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave casualty 'hero in my heart'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Coach, three boys 'stateless'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Cave boys were extraordinary
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            