HOUSTON, TX — The cold and flu season has hit Texas particularly hard as 2017 is nearing an end. According to a map created by Walgreens, Texas and part of Arkansas lead the nation in most influenza outbreaks to wrap up 2017.


The flu outbreak shows no particular bias in Texas as part of East Texas tops the national list while the valley is No.2. But East Texas and the Greater Houston and Gulf region seem to have been his hardest in the national drugstore's designated market areas (DMA)


Here's a link to the national map that can be enlarged to zoom in on Texas.


The Walgreens Flu Index is compiled using retail prescription data for antiviral medications used to treat influenza across Walgreens locations nationwide. The data is analyzed at state and geographic market levels to measure absolute impact and incremental change of antiviral medications on a per store average basis, and does not include markets in which Walgreens has fewer than 10 retail locations. 


According to the store's website, the Flu Index is not intended to illustrate levels or severity of flu activity, but rather, illustrate which populations are experiencing the highest incidence of flu. 


The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists healthy habits to undertake to try and prevent the flu. Those include:


Avoid close contact with people who are sick. When you are sick, keep your distance from others to protect them from getting sick too.

If possible, stay home from work, school, and errands when you are sick. This will help prevent spreading your illness to others.

Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing or sneezing. It may prevent those around you from getting sick.

Washing your hands often will help protect you from germs. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand rub.

Germs are often spread when a person touches something that is contaminated with germs and then touches his or her eyes, nose, or mouth.

Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces at home, work or school, especially when someone is ill. Get plenty of sleep, be physically active, manage your stress, drink plenty of fluids, and eat nutritious food.


Additionally, the CDC offers three tips specifically to fight the flu, and that includes getting a flu shot for those who haven't done so yet. With cold temperatures lurking in Texas the next week or so, these could be good tips to follow.


Image: With a temperature of 103.8, Asa Moore, 6, of Vivian, Louisiana is examined at the North Caddo Surgical and Medical Center for symptoms of Influenza December 12, 2003 in Vivian, Louisiana. Moore had not received a flu shot and the medical center was out of the vaccine. (Photo by Mario Villafuerte/Getty Images)


Patch welcomes contributions and comments from our users. We strive for civil, enlightened discussions on Patch stories and local issues. Please abide by our posting standards:

Users who violate our posting rules will have their comments blocked or deleted. Users who flagrantly violate our standards can be banned at the moderator's discretion.

Swipe for more from Patch »