

AEI 






Subscribe to AEIdeas

A public policy blog from AEI


November 10, 2017 11:50 am
| AEIdeas








AMLO and Trump — The odd couple that could oddly narrow the US-Mexico gap








Testimony: Examining the Importance of Paid Family Leave to American Working Families









The terrorists’ war on education








TESTIMONY: China’s Global Investment: Neither the US nor Belt and Road






More options:
Share,
Mark as favorite



View related content:
Foreign and Defense Policy, Middle East


Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman (MbS)’s “night of long-knives” appears to be an extended affair, with over 500 Saudi princes and businessmen detained to date. Even more elites are likely to come under “Ritz”-arrest, as Riyadh deepens its anti-corruption push. There are rumors that former senior defense official Prince Khalid bin Sultan and his brother, former Saudi Ambassador to the US Bandar bin Sultan (who overly profited from their time at Saudi’s Ministry of Defense) will likely be checking into the Ritz soon.

Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman attends the Future Investment Initiative conference in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia October 24, 2017. REUTERS/Hamad I Mohammed

As rife as the speculation has been about the young prince’s moves, MbS is swiftly consolidating his position in the Kingdom. Prince Miteb bin Abdullah’s removal as Minister of the National Guard jettisoned the last security service not under the control of MbS’s coterie. Furthermore, lower-level individuals were arrested within the national guard who potentially could stir-up tribal based dissent. This crackdown has clearly extended beyond mere figureheads.

The Crown Prince is broadly purging those who have opposed him or become symbols for how out of touch and reluctant to change some of Riyadh and Jeddah’s elites have become. The growing under-employed and less economically well-off youth population is sure to support these developments. Frankly, it’s hard for MbS to preach the McKinsey gospel of subsidy reform and austerity when his cousins are siphoning money from the state in order to fund their lifestyles in London and Paris.


See also:
Tehran Stands Atop the Syria-Iran Alliance


See also:


So far, these moves have been popularly received on social media. MbS will likely get a further boost of acceptance when he holds public trials of the most notorious of public offenders in the coming months. As details emerge of businessmen and princes pillaging the state coffers over the previous decades, MbS will become the face of cleaning up corruption in Saudi Arabia. Neither him, nor his father, are known for being particularly clean themselves, but the young prince is taking steps no one previously dared to do in the Kingdom.

MbS may also bring much needed Saudi Riyals back to the state’s depleted coffers. The numbers are wildly inflated currently, but Riyadh is ambitiously hoping to capture 3 trillion US dollars of assets. While it’s unlikely MbS will get close to that number, the young prince may end up back-stopping any Aramco IPO valuation shortfall in 2018 or oil price volatility with nearly a trillion dollars’ worth of extra cash to bolster his ambitious, but necessary, economic reform measures.

It’s still too early to tell if MbS will becomes the Xi or Putin of Arabia, but his domestic actions are creating space to reconstitute the Saudi elite and civil society in order to pursue necessary social reforms under a new populist mandate. He’s also equally showing his taste for iron-fisted rule at the expense of Saudi’s traditional consensus-based decision making. The balance that once existed among the sons of Abdul Aziz bin Saud is gone. MbS has created a new Kingdom around him.

Will MbS become King before the end of the year?

As enticing as the question may be, there’s no real upside or downside to such a move — MbS is King for all intents and purposes. There is speculation that MbS may even give his father the title Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, as he tries to draw a line between mosque and state.

Will MbS survive the year?

The young prince is certainly breaking a lot of china but barring a black swan event, it’s unlikely that any prince is in a position to pull-off a palace coup with military force. MbS’s own hesitancy to travel outside of the Kingdom and his heightened security certainly indicates that he is aware of his own fragility. The reality is that the street may be more receptive to him than his own extended family.

Where is this headed?

Predata signals measuring activity of digital traffic related to the Saudi government, as well as more focused signals tracking issues of domestic security and civil society, have all reached high points over the past few days. Saudi internet audiences and kingdom watchers seem to be reacting more strongly to the turmoil than is suggested in the press.

For the time being, it appears MbS is prepared to ride out the storm.


Learn more:
Game of Thobes: Saudi Arabia


Learn more:


There are no comments available.

AEI

1789 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20036

© 2018 American Enterprise Institute


Most Recent




Hot Topics 




Policy Area 




Scholar 




Type 


Date

Login or Register to save searches.