


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A controversial call took the spotlight in Sunday's best game.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    SportsPulse: NFL insider Jarrett Bell discusses a wild weekend and the Steelers not doing enough to come up with a win over New England.
    USA TODAY Sports

Pittsburgh Steelers tight end Jesse James (81) fails to hold the ball as he falls across the goal line against New England Patriots free safety Devin McCourty (32) and strong safety Duron Harmon (30) during the fourth quarter at Heinz Field. The play was ruled an incomplete pass. The Patriots won 27-24. Mandatory Credit: Charles LeClaire-USA TODAY Sports ORG XMIT: USATSI-359063 ORIG FILE ID:  20171217_gav_al8_069.jpg
(Photo: Charles LeClaire, USA TODAY Sports)

With only two weeks left in the regular season, it's difficult for many in the NFL to avoid a sense of panic.


But having the stakes raised as the playoff picture takes shape shouldn't lead to wild conclusions about the latest round of games.


Here are four overreactions we're pushing back on after Week 15:


The Steelers got robbed


In the postgame locker room, the Steelers were stunned, wondering how officials overturned a would-be touchdown by tight end Jesse James that almost certainly would’ve won the game.


Instead, the rival Patriots won 27-24 and seized control of the AFC’s No. 1 seed.


Steelers fans may want to take a deep breath before reading, but it was the right call.


Based on the way the catch rule is written, officials – with the help of vice president of officiating Al Riveron in the New York league office – judged that the ball had moved once it hit the ground when James extended his arms to cross the goal line.


Both referee Tony Corrente (in a pool report) and Riveron (in a video explanation) said James did not “survive the ground.”


Upon close examination, it’s clear that the ball jostled loose when it hit the turf before James regained possession.


Many fans find this to be the most frustrating and illogical rule in football, and it should be tweaked or clarified. But that’s for the competition committee to debate in the offseason.


More: Steelers bear blame for not finishing job vs. Patriots


More: Ben Roethlisberger: Steelers were confused by coaches' call on fake spike play


More: 40 things we learned in Week 15 of the 2017 NFL season


The Packers rushed Aaron Rodgers back too soon


A 31-24 setback against the Panthers might have sunk Green Bay’s postseason dreams as quarterback Aaron Rodgers made his return from a broken collarbone.


Rodgers proved, however, that getting their franchise QB back on the field was the Packers' best play.


Rodgers completed 26 of 45 throws for 290 yards, three touchdowns and three interceptions. It marked his first three-interception game since 2009. But each of the picks against the Panthers came when Green Bay struggled to pick up Carolina's blitz.


Certainly, Rodgers deserves some blame. He wasn’t as accurate as he needed to be and tried to force some throws.


The reality was that Green Bay needed a big swing to reach the playoffs. And though Brett Hundley was admirable in Rodgers' absence with a 3-4 record, the Packers are simply far more dangerous with No. 12 behind center.


Despite the turnovers, Green Bay actually had a chance to tie the game late thanks in large part to Rodgers. But a fumble by receiver Geronimo Allison inside two minutes doomed the Packers comeback bid, and likely their playoff hopes as well.


More: NFL playoff picture after Week 15


The Eagles still could be in trouble with Foles


The 34-29 score from the matchup against the cellar-dwelling Giants indicates a challenge for the Eagles, which the team certainly faced.


But even though backup quarterback Nick Foles started his first game in relief of Carson Wentz (torn anterior cruciate ligament), it wasn’t Philadelphia’s offense that took a step back.


Foles completed 24 of 38 for 237 yards and four touchdowns. He managed the game, avoided making mistakes and put the ball in the hands of his playmakers, completing passes to seven different players. In fact, Foles distributed each of his scores to different targets.


The problem for the Eagles was a defensive line that had entered the game with a reputation of consistently generating pressure despite often rushing just four players.


The Eagles didn’t generate enough pressure, sacking Eli Manning only once and hitting him three times. The defense allowed Manning to throw for 434 yards and three touchdowns with just one interception.


The Giants actually raced out to a 20-7 lead, and it was Foles who slowly orchestrated drives to chip away at the deficit and eventually secure the victory. Maybe the Eagles will be just fine with him leading the charge.


Jadeveon Clowney is right: Blake Bortles is “trash”


The Texans pass rusher raised eyebrows when, after the Jaguars throttled Houston 45-7, Clowney gave a succinct opinion of Jacksonville's quarterback: “He’s trash."


Bortles certainly isn’t without flaws. He’s still likely somewhere in the middle- to lower-tier of starting quarterbacks in the NFL.


But in his last three games (all victories, against the Colts, Seahawks, and Texans), Bortles has thrived. He has completed 71.4 % of his passes for 903 yards and seven touchdowns with no interceptions.


With injuries sidelining Jacksonville’s top three receivers, Bortles helped rookie receivers Jaydon Mickens and Keelan Cole shine against Houston. The Jaguars were without star running back Leonard Fournette, who was inactive with a quadriceps injury.


Keeping the offense afloat when key contributors go down is a sign of a good – or at least ascending – quarterback.


Much of Bortles’ improvement stems from the Jaguars boasting the NFL’s No. 1 rushing offense and top-ranked defense, removing pressure from the quarterback. Given his recent play, Bortles shouldn't be derided as "trash" for fulfilling his role as a complementary piece to its strongest units.


After all, using that formula, Jacksonville clinched its first playoff berth since 2007.


Follow Lorenzo Reyes on Twitter @LorenzoGReyes.


PHOTOS: Best of NFL Week 15


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
