A prison watchdog group is giving the Kane County Juvenile Justice Center high marks for its treatment of the youth there and its educational programming.

At the same time, the inmate advocacy organization is recommending changes to the center’s visitation policy, that better clothing be issued to the young people and an increase in psychiatric care.

The John Howard Association of Illinois visited the Kane County Juvenile Justice Center earlier this year and has issued a report on the challenges faced by the facility, which houses young people who have run afoul of the law. Some remain at the center for only a few days, while others stay longer while awaiting trial on criminal charges, such as aggravated battery or domestic battery.

“This facility showed a commitment to transparency and evidenced an understanding of the importance of accountability to the public, working to exceed the minimum standards expected by law,” JHA Executive Director Jennifer Vollen-Katz wrote in a summary of the report.

After the visit, but before the release of the report, the JJC bought new mattresses and blankets for the youth, which had been mentioned by the young people during their interviews with JHA staff.

“JHA was impressed with the dedication of the Kane JJC administrators and staff we met to helping youth and providing innovative programing, despite limitations on staffing and resources,” according to the text of the report.

In particular, the report commended the JJC for limiting strip searches of youth when they are brought to the facility for intake and classification.

“That’s pretty impressive,” Vollen-Katz said during a telephone interview.

According to the report, “Research shows that youth in detention, many of whom have prior histories of physical, emotional or sexual abuse, suffer serious psychological harm and lasting trauma from such searches.”

The Kane JJC limits the strip searches to about 20 percent of the youth, while the rest receive pat-downs, the report said.

The JHA report describes the 80-bed Kane JJC facility as “very clean, well-maintained and in good overall physical condition.”

The report’s call for increased resources devoted to psychiatric care is a common refrain at prisons and detention facilities throughout the state.

“Understaffing of mental health staff positions is an endemic, longstanding problem not just at Kane JJC, but [at] most of Illinois’ juvenile and adult jails and prisons,” according to the report.

The JHA report noted that most youth at the facility, because of the behavioral levels at which they have been assessed, are not eligible for “contact visits” with parents or guardians.

Instead, the youth and parents are in separate rooms, viewing each other through glass and speaking on a telephone, the report said.

“Youth and loved ones are not able to touch, hug, kiss or hold hands,” the report said, and there is “no reasonable privacy to allow for confidential conversation and unguarded expressions of emotion and affection between youth and parents as youth are located in the same room, next to each other and within earshot during no-contact visits.”

Kane JJC Superintendent Mike Davis responded in an email about the visits: “The design of the building itself provides limited space to handle contact visits, and any expansion will require capital funds to remodel the area.”

Ivars Spalis, principal of the JJC’s school, said during a telephone interview that the educational staff includes four teachers, one each for math, science, history and English, and a special education coordinator.

“Each student is a valuable and unique individual with a potential for success,” Spalis said.

But there are challenges. When admitted, the students immediately undergo testing that often reveals difficulty with reading.

“They are usually a couple of levels below where they should be,” Spalis said.

Students experience a full, six-period classroom day, Spalis said, which includes health and wellness, behavior management and social skills, he said.

The JHA report, while calling for increased educational resources, commended the Kane JJC for the work at the school.

“Some of the difficulties there are not for lack of caring,” Vollen-Katz said in the telephone interview. “They certainly understand the value of programming.”

 