
    
        
            By Corey W. McDonald

cmcdonald@jjournal.com

 The Jersey Journal

JERSEY CITY -- The Hudson County Board of Freeholders announced it has accepted a number of grants to provide assistance to various programs such as the Office of Emergency Management, the Individuals and Families Program for Hudson County, and the Integrity House substance abuse treatment program.

Office of Emergency Management:

The Board of Freeholders accepted a $871,904 grant for the purpose of improving security measures for the Office of Emergency Management.

The grant is through the Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) grant funding from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, and through the New Jersey Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness, officials said.

The term of the grant is from Sept. 1, 2017 to Aug. 31, 2020, officials said.

The purpose of the grant, officials say, is to provide assistance in OEM situational awareness, information sharing, risk mitigation, automated license plate readers, chemical detection, and active shooter or mass casualty incidents.

Integrity House programs:

A $1,160,000 grant has been approved for the Integrity House to provide residential substance abuse treatment programs for 40 men and 40 women at the Hudson County Adult Correctional Center in Kearny, officials said.

The program provides for mental health counseling, as well as drug addition counseling, in order to facilitate their re-entry into the community and prevent recidivism, officials said.

The program will run from Oct. 1 of this year to Sept. 30, 2018.

Supportive Assistance to Individuals and Families Program:

Additional funds totaling $756,583 will be provided to the Supportive Assistance to Individual and Families Program for Hudson County residents.

The funds, from the New Jersey Department of Human Services Division of Family Development, will be utilized to provide basic education skills, employment job search and readiness services that assist clients in securing employment or becoming self-sufficient, officials said.

The grant is for a period beginning Oct. 1, 2017 and ending Sept. 30, 2018.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        