
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

05/03/2018 07:19 AM EDT

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

Good Thursday morning!


Story Continued Below

If you bring up someone’s children in a statement, there’s a good chance that’s going to obscure the point you’re trying to make.

State Sen. Nellie Pou did just that acting as a surrogate for 11th District Democratic congressional candidate Mikie Sherrill on Tuesday.

Taking aim at Republican Jay Webber, Pou said: “Why Webber would not support countless pieces of legislation that would have ensured equal pay for equal work as well as equal access to healthcare is yet another sign of the grossly distorted worldview that Webber has deliberately tried to make a reality despite the truly cruel and vicious effect that his voting record and rhetoric has had on not just his four daughters but every woman throughout the state of New Jersey."

Webber, Webber’s wife Johanna, NJ GOP vice chair Lynda Pagliughi, Morris County GOP Chair Patti Paige, Assembly Minority Leader Jon Bramnick and even Webber primary rival Tony Ghee all got in on the condemnation with their own statement.

“Trying to pit daughters against their dad to score political points is reprehensible. My wife Johanna and I demand an immediate apology,” Webber said, demanding the apology from Sherrill. 

There’s some irony, of course, in that outrage over children being brought up in the campaign means they’re being brought up even more. 

WHERE’S MURPHY? In Edison for an 11:15 executive order signing at NRCC (Northeast Regional Council of Carpenters, NOT the National Republican Congressional Committee)

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Me. 

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “I've never been a marijuana guy -- this is for social justice." — Gov. Phil Murphy, talking around a question about whether he’s ever smoked weed. Asked again, Murphy was whisked away by staff and didn’t answer. — @StevenFulop

TWEET OF THE DAY —” I don’t understand why politicians are always so cagey on this. It is what it is + you are who you are - no big deal. 1) I’m for legalization 2) social justice is important to me as well 3) I used to smoke tons of weed (ok maybe not tons since we are talking about quantities)” — @StevenFulop

WHAT TRENTON MADE

NOW WE KNOW WHY MURPHY TAKES SO FEW QUESTIONS — Murphy still calculating cost of raises he’s giving state workers, by POLITICO's Ryan Hutchins: A day after Gov. Phil Murphy announced his support for a new labor agreement that will provide raises to 35,000 state workers, treasury officials were still calculating the cost of the deal and may not have a final number for days or weeks. Despite saying Tuesday that raises and other new costs had “been accounted for” in the state’s current budget and the one Murphy proposed for next fiscal year, neither the governor nor top officials at the Department of the Treasury could say Wednesday how much taxpayers will have to shell out. “I don’t know the exact number, but our folks are working on the program details,” Murphy, a former Goldman Sachs executive, told reporters after an unrelated press conference in Trenton. “This used to be standard operating procedure in this state, under both sides of the aisle. This is not that big a deal.” Read the report 

PAID SICK LEAVE — Murphy makes New Jersey the 10th state to guarantee paid sick leave, by POLITICO's Katherine Landergan: Gov. Phil Murphy signed a bill Wednesday guaranteeing paid sick leave to nearly all workers across New Jersey for the first time in state history. The enactment of NJ A1827 marks a win for the Democratic-controlled Legislature as well as for Murphy, who made the promise of sick leave a core issue on the campaign trail. His signature makes New Jersey the 10th state to have such a law on the books and is expected to give paid sick time off to nearly 1 million private-sector workers. “This is not just about doing what's right for workers and their families, this is about doing the right thing for our economy,” Murphy said, before signing the proposal at the Trenton War Memorial with a crowd of supporters. "This is the smart thing to do." Read the report 

—“At earned sick leave bill signing, some worry over budget battle” Read the report

LANIGONE — Murphy nominates new corrections commissioner after Lanigan nomination held up, by POLITICO’s Katie Jennings: Gov. Phil Murphy nominated Marcus Hicks to be acting commissioner of the state Department of Corrections on Wednesday, simultaneously announcing the retirement of acting Commissioner Gary Lanigan, a holdover from the Christie administration. The announcement comes three months after the state Senate Judiciary Committee held up Lanigan’s Cabinet nomination over “unresolved” issues, including an ongoing sexual abuse investigation at the state women’s prison. Hicks has been Lanigan’s chief of staff. Read the report

—“Inside the trial at the center of N.J.'s prison sex abuse scandal,” by NJ Advance Media’s S.P. Sullivan: “Two inmates said they welcomed the corrections officer's advances. Three others said they were targeted or performed sex acts out of fear of reprisal from a man in uniform. Either way, it would have been a crime, because inmates cannot legally consent to sex in prison. But the officer, Jason Mays, insists they are all making it up. Now a group of jurors is weighing whether to convict Mays of up to 15 charges including sexual assault, criminal sexual contact and official misconduct after a four-week trial at the Hunterdon County Superior Courthouse in Flemington. There is no DNA evidence connecting Mays to the women who say he sexually assaulted them. Other prisoners testified some of the women accusing him were troublemakers, and there were no cameras in the places the abuse allegedly occurred. How could a case of sex abuse at New Jersey's only women's prison -- a place where every move is monitored, where inmates are supposed to be kept under lock and key -- come down to their word against his? … That question is at the center of an ongoing criminal probe at the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women, where eight employees have been criminally charged with abusing inmates in the last two years alone … The problems have prompted calls for reform at the facility and stalled the renomination of state Corrections Commissioner Gary Lanigan, who was hired by for

YESHIVA NEEDS CASH SOON TO PAY FOR ITS LOBBYING TAB — Supreme Court punts on whether yeshiva, seminary should get millions in state funds, by POLITICO's Matt Friedman: New Jersey’s highest court punted Wednesday on whether two religious-affiliated institutions are eligible for millions of dollars in higher education grants, saying there aren’t enough facts on record to make a determination. In remanding the case to the secretary of higher education to hold a hearing, the court reversed an appellate decision that found the Christie administration’s 2013 decision to award grants of $10.6 million to the Beth Medrash Govoha yeshiva in Lakewood and $645,000 to Princeton Theological Seminary violated the state constitution’s prohibition of using funds “for the maintenance of any minister or ministry.” “Rather than address a matter of constitutional importance on an insufficiently developed record, the better course is to remand the matter for an evidentiary hearing to bring the relevant factual material into better focus,” reads the opinion, which was signed by six of the seven justices. Read the report mer Gov. Chris Christie and asked to stay on by Gov. Phil Murphy.” Read the report

STILL PREFERABLE TO MTV REALITY SHOW STARS — “All those bears you're seeing this spring? Why there could be a lot more next year,” by NJ Advance Media’s Rob Jennings: “Gov. Phil Murphy campaigned on a pledge to halt New Jersey's controversial bear hunt, but has been silent on the issue since taking office in January. Now some hunt supporters and opponents are questioning whether Murphy has changed his mind, or is at least taking a second look, as bears emerge from their winter hibernation. The state's Fish and Game Council approved the hunts that took place annually under former Gov. Chris Christie and, barring intervention by Murphy, a ninth consecutive hunt is on track to begin in October. Phil Brodhecker, a member of the council, said he is hoping Murphy will back off his campaign pledge. ‘I don't know whether he had enough information when he was being elected. Maybe he didn't have accurate information,’ said Brodhecker, who supports the hunt.” Read the report

LOOKING FORWARD TO COUNTER OP-ED BY JEANETTE HOFFMAN — “Garden State Initiative right-wing wolf in sheep's clothing,” by Joshua Henne for The Asbury Park Press: “For the past few decades, all across America, right-wing corporations and billionaires like the Koch brothers have been stealthily funding organizations with a mission aimed at stacking the deck against working families. Their goal is not to shape meaningful public policy, but rather to boost the bottom lines of their big business and well-heeled backers. These deep-pocketed groups are methodical, connected and committing serious resources to their regressive efforts. All the while, they mask their true intentions. Now they’re here in New Jersey via Garden State Initiative — an affiliate of the State Policy Network (SPN) and the latest cog in their well-oiled machine. Garden State Initiative marks the 49th state in which an SPN group is rearing its head. In other states, these chapters have had years — even decades — to falsely brand themselves as mere “think tanks” to pundits, politicians and the political chattering class. At least this time, here in New Jersey, we’re already onto their shtick — and their genuine purpose.” Read the op-ed

WHAT DO RUSH LIMBAUGH AND FUNKMASTER FLEX HAVE IN COMMON? — They both got police escorts they shouldn’t have had. NBC New York’s Brian Thompson reports (video only, sorry) that the Port Authority’s inspector general is investigating why the authority’s police chief, Michael A. Fedorko, according to Limbaugh authorized a lights and siren escort for Limbaugh from Newark Airport to a Manhattan charity fundraiser. Watch here

—“State GOP leader [Kean]: Make N.J. affordable (so we don't lose folks to Texas!)” Read the op-ed

—New bill would ban soda, sugary drinks in restaurant kids' meals Read the report

LOCAL

JOB TO PAY 50 CENT — “Toms River GOP councilman: Someone 'in the club' should get township job,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Jean Mikle: “Township Council Vice President George E. Wittmann Jr. is in hot water after he mistakenly sent an email to hundreds of township employees that seemed to suggest members of Toms River's Republican Club should get preference in hiring for a job opening in the law department. ‘We should discuss this at our caucus meeting to see if anyone is interested in the club,’ Wittmann wrote May 1, in response to an email about a job posting for a confidential secretary's position. A copy of the email chain was sent to the Asbury Park Press. Wittmann said he meant to send the email to Council President Brian Kubiel, but instead, he mistakenly hit ‘reply all,’ and sent it to about 400 township and police department employees. "Which club is that?" asked Jennifer Clifton, a secretary in the police department's Detective Bureau, almost immediately after Wittmann's message. Construction Code Official Kenneth Anderson then responded, sending an image from the old "Our Gang" series (later known as ‘The Little Rascals’), that featured a sign advertising the "He-Man Woman Haters Club." In the series, the club was organized by Spanky to exclude all girls and keep the boys in the gang from playing with them. About 40 minutes after Anderson emailed the Our Gang image, Wittmann sent out an additional email: ‘Please disregard this email it was sent in error.’” Read the report

PUTTING THE ‘MORT’ IN ‘LE PETITE MORT’ —“Arrested Spring Lake Heights councilman once charged with prostitution sex in cemetery,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Shannon Mullen,Kala Kachmar and Ken Serrano: “Councilman Robert T. Merriken Sr., arrested last month on a drug paraphernalia charge, has a prior history of prostitution arrests, including charges that he paid a woman $25 for sex in a Jewish cemetery. Merriken was arrested by police in Neptune on Jan. 10, 2015, and charged with paying a woman $25 for oral sex on a bitter cold evening in the Chesed Shel Ames Hebrew Cemetery on West Bangs Avenue, police records show. Temperatures dipped into the teens that day, according to the Asbury Park Press.” Read the report

PATERSON — Paterson schools put on path toward local control, as Camden waits for its day, by POLITICO’s Linh Tat: As one school district celebrated Wednesday’s news that it is on its way toward regaining local control, students and community members from another state-operated school system demanded their autonomy as well. But as of now, New Jersey’s plans for Paterson Public Schools — which the state took over in 1991 — appear to be far different than what it has in mind for the Camden school district, which has been under state intervention since 2013. The state Board of Education voted 10-0, with three members absent, to authorize staff from the state Department of Education to work with Paterson officials in formulating a plan to transition the district back to local control. The state board must approve the plan before full local control is restored … Despite the celebratory mood in Paterson, state officials acknowledged “a long road ahead” for the district.” Read the report

TOTOWAR — “Explosions, military helicopters cause a panic in Totowa,” by The Record’s Matt Fagan: “While it's no secret that the North Jersey Developmental Center is going to be redeveloped, it apparently was a well-kept secret that military forces had intended to use the site to train last month. So well kept, in fact, that when on April 16 seven helicopters descended on the training center around 10 p.m., few people other than local law enforcement knew what was going on. ‘My parents thought we were under attack,’ said Rutherford Court's Mike Melograno. By many accounts, residents living next to what once was the North Jersey Developmental Center first learned of the military training operation when the helicopters appeared in the night sky, like a scene out of ‘Apocalypse Now’” Read the report

LAKEWOOD — “Lakewood: Parents take over school board meeting,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Stacey Barchenger: “Frustration over a perennial lack of school funding turned to an all-out takeover of a school board meeting here. Families packed the Lakewood High School cafeteria Monday night, listening as Superintendent Laura Winters pledged she would not fire teachers despite a $28 million budget deficit. But the district is running out of time to balance its books, with deadlines in just two weeks to notify staff of any layoffs and finalize its financials for the 2018-2019 academic year. How it will close the $28 million gap, which is nearly twice the shortfall that last year threatened 100 jobs and athletic programs, isn't clear. The school board called a special meeting to field questions about the budget.” Read the report

MEDIA BIASED AGAINST PEOPLE WHO SAY CRAZY THINGS — “‘Look what they did to Steve Lonegan:’ at Newton debate, candidate goes after NJ.com,” by InsiderNJ’s Fred Snowflack: “Seven individuals, including three incumbents, met Tuesday night at Sussex County Community College to debate these and other issues. Three seats are up on the five-member council. Newton has non-partisan May elections and the mayor is selected by his, or her, council peers, not directly by the voters. The election is next Tuesday. The debate and election are unfolding two months after the current mayor and reelection candidate, Wayne Levante, was censured by his peers for a Facebook post that referred to conspiracy theories that claimed one of the victims of the Parkland, Fla. school shooting was an actor ... Levante was not done. He complained in general about media ‘bias,’ mentioning both Fox News and CNN. Earlier in the campaign, he criticized TAP-Into, a local online news outlet. At the debate, Levante also criticized NJ.Com, saying, ‘look what they did to Steve Lonegan.’ Talk about an odd interlude into a debate about municipal government.” Read the report

THE HITS KEEP COMING FROM SUSSEX COUNTY — "NJ councilman claims his DWI arrest was police conspiracy," by NJ 101.5's Sergio Bichao: “A township councilman who got away with driving drunk is now claiming that his DWI arrest was part of an ‘organized conspiracy’ by the police department. Councilman Jerard “Jerry” Murphy is suing police, seeking an unspecified amount in damages for a Feb. 12, 2016, DWI bust. The existence of the lawsuit was first reported this week by open-government activist John Paff on his website. Murphy doesn’t deny that he was drunk — a breath test after his arrest showed he had a blood-alcohol content of 0.13 percent, above the 0.08 limit — but he says that police should have stopped him from leaving the bar rather than waiting until they could pull him over. He says they set him up instead because they were taking revenge for his voting to furlough police officers.” Read the report

AFTER TRYING TO DISCREDIT ROY MOORE ACCUSERS, O’KEEFE GOES AFTER OTHERS FOR NOT PROTECTING CHILDREN — "NJ teachers union president: We 'bend truth' to defend the worst people,” by NJ 101.5’s Dan Alexander: “The president of this school district's teachers union was caught on video describing how he can ‘bend the truth’ in order to protect teachers accused of wrongdoing and bragging about how he saved teachers who used drugs and shoplifted. In an undercover video released by Project Veritas, Hamilton Teachers Education Association president David Perry describes his job as defending "even the worst people" from allegations of physical abuse and verbal threats against students. ‘I need to know the truth, so that we can bend the truth,’ Perry says to a Project Veritas agent pretending to be the relative of a teacher who is worried about an altercation he had with a student … The spokesman for the New Jersey Education Association declined to specifically answer questions about the video, instead casting doubt on the organization, which in the past has been criticized for unfairly editing its videos. Project Veritas, a conservative group founded by New Jersey native James O'Keefe, is known for using undercover video to embarrass and expose public officials. One of their usual targets is the teachers unions … ‘Project Veritas has a long history of releasing deceptively edited videos,’ NJEA spokesman Steve Baker told New Jersey on Wednesday. ‘This video that they released has something like 26 edits and cuts in it. They should not be given any credibility whatsoever.” Read the report

—“Teacher union president suspended for saying 'I'm here to defend even the worst people'” Read the report

ABBOTT V. BIRD — “Trenton school board member reportedly flips bird to crowd at meeting, video shows,” by The Trentonian’s David Foster: “City school board member Jane Rosenbaum was ejected out of Monday’s public meeting like an athlete for an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty. The crowd began applauding as Rosenbaum, who has served on the board since 2011, was escorted out by board attorney James Rolle Jr., according to video obtained by The Trentonian. Right before Rosenbaum hits the exit, she looks back at the crowd and makes a gesture with her hand. Those in attendance at the meeting said it was clear that Rosenbaum gave the public the middle finger while the school board member claims she was gesturing for her belongings. ‘I did not flip off the audience and I did not say anything,’ Rosenbaum said Wednesday regarding the video. ‘There isn’t because there can’t be because I didn’t do that. I got up because I was angry and I didn’t grab my bag. I pointed to that and somebody came after me with my bag.’” Read the report

LEONIA HELMSLEY — “Attorney general calls Leonia street closures illegal, mayor defends ordinance,” by The Record’s Joshua Jongsma: “Attorney General Gurbir Grewal's opposition to Leonia's controversial street closure rules will not deter the borough's mayor. During a budget meeting Wednesday, Grewal called the decision to restrict 60 local side streets during rush hour to those heading only to Leonia destinations ‘legally invalid.’ The ordinance took effect in January because of increased traffic in the borough from commuters using navigation apps like Google Maps and Waze to avoid George Washington Bridge traffic. Weehawken enacted a similar rule. ‘We told them in March, Leonia and Weehawken, that they didn’t have the authority to do that the way in which they did that’ Grewal, the former Bergen County prosecutor, said on Wednesday.” Read the report

—"Ciao! Mercer County fees push out Italian American festival" Read the report

—“Warehouses and trucks may replace bucolic N.J. Blame your online shopping habit” Read the report

—“What Hudson Prosecutor Esther Suarez thinks about legal weed and 6 other topics” Read the report

—“[Roselle] Superintendent's abrupt resignation marks district's third big departure this year” Read the report

—“Camden County Animal Shelter unveils Rent-A-Dog program” Read the report

—“Paterson teachers union claims $7.6M victory in contract dispute” Read the report

—“Mimms seizes fundraising lead in Paterson council race” Read the report

—"No prison for NJ cop whose daughter, 8, died from gunshot” Read the report

—“Plan to switch health care providers angers Jersey City teachers” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

—“'Caged': How 28 inmates' tales of prison and poverty became New Jersey's must-see play” Read the report

—“Elusive black bear caught, relocated after sleepy 2-day jaunt in North Jersey” Read the report

—“'Nobody should be comfortable.' Shore prescription probe closing in on targets large and small” Read the report

—“Fired Camden Catholic football coach retains lawyer, explores options” Read the report

—"Bridge construction technique used in fatal Florida collapse is widely used in New Jersey” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC