
    
        
            By Jersey Journal Guest Columnist

By Natalia Ioffe

In a recent membership meeting the Greenville Neighborhood Alliance focused on how each community can impact the youth in a positive way. GNA Founder Sandra Lovely spoke to the block association presidents from Wards A and F about different ways to engage young people and keep them inspired and informed about the opportunities available to them.

As parts of Jersey City continue to struggle with drugs and gun violence, young teenagers are often caught up in the center of the turmoil, resulting in devastating consequences to themselves and others. Ms. Lovely stressed that deeper dedication to the youth is needed to bring on positive change, and all adults who have committed themselves to making Jersey City a better and safer place, must do their part. 

GNA's first guest speaker was Frank Gilmore, an athletics coach and youth mentor with the Jersey City Department of Recreation. He shared information about current available recreational programs for children and teens, the positive benefits of bringing these free programs to the areas where they are needed most, and providing kids with a safe space to apply themselves and engage in a healthy way.  

Mr. Gilmore, who uses a Facebook pseudonym "Educational Gilmore", also shared about his one-on-one youth mentorship program and a powerful non-profit initiative called "A Tale of Two States", in which a group of youngsters ages 10-13 participate in an all-expenses-paid trip to a NJ state prison and a place of higher learning.

During the visit to the prison the kids meet with and hear from the correctional staff, that includes counselors and administrators, who share their perspective and speak about career opportunities in law enforcement. This is followed by a trip to Rutgers University of which Mr. Gilmore is an alumni. The goal of this initiative is more than simply "scaring the kids straight" by juxtaposing the two different realities for them, but to inspire them and provide new opportunities for their future.

The second guest speakers to address the GNA block association leaders were the members of the Hudson County Council on Juvenile Justice Improvement. They spoke at length about the importance of prevention and how it can be best achieved by strong community partnership. Steven Campos and colleagues shared their mission, which is to keep kids at home with their families, in school, and in the community, and not involved with the Juvenile Justice System or at risk of detention or incarceration. 

Mr. Campos and team encouraged the Greenville Neighborhood Alliance to become active in prevention efforts by participating in the outreach programs such as informational discussion panels on Juvenile Justice, court tours and making use of the court resource center. The latter is a part of a public outreach project undertaken by the court to enhance access to justice for self-represented litigants by offering information on court processes and procedures. By becoming thoroughly informed about all available programs, block association leaders can share these valuable resources with their community of neighbors.

After hearing from guests Lovely spoke about the GNA's current youth-centered initiative - a college tour to Coppin State University and Morgan State University for 40 Jersey City middle and high-school students on Oct. 19, 2017. The goal of this endeavor is to introduce the kids to college life in a real and tangible way, provide them with with first hand curriculum information, entrance requirements and financial aid.  

Greenville Neighborhood Alliance is actively raising funds to sponsor the college tour. Anyone who wishes to support this initiative can visit GNA's gofundme page - "Greenville NA Fall College Tours" or attend their next fundraising event - GNA Awards Dinner and Dance on Sept. 22, 2017 at 7 p.m. at the "Chandelier" restaurant in Bayonne. 

To stay informed about GNA's community events, fundraisers and workshops please visit @GreenvilleNeighborhoodAlliance on Facebook. 

Natalia Ioffe is a Jersey City resident and serves as secretary of the Greenville Neighborhood Alliance.

Submit letters to the editor and guest columns at jjletters@jjournal.com


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        