By

Valerie Edwards For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  09:36 EDT, 15 June 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  13:23 EDT, 15 June 2018







         169

View  comments

A 24-year-old woman has been arrested after being accused of killing her four-year-old stepson at their California home. 


Rose Marie Schmittle was taken into custody on Tuesday by officers from the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department after authorities received information from family members that Benjamin Schmittle's injuries were not accidental. 


First responders found Benjamin 'unresponsive' at a home near Rhineland Drive in Fort Irwin around 5.30pm on June 7. 


Rose Marie Schmittle, 24, the stepmother of four-year-old Benjamin Schmittle (pictured), has been arrested after being accused of killing the little boy last week inside their California home

Rose Marie Schmittle was taken into custody on Tuesday by officers after they received information from family members that Benjamin's injuries were not accidental. Benjamin is pictured with his biological mother Jacqueline Brockman 

First responders found Benjamin 'unresponsive' at a home near Rhineland Drive in Fort Irwin around 5.30pm on June 7

Benjamin (left and right) was transported to a hospital at the Fort Irwin National Training Center, a military training facility

He was then airlifted to Loma Linda University Medical Center due to the severity of his injuries

Benjamin was transported to a hospital at the Fort Irwin National Training Center, a military training facility.


He was then airlifted to Loma Linda University Medical Center due to the severity of his injuries. 


Benjamin was placed on life support while at the medical center but on June 8, just 24 hours after he was found unresponsive, he was pronounced dead.


According to a GoFundMe account set up by the boy's grandmother, Benjamin suffered a brain aneurysm and was in a coma. 


His family said Benjamin would have turned five years old in July.   


Benjamin was living with his father, James Schmittle, who is a helicopter pilot in the Army, and stepmother at the time of the incident.   


Benjamin was placed on life support while at the medical center but on June 8, just 24 hours after he was found unresponsive, he was pronounced dead

According to a GoFundMe account set up by the boy's grandmother, Benjamin suffered a brain aneurysm and was in a coma.  He's pictured with his mother, Jacqueline Brockman

Heartbreaking photos of Benjamin in the hospital were also posted on the GoFundMe account. Several photos show him with his mother, Jacqueline, as they hold hands before he quietly slipped away

Another photo shows his mother watching videos on her smart phone as she sat next to him

His biological mother, Jacqueline Brockman, and his sister, Kayla, traveled from another state to be by his side. 


Heartbreaking photos of Benjamin in the hospital were also posted on the GoFundMe account. 


Several photos show him with his mother, Jacqueline, as they hold hands before he quietly slipped away.


Another photo shows his mother watching videos on her smart phone as she sat next to him.


Benjamin was living with his father, James Schmittle (pictured), and stepmother at the time of the incident. His biological mother, Jacqueline Brockman (left), and his sister, Kayla, traveled from another state to be by his side

His family said Benjamin would have turned five years old in July. Benjamin is pictured with his father (left), who is a helicopter pilot (right) in the Army

According to the family, Benjamin (pictured with his canine pal) remained on life support until Sunday in order 'to donate his organs to those in need'

According to the family, Benjamin remained on life support until Sunday in order 'to donate his organs to those in need'. 


Following interviews with family members, detectives arrested Rose Schmittle for murder. 


She was then booked into the West Valley Detention Center where she is being held without bail.


On Thursday, Schmittle pleaded not guilty to charges of murder and assault on a child causing death.


Authorities have not released any other details involving the case. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group