
						GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.
					

X
					


			Trending:		

A toddler who was found unresponsive last week in her mother’s lap at a Denver elementary school was at risk of dying from injuries that included severe head trauma and a lacerated liver, according to the Jefferson County arrest affidavit for a man now charged with abusing her.

Joshua James Gonzales, 21,  surrendered to authorities Sunday night, walking into the county jail lobby at 9 p.m., accompanied by family members, said Jenny Fulton, a sheriff’s spokeswoman. He’s been charged with child abuse resulting in serious injury.

Investigators had been looking for Gonzales since Thursday, when a bystander called 911 to report an injured child was outside Doull Elementary School with her mother. Authorities said earlier that the girl’s injuries likely occurred last Monday.

Medical personnel who responded to the report found the girl lying in the lap of her mother, Melissa Mangeri,  who is also Gonzales’ girlfriend, according to the affidavit.

Believing she might be choking, the medical personnel delivered blows to the child’s back, and she coughed up large amounts of brown mucus. When they removed her clothing they observed bruising on her genitals and elsewhere on her body.

She was taken to Denver Health Medical Center, where doctors found she had a lacerated liver and severe head trauma. At the time of her admission, the hospital found the girl faced a substantial risk of death.

A physician treating the girl told an investigator that she had a subdural brain bleed, liver laceration, fractures to two ribs, bruises all over her body, according to the affidavit.

Mangeri told an investigator she didn’t know what led to her daughter’s condition. The toddler fell down the stairs a few days prior, she said, “but she didn’t show any signs of being hurt.”

Detectives who questioned Mangeri told her that her daughter was fighting for her life. “At this time Melissa began to get visibly upset and was crying.”


Mangeri then said she was arguing with Gonzales in her living room when the girl began to cry. “This upset Josh,” who yanked on the toddler’s arm and then hit and threw her against a couch.  

He then kicked her. “Melissa stated she intervened, and told Josh to leave.” Gonzales left.

Mangeri may yet be charged in the case, said sheriff’s spokesman Mark Techmeyer.