Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low around 65F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low around 65F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 6:55 pm

Potentially deadly drugs heading toward the Tri-Cities region were stopped Monday along Interstate 40 in Jefferson County, Tennessee, authorities said.


Just before noon Monday, Tennessee Highway Patrol troopers stopped a 2015 Chevrolet Camaro in the eastbound lanes of Interstate 40 in Jefferson County.


“ Upon the traffic stop, signs of criminal activity were observed in plain view of the arresting officer,” according to the trooper’s report.


A narcotics K-9 conducted a search and alerted officers to possible items in the vehicle. With the driver’s consent, troopers found about 30 grams of heroin, and 4,400 Oxycontin pills, believed to be laced with Fentanyl, according to a preliminary arrest report.


Troopers arrested the driver, Kenneth Alexander Young, 36, of Detroit, Michigan, and seized his vehicle. He was taken to the Jefferson County jail on charges of felony possession of Schedule I and II drugs and failure to maintain lane.


“ Subject stated that he was coming from Detroit, Michigan, and headed to his final destination, Tri-Cities area,” the trooper wrote.


The trooper estimated the street value of the pills at $27,000 and the heroin was valued at an undisclosed amount, the report states.


The Tennessee Highway Patrol office in Fall Branch tweeted congratulations late Monday to the troopers. The tweet noted that the Fall Branch Interdiction Plus Team was involved in the traffic stop.


“ And that’s exactly what you get when you continuously look beyond the ticket,” the Fall Branch office tweeted. “Great job troopers. You have no idea how many people y’all may have saved.”


Any of the drugs seized during the traffic stop could have potentially killed someone in the Tri-Cities.


Counterfeit pills, similar to those seized in the stop, are now distributed in the Northeast Tennessee and Southwest Virginia areas, according to Sullivan County Deputy District Attorney General Gene Perrin, the county’s chief narcotics prosecutor.


“ Any time you are dealing with a counterfeit pill, there are grave concerns as to the make-up of the pill since there are no manufacturing guidelines or controls,” Perrin said Tuesday. “There has been confirmation of the use of Fentanyl in the pressing of the pills since it is cheaper and much more potent.”


The prosecutor, who works closely with narcotics officers throughout Sullivan County, said he’s also concerned with the heroin found in the stop.


“ We are now seeing one to two people dying a week in Sullivan County alone from needle dope,” Perrin said. “Since we have to wait until the toxicology results are released with the autopsies, I cannot tell you conclusively what is killing these users but word on the street is that it is heroin.”


Fentanyl, which is described as being 50 to 100 times more potent than morphine, has been discovered cut, pressed and mixed into a number of other drugs, including heroin, cocaine and marijuana. An increase in Fentanyl and heroin overdose deaths has been reported across the country, including in Northeast Tennessee and Southwest Virginia.


“We’ve seen submissions of pain medications laced with Fentanyl,” said Leslie Earhart, a spokeswoman at the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation. “The submission of substances submitted to TBI laboratories testing positive for Fentanyl and its analogs continues to increase.”


Earhart said Fentanyl has also been identified in clandestine pills compounded to resemble legitimate prescription opioids.


“Even a small amount of Fentanyl can be deadly,” Earhart said.


In 2017, the state issued a public health advisory on the dangers of Fentanyl.


Young, the man arrested, has a history of drug convictions in the Detroit area, according to the Michigan Department of Corrections. He is currently listed as being on probation.



                                    
                                        Whenever Robert Sorrell posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
