A measure designed to prevent violence against nurses and other staff members at health care facilities passed the Illinois General Assembly on Wednesday and now awaits Gov. Bruce Rauner’s signature.


If signed, the law would take effect Jan. 1, 2019, and require hospitals and other health care facilities to provide violence-prevention training and offer whistleblower protections for workers who report assaults.


“Violence against nurses and health care workers is no longer going to be the status quo,” said Illinois Nurses Association Executive Director Alice Johnson, who said she expects Rauner to sign the bill into law.


The Illinois Nurses Association lobbied for the bill, which was written after two nurses were held hostage May 13, 2017, by an inmate receiving treatment at Northwestern Medicine Delnor Hospital in Geneva. Just a month after that incident, another inmate used a makeshift weapon to hold a corrections officer and a nursing assistant hostage at a Joliet hospital.


While nurses groups say hospital violence has long been a problem and is not limited to treating inmates, the attacks brought the issue to light. Johnson points to a survey released last month that showed that 90 percent of Illinois nurses who participated had experienced violence at work in the last year. Of those, half said they had experienced at least six incidents of violence.


And violence often goes unreported, Johnson said, in part because workers are afraid to speak up or are told violence is “just part of the job.” The new law “makes it clear to everybody” that any violence is not OK, she said.


The law would require employers to conduct analyses of potential safety hazards that could prompt violence, as well as provide training to employees. The measure also offers safety protocols to the Illinois Department of Corrections and the Department of Juvenile Justice when inmates require hospitalization.


After the hostage incident at Delnor, nurses from around the country rallied in Kane County, calling for change. The Kane County jail inmate was left unshackled and got ahold of the gun of a corrections officer, before he took two nurses hostage, according to a lawsuit filed after the incident. One of the nurses was sexually assaulted before police fatally shot the inmate. Less than a month later, a convicted murderer used a makeshift weapon to hold a corrections officer and nursing assistant hostage at the Presence St. Joseph Medical Center in Joliet.

“It was so horrifying and so unacceptable that nurses across the country came together,” Johnson said.


kthayer@chicagotribune.com


Twitter @knthayer


After hostage incidents, proposed law would protect nurses from violence »


As hospital violence grows, nurses seek reforms: 'Too many of us are being hurt' »


Illinois Senate passes legislation to improve care for sexual assault patients »




With Twitter dishing on #WeirdPlacesToPicnic Monday morning, we started thinking about the best places throughout Chicago to throw down a blanket, lawn chair and basket of snacks. From mainstream Michigan Avenue staples, to hidden gems on the North and South sides, these parks offer perfect picnic options, as well as other activities, for everyone in the family. 



What plastic buckets? The world's most impressive sand castles are full-blown works of art, created by skilled builders with a eye for detail. We've rounded up some of the greats. 