
                                                            Politico

Laura Nahmias and Jimmy Vielkind's must-read briefing informing the daily conversation among knowledgeable New Yorkers

Get the New York Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

12/18/2017 07:18 AM EST

By Jimmy Vielkind in Albany and Laura Nahmias in Manhattan, with Daniel Lippman

There were rallies around the state, calls and letters to the state’s 27 members of Congress and lobbying by everyone from elected officials to realtors. But the final tax overhaul bill released Friday night — and slated to be voted through Congress this week — still disproportionately impacts the Empire State by curtailing the deductibility of state and local taxes. The final legislation would allow New Yorkers to itemize and deduct $10,000 worth of property and income taxes, which should help middle class families in upstate areas but still pinch people in downstate suburbs. “The bill is better now than when we started in September or October,” Rep. Peter King told Newsday. “We made progress, but not enough for me to vote for it.”


Story Continued Below

The vote breakdown will likely mirror the tally when the bill cleared the House last month: All 18 of the Democrats in the state’s delegation voted against it, as did five of nine Republican members: Reps. King, Lee Zeldin, Dan Donovan, John Faso and Elise Stefanik. Faso and Stefanik, according to spokespeople, are again leaning toward no. In the Senate, support from Bob Corker and Marco Rubio has fueled optimism among the chamber’s leaders, and a vote is expected in the latter half of the week, after the House. Of course, Sens. Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand will oppose the bill.

Which leaves officials like Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio to stomp their feet, seethe, and wait to see what the $1 trillion-plus overhaul will do to their own fiscal houses. Cuomo again warned this weekend that the bill is “a dagger at the economic heart of New York,” but there’s no useful object for his rage — unless he he takes the leap into pushing against Republican senators on the fence. Since Donald Trump was elected last year, we knew there would be policies that would enrage the Democratic politicians who dominate the state and city. For the first time, though, they’re staring down a big loss.

HAPPY MONDAY. Got tips, suggestions or thoughts? Let us know ... By email: JVielkind@politico.com, LNahmias@politico.com, and daniel@politico.com, or on Twitter: @JimmyVielkind, @nahmias, and @dlippman.

WHERE’S ANDREW? In New York City with no announced public schedule.

WHERE’S BlLL? Holding a public hearing on a series of bills, appearing on NY1’s Inside City Hall with Errol Louis, and attending a town hall meeting in Council member Elizabeth Crowley’s district. 

The Tabloids: — New York Post: “HARV CASH”—  Daily News: ”FAMILY’S ANGEL” — See Them

The Tabloids, Continued: — Newsday: “TRUMP ON RUSSIA SPECIAL COUNSEL: NO PLANS TO FIRE MUELLER”— El Diario New York: “‘Celda’ de la libertad”—TRANSLATION: “‘Cell’ of Freedom” See Them

The Free Papers: — AM New York: “TAXING TRANSIT”— Metro New York: ”GET OFF MY TAIL!”— See Them

The Broadsheets: — New York Times: — 1 col., above the fold: “EPA STAFF FEARS EFFORT TO TARGET EMAILS OF CRITICS” — 3 col., below the fold:” In New Jersey, Tax Bill Looms Like a Dark Cloud” — Wall Street Journal: —1 col., above the fold: “Tax-Code Changes Set Up Years of Challenge” — 4 col., below the fold: “Trump Plans Security Shift” — See Them

QUOTE OF THE DAY: ““At this point, he needs to redeem himself — he should be right in front where the team can look him in the eye,’’ — Edwin Williams, the Brooklyn Nets fan whom Mayor de Blasio spoke critically about the team to at a recent town hall, on why he’s now inviting the mayor to attend a game with him. 

BONUS QUOTE OF THE DAY: “In an unsolicited call to the Daily News, a women’s rights advocate defended Cuomo. ‘I think he gets the issues that affect women and has been very responsive,’ said Sonia Ossorio, who leads the National Organization for Women of New York” 

** POLITICO is accepting applications for its fifth session of the POLITICO Journalism Institute (PJI), an educational initiative focused on newsroom diversity. The intensive program, which is designed for college students, will be held May 29 to June 9, 2018. It features hands-on training for up to 12 recent grads and university students interested in covering government and politics. Students also will have an opportunity to have their work published by POLITICO. All expenses are paid for the program, reflecting POLITICO's ongoing support of journalism education, newsroom diversity and recruitment of top-notch talent. Admissions are made on a rolling basis, so APPLY TODAY but no later than Jan. 15, 2018.  https://www.politico.com/pji **

WHAT ALBANY IS READING:

— Cuomo Suggests Changes to Tipped-Workers Policy” — Daily News’s Stephen Rex Brown: “Gov. Cuomo ordered a series of hearings Sunday on the minimum wage for tipped workers, saying it was important to ensure 'no workers are more susceptible to exploitation.' In New York State, certain industries, like restaurants and car washes, are allowed to “credit” tips toward a minimum wage. Large restaurants in the city, for example, currently pay workers $7.50 an hour, while employers in other industries pay workers who don’t receive tips $11. Both rates are to go up in the new year, but the wage discrepancy will remain. Cuomo cited studies that found the system is unfair — particularly toward women and minorities — and hinted he might get rid of it altogether.” Read more here. 

— BOB WILMERS, LONGTIME M&amp;T BANK LEADER, 83 — Buffalo News’ Matt Glynn and Jonathan Epstein: “Robert G. Wilmers, the longtime chairman and chief executive officer who drove M&amp;T Bank Corp.'s growth from a small local bank into one of the nation's biggest financial institutions, died unexpectedly late Saturday night...Wilmers was a larger-than-life figure in banking, business and Buffalo circles. He transformed M&amp;T into a powerful economic force while also leaving his stamp on cultural institutions and public education in the region. He led the bank for almost 35 years, establishing a reputation for cautious but opportunistic growth while sticking mostly to conservative and traditional banking. He also played a major role in the Western New York region and the state, and was widely viewed as the dean of the local business community. He was known for being outspoken on topics ranging from the financial services industry and regulation to taxes, public policy and education.” Read more here

— JOHNSON BRINGS NEW ENERGY TO SUNY — POLITICO’s Keshia Clukey: On an unusually warm autumn day, new SUNY Chancellor Kristina Johnson took a tour of the system’s campus in Plattsburgh, in the the heart of the North Country. Most students had better fitness facilities at their home high schools, a university official told Johnson as they walked by the college’s aging athletic center, which was built in the early 1960s. It’s not the last time she’ll hear about outdated buildings as she tours SUNY’s 64 campuses. Nearly half of the system’s academic facilities, 45 percent, were built between 1965 and 1975. Aging infrastructure is just one of many challenges facing Johnson as she navigates her first year leading the largest comprehensive state university system in the nation.. Read more here

— TIMES PROFILES GILLIBRAND — Shane Goldmacher and Matt Flegenheimer: “After a Senate career spent elevating victims of sexual harassment and assault as a defining political focus, Ms. Gillibrand has assumed her place at the head table of the Democrats’ anti-Trump movement. The reason is simple: Her cause became the country’s. And she has made sure to stay out front in the reckoning. … Ms. Gillibrand’s strengthening hand in national Democratic politics owes to more than mere circumstance. Circumstance does not transform an upstate congresswoman, who once boasted of keeping guns under her bed and pushed English as the official language of the United States, into an avatar of progressivism in 2017.” Read more here

— PATERSON EXPLAINS HIS PICK, 2017 VERSION: “Mr. Paterson’s choice in 2009, which he considers a signal achievement of his tenure, came down to a simple calculation: He was deciding between Ms. Gillibrand and Andrew M. Cuomo, then New York’s attorney general and now its governor, he said. And only one of them had a certain future with or without his help.‘Andrew Cuomo was destined to go beyond where he was,’ he said, ‘Kirsten Gillibrand, not necessarily.’”

— PATERSON EXPLAINS HIS PICK, 2014 VERSION, via POLITICO’s Jimmy Vielkind: “Paterson awoke to learn that Saturday Night Live's Fred Armisen had portrayed him the night before as a bumbler hobbled by his visual impairment, a caricature that hurt him deeply. The bitterness was compounded when his aides suggested he make light of the matter, severely misjudging his reaction, he now says. Gillibrand, Paterson recalled, offered well-timed sympathy. ‘You could play along. Go on, laugh it up with them. But there are a lot of people for whom that kind of depiction is in the back of people's heads when they interview blind people or people in wheelchairs,’ Gillibrand said, according to Paterson. ‘You have a chance to speak for them.’ Paterson was impressed. ’I was very touched at how she made me feel as a human being, and I thought, that was one area that I didn't know about her—I knew she was smart, I knew she spoke well, I knew she worked hard, I knew she could win because she got Republican votes,’ he recalled.” Read more here 

— DEEP DIVE— “Decades later, women file sex abuse complaints in Cayuga County, push for law changes” — Auburn Citizen’s Megan Blarr: “Pamela Deacon O'Grady remembers the first time she met him. It was the summer of 1978. A clarinet player at Auburn High School, O'Grady was learning the music for the fall marching band. She had just graduated from eighth grade. “‘I walked in (the high school band room) and saw him for the first time,’she said. ‘I remember how nervous and intimidated I was ... because he was so tall.’ He was her music teacher. She was 14 years old. For the next five years, O'Grady said, he would sexually abuse her — in the band office, in the auditorium, in his car and in his home. He told her not to tell. ‘I never told the secret,’ O’Grady said, ‘until now.’ But now, she said, it’s too late. ‘Due to New York’s statute of limitations, it’s too late to press charges,’ she said. ‘Because of the statute of limitations, there is nothing I can do.’ That could change, however, for future sex abuse victims, as proposed state legislation aims to extend or eliminate the statute of limitations.” Read more here 

— THE OPIOID DIVIDE — Newsday’s Delthia Ricks: “For the first time, policy experts have conducted a wide-ranging analysis examining differences — county by county — on how prescribers wrote orders for opioid medications. The analysis, which relies on data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and sources within New York, reveals a sharp demographic divide. “We saw higher opioid prescribing in areas that are less populated, more rural and majority white,” said Mark Zezza, director of policy and research at the New York State Health Foundation in Manhattan....Zezza said his analysis of prescribing variations covered all of New York’s 62 counties. He found a 400 percent per capita difference between Sullivan County, which prescribed the most opioids, compared with Kings County (Brooklyn), which prescribed the least.” Read more here 

WHAT CITY HALL IS READING: 

 — ‘RIGHT TO KNOW’ BILL LOSES KEY SUPPORT — Newsday’s Matthew Chayes: “City Council legislation meant to force NYPD officers to identify themselves in certain nonemergency encounters — and distribute business cards when there is no arrest or summons — is continuing to lose support from foes of police misconduct. The groups say the bill ultimately creates loopholes that cops can exploit. The Legal Aid Society, New York County Defender Services, Brooklyn Defender Services, the Bronx Defenders and Neighborhood Defender Service of Harlem are set to urge council members Monday morning to withdraw support of Introduction 182-D, which unlike an earlier version exempts the identity requirement from lower-level stops and vehicle stops.” Read more here 

 — INMATE FAMILIES FORCED TO BUY BASICS FROM PRICEY VENDORS — Daily News’s Reuven Blau: “Infuriating inmate advocates, the state Department of Corrections has launched a pilot program that forces visitors to buy supplies for loved ones behind bars from five online vendors who they say overcharge for simple items.State officials maintain the vendor system — expected to go statewide by fall 2018 — will reduce contraband being smuggled into facilities.” Read more here. 

 — BILL-MANIA — New York Times’s J. David Goodman: “Tempers flared last week during a closed-door meeting of City Council leadership over two police reform bills, with one Brooklyn councilman forcefully opposing a compromise engineered in part by Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito.Resistance was more muted, but far more widespread, among those present at the Council’s leadership meeting to the speaker’s ambitious proposal to increase the number of permits for street vendors, according to two people familiar with the discussions. Those contentious measures are set for a vote during the Council’s last session on Tuesday, part of a raft of about 40 different proposals affecting everything from biodiesel for city ferries to the city’s Human Rights Law to a requirement that certain city forms include an option to indicate a gender-neutral pronoun, such as they or ze.” Read more here 

— VANCE CHASING WEINSTEIN ON EMBEZZLEMENT — New York Post’s Larry Celona, Rebecca Rosenberg and Bruce Golding: ”Cyrus Vance Jr. is hedging his bets by pursuing a potential embezzlement case tied to hush-money settlements with [Harvey]Weinstein’s accusers, in addition to seeking evidence of his alleged sex crimes, law-enforcement sources said. One source described the Vance investigation as “wide-ranging and aggressive,” and said authorities had served more than two dozen subpoenas demanding documents for the probe. Several current and former Weinstein employees have also appeared with their lawyers for voluntary interviews at the DA’s office in recent weeks, sources said. Vance’s prosecutors asked them what they knew about the slew of sordid accusations against Weinstein, sources said.” Read more here 

— MEEKS SETTLED SEX HARASSMENT SUIT — New York Post’s Isabel Vincent: “A secretive, multi-million dollar taxpayer-funded slush fund used for years to pay off victims of sexual misconduct was tapped to settle a lawsuit against New York Rep. Gregory Meeks. In March 2006, the Democratic Congressman from Queens settled a lawsuit brought by a female staffer who said that he fired her after she sued one of his donors for sexual harassment, according to court papers. Although the amount of the settlement was never made public, the funds were provided by the Congressional Office of Compliance, an agency set up in 1995 to resolve labor and other disputes, including sexual-harassment complaints, brought by congressional staffers against lawmakers. The agency recently came under fire when it was revealed that it had spent more than $17 million in settlements over 22 years, many related to sexual-harassment claims against mostly unnamed members of Congress...In March 2006, the fund paid an undisclosed settlement in a lawsuit brought by Andrea Payne, a congressional aide in Meeks’ office from 1998 to 2000.” Read more here

— WAFFELN WILHELM — De Blasio flip-flopped on G-20 trip after cop assassination — New York Post's Anna Sanders: "Could this have been Hizzoner's wurst decision? City Hall initially canceled Mayor de Blasio's widely criticized jaunt to Germany after a cop was assassinated — but flip-flopped 13 hours later, e-mail records show. The mayor's waffling over the July trip is exposed in e-mails shared with the Post by good-government group Reclaim New York, which obtained them through a Freedom of Information Law request." Read more here.

OP-EDS AND EDITORIALS: 

— "Congress is Clueless About Long Island" — Former Rep. Steve Israel, for Newsday: "The Trump administration and the Republican majority have effectuated one of the largest transfers of wealth away from Nassau and Suffolk, and reshaped our economic terrain...Like that song that brings you back to distant memories, Republican arguments for the current tax bill, which robs Long Islanders of the full value of tax and mortgage interest deductions, have returned me to the refrain I’d heard for 16 years in Washington. In congressional offices, in the Members Dining Room, on the House Floor, it went something like this: 'Why should my constituents subsidize your rich constituents?'"Read more here. 

— ”Will New York Cut Off the Fuel for Corruption?” — New York Times Editorial Board: “Corrupt companies in New York’s fuel oil industry mastered the art of fraud long ago. They have delivered less oil than customers thought they had bought, then sold the rest on the black market. One popular scam involved rigging oil trucks to push air, rather than oil, through their meters, creating false delivery receipts... Until the 1990s, commercial garbage collection in the city was a similar cesspool, with the Mafia dominating the industry through extortion, price fixing and threats of violence. Then the city created a muscular law enforcement agency — now known as the Business Integrity Commission — that has gained a national reputation for the way it rooted out corruption. So it’s absurd that a City Council bill that would give the commission jurisdiction over the home heating oil industry would not pass easily. But Council members and other elected officials are running away from the bill, fearing a backlash from the politically powerful unions and the home heating oil industry.” Read more here 

— “NYC Council Shouldn’t Take City Backwards by Undermining Police Reform,” by Moms Rising Vice President Monifa Bandele: “The half of the Right to Know Act sponsored by Council Member Antonio Reynoso (Intro 541-C) remains in an effective form that will help protect New Yorkers from unconstitutional searches… Unfortunately, Council Member Ritchie Torres, who sponsored the other half of the legislative package, allowed Intro 182 to be gutted by the NYPD, misled advocates about his intentions to advance it, and is now seeking to pass a bill that no longer resembles police reform...This version of Intro 182 has removed the core protections of the legislation and allowed loopholes that ensure it will provide no change for New Yorkers in their abusive policing interactions. In fact, the bill as written is dangerous and may increase the likelihood of escalation and even violence in the majority of low-level encounters where New Yorkers most frequently experience abuse.” Read more here 

— ”Micromanagement 101 interfering with the cops” — Daily News Editorial Board: “...In the face of radically more oversight, police continue to do their jobs, and quite well. Why not leave well enough alone, for now? Ask the City Council, which, in its meddling progressive heart, is convinced still more oversight is necessary, and urgently. Thus, the two pieces of legislation being offered Tuesday, together dubbed Right to Know.” Read more here. 

— “‘Right to Know’ Will Handcuff Our Cops” — City Council Members Joe Borelli, Chaim Deutsch and Paul Vallone: “New York City police officers have a difficult and dangerous job. We should all be grateful for the sacrifices they make each day — which is why we strongly oppose two pieces of pending City Council legislation, together known as the “Right to Know Act.”..The most critical concern comes from the provision requiring officers to inform members of the public of their right to refuse certain searches, and to obtain documentation of that consent before conducting the search.We know we speak for a significant number of New Yorkers who were dismayed to learn through media reports that in the wake of two terror attacks, the Council would actually be taking steps to restrain the department’s ability to conduct lawful searches of individuals who may pose a public threat.” Read more here. 

— SPEAKER’S RACE MONEY — Daily News Editorial Board: ”Halfway through December, the eight would-be Council speakers have lived up to their word to disclose all campaign contributions and expenditures during this month. Good. Due to a wrinkle in the Campaign Finance Board calendar, current monetary activity isn’t shown until Jan. 16, two weeks after members elect their next leader. Which is why we asked for early show and tell. The tally: Robert Cornegy had 48 contributions totaling $34,450, and spent $4,983; Corey Johnson: $50 in, $43,115 out (much of it for compliance costs); Mark Levine: $750 in, $2,285 out; Donovan Richards: zero activity; Ydanis Rodriguez: zero in, $4,000 out; Ritchie Torres: $50 in, $1,020 out; Jimmy Van Bramer: zero in, $17,537 out; Jumaane Williams: $100 in, $42 out. They told us where the cash is coming from and going to; they should post that online for all to see.” Read more here. 

REAL ESTATE, with POLITICO New York’s Dana Rubinstein:

— TAX ‘REFORM’ — “Tax Bill a Boom to Commercial Real Estate Owners,” by The Wall Street Journal’s Keiko Morris: “The final Republican tax bill coming up for a vote this week promises to hit some high-income New York area taxpayers hard. But commercial real estate owners have reason to cheer. The bill, which includes deep tax cuts for corporations, reduces the tax rate and provides a steep deduction for some businesses structured as partnerships, limited-liability companies and other so-called pass-through companies, which is how most real estate businesses are set up. In fact, real estate businesses appeared to fare better than other pass-through businesses, which pay taxes through individual returns.Not only does the proposal drop the top individual marginal tax rate, but the plan also gives a 20% deduction on taxable income to pass-through businesses owned by individuals making less than $157,500 and joint filers making less than $315,000.

— “In addition, the bill gives some owners of pass-through companies who exceed those income levels another method of qualifying for that deduction that benefits private real estate partnerships with few employees and large real estate holdings, tax lawyers noted. ‘If enacted, the commercial real-estate industry will have hit the jackpot,’ said Steven M. Rosenthal, a senior fellow at the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, a joint venture of the Urban Institute and the Brookings Institution...Some developers worried that the tax bill’s broader changes, such as residents losing the ability to fully deduct state and local taxes, could weigh on the region’s economy.” Read it here.

SOCIAL DATA:

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: former Sen. Cece Tkaczyk … former Rep. David Levy (R-N.Y.) is 64 … Senate aspirant and former City Councilman Robert Jackson … one-time Senate aspirant and former City Hall aide Micah Lasher … AFT President Randi Weingarten … DASNY chief of staff Caroline Griffin Cartwright … Ady Barkan of the Center for Popular Democracy … Jorge Montalvo of Fran Barrett's office.

AROUND NEW YORK: 

— The Building Trades Employers’ Association and General Contractors’ Association are livid over a bill in the CIty Council that would “allow judges to consider a ‘defendant’s financial resources’ in determining penalties for construction violations that result in death or serious injury.”

— A coalition of business groups being led by the Business Council plan to call on Cuomo to reform the state’s prevailing wage law today. 

— A new state law will require the MTA to post its financial plans online before the board considers them for a vote. 

— NYCLASS expects a new bill to ban horse carriages in New York City will be introduced early next year.

— A new hit and run alert system took effect in New York City over the weekend. 

— Roger Stone prevailed in a defamation suit brought by former gubernatorial candidate Warren Redlich.

— A fitness center is slated to come to Albany’s Empire State Plaza.

— Three leaders of the Women’s March are backing Jumaane Williams’s candidacy for speaker. 

MORNING MEDIA, with POLITICO’s Michael Calderone: 

ON CAPITOL HILL, there have been rumors for weeks that various news organizations are going to be next with a bombshell story about sexual misconduct allegations against a member (or dozens of members) of Congress. POLITICO's Elana Schor and Rachael Bade look at the frenzy: "By last week, The Washington Post was the organization, and the number of members had grown more grandiose. 'I am hearing The Post has a list of 40-50, evenly split between the parties, that have had sexual harassment charges,' one lobbyist texted POLITICO."

- "Since the speculation began, members and aides from both parties in recent weeks have buttonholed reporters to try to gauge what they're working on regarding sexual harassment - and, perhaps, to put their own minds at ease that no one is dogging them," Schor and Bade report. "In the past week alone, at least four lawmakers have asked POLITICO whether the bombshell story is real. The atmosphere in Congress has reached the point that one Republican leadership staffer told POLITICO she worries that members might think the worst if they're called into Speaker Paul Ryan's office."

THE HOME TEAMS — POLITICO’s Howard Megdal: 

Pacers 109, Nets 97: The surprisingly entertaining Pacers, led by Victor Oladipo’s 26 points, sent the Barclays faithful home unhappy.

Eagles 34, Giants 29: Another hard-fought, close loss replete with mistakes the Giants typically don’t make in seasons they aren’t 2-12.

Saints 31, Jets 19: The Jets had no answer for Mark Ingram, who rushed for 151 yards and two touchdowns.

In men’s college hoops, St. John’s beat Iona at The Garden, 69-59.

The day ahead: the Knicks head to Charlotte.

#UpstateAmerica: Rochester is proud that the latest Star Wars movie was shot on Kodak film.

#ZooYork: “Macy’s Herald Square has a secret army of “special” Santas of other races and ethnicities for families not dreaming of a white Christmas.”

FOR MORE political and policy news from New York, check out Politico New York’s home page: http://politi.co/1MkLGXV 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook  http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook  http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook  http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook  http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook  http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX


CORRECTION:  This newsletter has been updated to correct where Jorge Montalvo works. 


                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC