A yard is covered with water in Sumava Resorts on Feb. 22, 2018.

A yard is covered with water in Sumava Resorts on Feb. 22, 2018.

The Kankakee River was almost a foot above flood stage at Shelby on Thursday, washing out roads and flooding homes throughout the area.


Most residents along the leading edge of the Kankakee River in the affected area voluntarily evacuated Thursday as floodwaters threatened the area, according to Lake County Sheriff Oscar Martinez.


"Mostly everybody evacuated," he said. Those who stayed behind were not in imminent danger and the afternoon and midnight shifts would be monitoring the conditions, he said.


Two levies, one east of Schneider and one in Shelby, had breached but have been secured and additional sandbags had been placed around homes, officials said. A number of pumps are operating to pull water away from the homes as well.


"We think the worst of it is right now," Martinez said. "We expect it will flood a little more but don't anticipate anything worse than that."


Martinez said 10 trustees from the Lake County Jail were tapped to fill sandbags at the site. The department's helicopter had conducted searches for anyone who may have been stranded, though no one was found in need of rescue.


Martinez said Indiana 55 is shut down at Shelby, Clay Street is shut down at the Kankakee River and northbound U.S. 41 has been closed. He said officials anticipate the southbound lanes will be closed as well. Extra patrols are in the area.


"There's really no access getting (north) into Lake County except (Interstate) 65," Martinez said.

Lake County Commissioner Jerry Tippy, R-Schererville, said officials from the commissioners' office, highway department, sheriff's office and surveyor have been working since Wednesday to help the area. The Wildwood and Shady Shores subdivisions were among the hardest hit by the flooding.


"We're pretty sure the river has crested," Tippy said. "We spent the entire day sandbagging. We got pretty much every area a significant number of sandbags. The local Boy Scout troop was filling more bags Thursday night as a precaution."


Tippy said the area recieved a helping hand from the towns of Munster and Highland and the Little Calumet River Basin Commission after the Little Calumet River crested. Both towns loaned their sandbag machines to Shelby, and the county highway department was able to pick up the already filled sandbags from the Little Calumet River and transfer them to Shelby and the surrounding area.


"They really helped us get a big jump on bagging over there," Tippy said.


Commissioner also have designated the Lake County Fairgrounds as an emergency shelter for non-domestic animals such as horses during the flooding. These animals should not be left in standing water. Anyone needing the service should contact the fairgrounds or county commissioners.


In Sumava Resorts in Newton County, Ray Malenius said the flood water crossing the street in front of his house and flowing into his basement came on quick.


Malenius said that on Wednesday things were looking OK, with the water slowly rising, but on Thursday the water rose and rose fast. Now he is just waiting to learn when the Kankakee River might crest.


"I've seen it pretty bad with water up to my chest," Malenius said. He uses a 2-by-4 piece of wood to brace the basement door now when floodwaters threaten in order to prevent the pressure from pushing the door open. The sump pump in his basement is cycling non-stop trying to keep pace with the water flowing under the door and seeping in through the foundation. Almost an inch of water had accumulated by Thursday afternoon.


"It's probably going to get worse," he said.


The entrance to Sumava Resorts was flooded. Only larger vehicles were able to pass by Thursday afternoon. Newton County Sheriff's Deputy Chris Wilson was sitting in his squad car preventing motorists from trying to enter the high water on northbound U.S. 41.


He said Newton County Highway Department had delivered a load of sand to the community earlier and that the water leading into Sumava was so deep his squad car could not pass through.


Wilson said the water was still rising. He said a traffic cone placed on a dry spot of the highway around 1 p.m. was already partially covered with water two hours later.


Carrie Napoleon is a freelance reporter for the Post-Tribune.