

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

A Kent couple planned to "start a new life" in Texas after a woman 
fatally hit a pedestrian walking to work and left the state with her 
boyfriend, according to charging documents.

A Kent couple planned to "start a new life" in Texas after a woman fatally hit a pedestrian walking to work and left the state with her boyfriend, according to charging documents.

A Kent couple planned to "start a new life" in Texas after a woman fatally hit a pedestrian walking to work and left the state with her boyfriend, according to charging documents.

Gracey Kailey Pearson, 19, and Alec James Fleck, 20, were charged last week for their roles in the death of 29-year-old D'maine Dugar, who was walking to his job at Safeway when he was hit early the morning of Sept. 9.

The Kent Police Department initially reported Pearson's age as 20.

Kent police say Pearson drove the 1998 Honda CR-V that crossed into the on-coming lane and struck Dugar in the 20500 block of 132nd Avenue Southeast. Dugar was reportedly walking north on the west shoulder, while Pearson was driving south. No sidewalks exist on that portion of the road.

RELATED: Woman arrested in Colorado for fatal Kent hit-and-run

Cops found Dugar's body while investigating a separate crash that occurred the same morning in the same area, according to initial reports from the Kent Police Department.

But they found vehicle debris connected to another vehicle, a 1997 to 2001 Honda CR-V. Dugar appeared to have been thrown into a ditch after being hit by a vehicle.

The incident report says Pearson left the scene and went to Fleck's house in the 26400 block of 132nd Avenue Southeast. They returned to the crash site in Fleck's Honda Accord, but spotted police vehicles and returned back to his house.

Fleck's stepfather told police he heard Fleck saying something in his home like, "no one would be putting his baby in jail," according to the incident report.

The stepfather noticed the damage to Pearson's vehicle, which she allegedly explained by saying she hit a tree. But the stepfather saw blood and hair on the SUV, police reports say.

Senior Deputy Prosecutor Amy Freedheim wrote that Fleck was seen picking at blood on the CR-V's windshield.

RELATED: Charges: Man in fatal hit-and-run torched his car

Fleck left the home before Kent police could arrive in the Honda CR-V and Pearson followed in Fleck's accord, according to court records. They allegedly left the CR-V on a dead end street at 133rd Place Southeast and South 262nd Street, blocks from Fleck's home. Police found the CR-V covered in blood and hair and missing pieces that were recovered from the crash site.

Pearson later reportedly called her father, saying she was in a hit-and-run and that she would not see him again, then hung up on him, according to police reports. She later allegedly texted her parents saying she was "catching a plane" to Texas to "start a new life."

Kent police issued a bulletin on Fleck's Honda Accord. Later that day, Oregon State Patrol reported spotting the car tailgating and driving aggressively, headed east on an Oregon freeway.

RELATED: State Patrol: Hit-and-run driver sent SUV plunging off I-5

Authorities found the vehicle in Glendale, Colorado on Sept. 12. The couple was arrested for shoplifting.

Prosecutors expect the couple to be sent to Washington to face their charges for Dugar's death. Jail records show they have not yet been booked into King County Jail, but a judge imposed $150,000 bail for each defendant.

Pearson is charged with felony hit-and-run and Fleck is charged with second-degree rendering criminal assistance.

This article was updated to correctly reflect Pearson's age.