Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 9:54 pm

Michael Wade, sheriff of Henrico County

Wade

Wade

Michael Wade, sheriff of Henrico County

Nearly 9 of 10 inmates who took a recent Henrico County Sheriff’s Office survey said their drug use helped land them behind bars.

The survey, the first of its kind in about 15 years, was taken by inmates on Dec. 28 at the two jail facilities run by the sheriff’s office — one on East Parham Road in Henrico and the other in New Kent County.

The questionnaire garnered 1,007 responses on a day that the inmate population was 1,434, according to a summary of the survey findings provided by Henrico Sheriff Mike Wade.

The survey found that 87 percent of inmate respondents said their involvement with drugs was a “direct or indirect reason” for their incarceration.

That was an increase from March 2003 when a similar survey was last conducted. Back then, 74 percent of inmates surveyed reported their involvement in drugs was a direct or indirect cause of their incarceration.

“I think it verifies a lot of what we’ve been saying — that substance abuse is a problem and one of the main factors of people coming to jail,” Wade said of the survey results. “One of the things that I say all the time is that there’s not a single person in any jail or prison across the country that’s charged with being an addict. They’re charged with the consequences (of their addiction).”

Back in 2003, about 30 percent of Henrico inmates surveyed said heroin was their drug of choice. An additional 30 percent, back then, reported their preferred drug was marijuana.

But in last December’s survey, 47 percent of inmates surveyed at the end of 2017 said their preferred drug was opiates, which includes heroin. About 24 percent said alcohol was the drug they preferred, while 19 percent said it was marijuana. About 41 percent of male inmates and 28 percent of female inmates who responded to last December’s survey reported they had been hospitalized for drug use. About 32 percent of male inmates and 22 percent of female inmates said they had been administered Narcan, a drug used to treat an opioid overdose.

Nearly half of respondents, 48 percent, said the first drug they ever took was marijuana, far larger than the 29 percent who said it was alcohol, 13 percent who said it was opiates and 7 percent who said it was cocaine, according to the 2017 Henrico survey. Male inmates reported that they had an average of five incarcerations due to their drug use, while females said they had an average of two drug-related incarcerations.

In the December survey, which was completed by 825 men and 182 women, about 25 percent of female inmates said they had taken drugs while pregnant. About 43 percent of female inmates reported having their children taken away because of drug use.

Henrico’s latest inmate survey is being used as part of an application to the National Association of Counties for an award recognizing a Henrico Sheriff’s Office program for inmates called Opiate Recovery By Intensive Tracking, Wade said. Started in 2016, ORBIT is a comprehensive program to help Henrico inmates fight their opiate addiction and stay off the drug after they are released into jobs in the community. One of the sheriff’s office’s most-utilized substance abuse programs is Recovery in a Secure Environment, or RISE. That program puts groups of inmates in separate housing pods at the Henrico jail facility in New Kent where they get addiction counseling.

Chesterfield County Sheriff Karl Leonard said there hasn’t been a formal study of the drug use among that county’s inmates, but he did say a “very large proportion” of them are drug users. During a meeting about a month ago with inmates in the Heroin Addiction Recovery Program at the Chesterfield County Jail , 86 of 88 of those inmates said they would have no criminal record were it not for their drug use, Leonard said.

The Chesterfield sheriff said that while an inmate might not be in jail for a drug charge, they could still be facing a charge related to feeding their addiction, such as robbery or larceny.

Leonard said he feels that jails in Richmond, Henrico and Chesterfield are doing a great job helping inmates with their addictions. What’s really needed, Leonard said, are affordable, accessible recovery programs out in the community that offenders could take part in before they get arrested.

“But they’re not there,” Leonard said. “So in the absence of that, we are the best place.”

sgorman@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6885

Wade


                                    
                                        Whenever Sean Gorman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




