
                                JODY OCALLAGHAN
                            


                            
                            Last updated 14:49, September 19 2017
                            

Police have charged a teen with sexual assault following an incident at Lincoln University.

An 18-year-old man has been charged after an alleged sexual assault at a Lincoln University hall.


Police arrested the man on Friday in relation to an incident on the campus, south of Christchurch, on September 12. 


Lincoln University posted on its Facebook page that it was providing support to the affected students.


"Lincoln University wants to assure students, staff and the general public we take these incidents very seriously and measures are in place to ensure the safety of everyone on campus."


The university was conducting its own investigation.


"Incidents of this nature are unacceptable and will not be tolerated by the university."


Vice-chancellor Professor Robin Pollard said it had been advised of the alleged offender's bail conditions.


Sexual violence was "unacceptable and abhorrent", he said.


"Incidents of sexual violence have been highlighted across Australia and New Zealand in recent months, reminding university communities of their obligations and improving understanding."


The teen will appear in the Christchurch District Court on October 10, charged with assault with intent to commit sexual violation.    



                
                     - Stuff
            

VTNZ investigated after employee tips off Head Hunters hit squad

National Homepage


                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Security fears at forensic unit
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Injuries after two crashes
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        This is what you don't see
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
           
               
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        $5k reparation for killing woman
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        'Personal' problems rock charity
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Police found negligent
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Boy, 5, sparks house fire
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Nurses walk off the job
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Census response rate dropped
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Blazing truck on highway
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        How Deloitte dept closed its pay gap
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        House fire 'suspicious'
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Which plastics are really green?
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Chemical spill during crate wash
    

            
    
        
    





    








    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





                        









    
    
        
    
    
    





















    
    
        
    


    

        
    
        Nurses' negotiations not over
    

            
    
        
    





    








    
       
           
           
               
           
           
           
        
    











    
    
        
    
    
    










    
    
        
    
    
    





            
                Thinking outside the 100+ square metre housing box
            

Breaking news?

Send us your photos, videos and tip-offs:

Emailnewstips@stuff.co.nz

Phone0800 697 8833


                SecureDrop
                Share with us securely
            