


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Milwaukee County Board keeps open Schulz Aquatic Center this year by restricting most travel by county employees in 2018.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The Milwaukee County Board has voted to keep the Schulz Aquatic Center open in 2018.
(Photo: Angela Peterson, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

The Milwaukee County Board on Thursday agreed to throw a life preserver to the Schulz Aquatic Center at Lincoln Park to ensure the pool will reopen this summer.


A two-step proposal from Board Chairman Theodore Lipscomb Sr. saves the pool in his district by imposing a moratorium on most county employee travel this year and directing the savings to be used by the parks department to fund the aquatic center.


The board's action requires the parks department to look for other cost-saving measures in its own budget to ensure sufficient funds are available to keep the north side aquatic center open. The department needs $232,246 to save the pool this year and prevent a deficit in the department's budget.


The board approved the plan Thursday on a 16-1 vote. Supervisor Deanna Alexander had questioned whether the proposed travel ban would generate enough savings to save the aquatic center. She voted against the proposal.


Supervisor Michael Mayo Sr. urged the board to approve the measure. "It's important for children to learn how to swim," Mayo said.


Lipscomb's resolution requires the parks department to keep all water parks and pools open in 2018.


The board's finance committee last week recommended approval of the pool-saving measure after children protested the closing at the county courthouse and more than a dozen residents urged supervisors to open the aquatic center this summer.


Residents who live near the Schulz Aquatic Center in Lincoln Park, organizers and members of the Northwest Side Community Development Corp. gather at the Milwaukee County Courthouse before the start of the County Board's finance committee meeting for a news conference on Thursday to oppose theclosing of the pool on the city's north side. (Photo: Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

RELATED: Milwaukee County panel moves to save Schulz Aquatic Center and hears from pool supporters



	
LIKE  US ON FACEBOOK: Get the latest Journal Sentinel news in your feed
	
	

The county's administrative services department listed the Schulz Aquatic Center among services to be closed this year after the board imposed $15.7 million in spending cuts in the 2018 budget.


The cuts followed the board's decision to reject County Executive Chris Abele's recommendation to increase the county wheel tax by $30 this year, to a total of $60. The wheel tax increase was projected to generate $14.7 million in revenue this year so the board had to remove that amount of spending from Abele's budget.


Fully $3.7 million of the revenue reduction came from board approval of 0.75% across-the-board cuts for all departments. The parks department's share of that cut was $232,246 and that amount nearly matched the annual cost of operating the Schulz Aquatic Center.


Operating the Schulz Aquatic Center in 2017 resulted in a net loss to the county of $271,575, according to a report from the comptroller's office.


The moratorium on non-essential travel will not impact employees required to travel under contract or workers who check the welfare of county teens imprisoned at state juvenile prisons in northern Wisconsin. The district attorney's office, Mitchell International Airport and other departments will be exempted from the travel moratorium if they already have met their full share of across-the-board cuts by other means.


RELATED: Milwaukee County panel OKs contract to run local juvenile treatment center in wake of Lincoln Hills crisis


Milwaukee County has proposed leasing a five-story building at 4777 N. 32nd St. for a local residential treatment center for juveniles that would be an alternative to imprisonment at Lincoln Hills. (Photo: Mark Hoffman, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Also Thursday, the board approved a $2.7 million contract this year with Wisconsin Community Services to run a residential treatment center in the county as an option to imprisonment for some male teen offenders.


The center was proposed by county officials as an alternative to sentencing county youth to the state's troubled Lincoln Hills prison in northern Wisconsin.


The county Health and Human Services Department has negotiated a separate lease for a five-story building on Milwaukee's north side that would house the program. The building at 4777 N. 32nd St. is owned by Bishop's Creek Community Development Corp., an affiliate of Holy Redeemer Institutional Church of God in Christ.


Boys between the ages of 14 and 17 would be placed in the center by a judge only if officials determine they do not require lockup in the county detention center or state juvenile prison. Serious juvenile offenders would continue to be incarcerated.



	
Sun Prairie firefighter killed by explosion that destroyed his own bar





Tensions boil in tiny Northwoods school district after board member asks about finances




	
'Pivot counties' will be key in fight for Senate control



 
