Sign up now and start saving and organizing your favorite architecture projects and photos


Sign up now to save and organize your favorite architecture projects


✕

Find the most inspiring products for your projects in our Product Catalog.


Find the most inspiring products in our Product Catalog.


✕

Get the ArchDaily Chrome Extension and be inspired with every new tab. Install here »


✕

All over the world, architects are finding cool ways to re-use run-down old buildings. Click here to see the best in Refurbishment Architecture.


Want to see the coolest refurbishment projects? Click here.


✕

Immerse yourself in inspiring buildings with our selection of 360 videos. Click here.


See our immersive, inspiring 360 videos. Click here.


✕




Two large-scale US cultural projects have, this week, announced major updates relating to the renovation of existing buildings – and both involve, to a greater and lesser extent, American business magnate, media mogul, and philanthropist David Geffen.





One—the Lincoln Center's Geffen Hall in New York City—has scrapped plans for a $500 million renovation to be led by Heatherwick Studio and Diamond Schmitt Architects, while another—Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), for which a renovation is being led by Peter Zumthor—has seen a pledge by Geffen of $150 million toward its $600 million price-tag.





In a report by The New York Times (October 3, 2017), the new management of the Lincoln Center and the New York Philharmonic announced that they "were scuttling a half-billion-dollar plan for a gut renovation" of David Geffen Hall, "seeking simpler ways to improve the lackluster theater." In 2015 Heatherwick Studio and Diamond Schmitt Architects were selected to collaborate on the "renovation and re-imagination" of the hall, which is the Lincoln Center’s largest concert venue in New York City.





In separate news that emerged on October 4, 2017, Geffen's substantial donation to LACMA brings the total amount raised for the project to $450 million. In honor of the donation, which represents the single largest donation to the institution in its history, the renovation to the building will be named the David Geffen Galleries. The project is set to begin construction in 2019, to be completed by 2023.





News via The New York Times.





The Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) has released the newest renderings of their planned Atelier Peter Zumthor-led $600 million renovation, and one thing in particular stands out: the building is no longer black.




The Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) has announced two gifts totaling $75 million dollars, bringing the museum's Peter Zumthor designed campus overhaul one step closer to reality, reports the Los Angeles Times. Elaine Wynn, one of the world's top art collectors, has pledged $50 million dollars, and former Univision chairman A.




Peter Zumthor and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art ( LACMA) have revealed a revised design for the museum's $650 million new home on Museum Row in Los Angeles.