
    
        
            By Patrick Villanova


                     The Jersey Journal
                    

Hudson County has never been short on stories that make you shake your head and exclaim: You just can't make this up!

Who could forget the infamous Easter bunny brawl at a Jersey City shopping mall in 2016? Or how about the time "Oopy from Bullet Town" allegedly climbed through a Wendy's drive-thru window and assaulted employees of the restaurant?

But Hudson County also saw its fair share of jaw-dropping stories in 2017. Some are bizarre. Others are outrageous. A bunch are all of the above.

So to put a bow on the past year of wacky news, and usher in 2018, here's a list of the Hudson County stories from 2017 that we couldn't have made up even if we tried:

Son of black supremacist cult leader charged with child abuse

It's not every day the son of a cult leader appears in the Hudson County courts, but that's what happened in March when Rameses Richardson -- also known as Prince York -- appeared on charges of child abuse. The Jersey Journal learned Richardson is the son of Dwight D. York, the founder of the United Nuwaubian Nation of Moors, a black supremacist cult classified as a hate/extremist group by the Southern Poverty Law Center.

Heidi Beirich, director of the Intelligence Project at the SPLC, called the Nuwaubians "probably one of the wackiest groups we have listed as a hate group. They had a compound outside Atlanta, Georgia and they actually built pyramids there."

Richardson was accused of beating the son of his girlfriend with a belt and leaving "whip marks," as well as burning the boy's hands with hot water and locking him in a bathroom overnight multiple times.

Car burglar found in trash compactor with broken legs: police

Call it a tough break.

An alleged burglar's attempts to break into cars in the Newport section of Jersey City were thwarted in July when he was spotted by police and ended up jumping into a high-rise building's trash compactor. Police caught up with him when they heard him howling in pain after he suffered compound fractures to both legs, a source told The Jersey Journal.

Man left bloodied after assault at college graduation

Nothing says "I'm proud of you" like turning a loved one's college graduation into a street fight.

That's allegedly what happened when police arrested a 25-year-old man who they say assaulted a 60-year-old man at the New Jersey City University commencement ceremony in May. The victim was left bloodied after he was accused of pushing the other man's mother during the graduation ceremony at Prudential Center. Newark police charged the 25-year-old with aggravated assault following the incident.

Mom nearly stabs daughter's boyfriend after finding teens in bedTalk about an awkward introduction.

A protective mother jumped into the fray and sliced an 18-year-old man's hand when she walked in on him having sex with her 16-year-old daughter in September. The woman told police she thought her daughter's boyfriend was an intruder, but police determined the teens had an ongoing relationship that the mother did not know about.

$1 million in cash found in home of man charged in fatal hit-runOne of Hudson County's most tragic stories of year took a turn for the bizarre when the man charged in a fatal hit-and-run was rung up on money laundering charges after authorities raided his home and found $1 million in cash, bags of diamonds, and fake IDs.

"He is literally like a ghost. He can go anywhere in the country with any of these IDs and nobody would know," Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Lynne Seborowski said during Olvy Torres' detention hearing. Torres is charged in the Sept. 26 hit-and-run that killed 59-year-old Luisa Valdez on River Road in North Bergen and is currently awaiting trial.

The $2.2 million budget gap that wasn't

File this one in the "stranger than fiction" category.

The Bayonne school district spent plenty of time in the news over the last year after a $2.2 million hole was found in the district's budget. To stop bleeding, the Board of Education voted to lay off nearly 300 teachers and other employees, as well as raise the school tax -- measures that were met by considerable frustration and anger.

The district eventually rehired about 200 of the laid-off teachers, but the whole saga took a stunning turn in November when the state auditor released a bombshell report showing the district was never actually in the multimillion-dollar deficit it presumed to be facing. Instead, "inappropriate" budgetary practices turned a $3 million surplus into what appeared to be a $2.2 million deficit, though the deficit never actually existed.

Woman accused of sending 10-year-old girl naked picture of her father

A 24-year-old Jersey City woman landed in hot water after authorities said she texted a 10-year-old girl a naked photo of the girl's biological father in June. The woman, an Armstrong Avenue resident, was charged with third-degree child abuse.

Caiman spotted in Secaucus duck pond

Secaucus may be home to the Meadowlands, but it's not exactly the Florida Everglades.

So when a small reptile, presumed to be an alligator, was spotted in the town's duck pond on May 3, people took notice. Signs were installed at the pond warning the public that an alligator had been seen. While it was a DPW worker who initially reported seeing the reptile, a group of kids snapped a photo of the creature soon after its first sighting, Mayor Michael Gonnelli said.

How it got in the body of water? Well that's not much of a mystery, according to a reptile expert at the University of Florida. When contacted by The Jersey Journal, Ken Vliet said the reptile was likely a caiman that someone kept as an illegal pet. He said it probably ended up in the pond after someone released it into the wild, adding that it wouldn't be able to survive the winter weather.

Masked man threatens hoops coach over playing time: cops

We know spectators at high school sporting events can be a bit overbearing at times, but one person took it to an extreme in February. A Lincoln High School basketball coach reported to police that one night outside the school he was approached by a masked man armed with a crowbar. The man knocked him to the ground and threatened to kill him if he didn't play the team's seniors.

"You need to start playing the seniors for two minutes a quarter or I'm going to kill you," the suspect told the coach, a police report indicates. The district ramped up security at the school's basketball games following the incident, but it's unclear whether the suspect was ever arrested.

Plane crashes in Bayonne, narrowly misses gas station

It could have been a lot worse.

That refrain was surely on the minds of any- and everyone who saw the aftermath of a small plane crash in the Peninsula City in February.

Officials said the pilot of the Piper PA-28 aircraft encountered a problem near the Statue of Liberty and crashed-landed on Avenue E near 41st Street.

The pilot, a man from Long Island, was hospitalized after the crash but luckily no one on the ground was injured. Further disaster was avoided when the plane narrowly missed a gas station as it crashed to the street.

Video shows cops kick innocent victim of fiery crash

Few stories in 2017 generated more buzz than our report on a June 4 police pursuit that ended in a fiery crash and an innocent man being assaulted by police. The pursuit began in the Greenville section of Jersey City when officers tried to pull over a vehicle that matched the description of one tied to a shooting. A six-mile chase ensued and eventually ended on Tonnelle Avenue near North Street when the suspect's car crashed with an innocent man's vehicle.

Video footage shot immediately after the fiery crash shows police officers kick the innocent man after he emerged from the burning wreckage.

Four officers, including one who was fired after the crash, were eventually indicted for their alleged roles in the chase and the incident caught on camera.

Their cases are still in the courts.

Man steals $20K worth of soda from ShopRite, cops say

Call it the great soda caper.

A Bergen County delivery truck driver was arrested in April after authorities said he stole $20,000 worth of soda from a Jersey City supermarket over the course three months. According to a police report, the Bergenfield man stole 3,239 "units" of Canada Dry products between November and January from the ShopRite on Marin Boulevard. The status or outcome of the charges is unclear.

Nonetheless, it was one of the more bizarre crimes The Jersey Journal reported on this year.

Sheriff's officers' horseplay ends in stabbing

Friendly horseplay between two Hudson County Sheriff's officers turned violent when one of the officers stabbed the other inside the Hudson County Administration Building in mid-August, sources told The Jersey Journal. When asked about the alleged incident for a Sept. 19 story, a spokesman for the Hudson County Sheriff's Office said "it is being investigated by the (county) law department" and declined to provide any details about the incident, including the date, time, and exact location of the alleged stabbing.

'America's Most Wanted' scam artist busted in Hudson County

A scam artist who once appeared on "America's Most Wanted" for targeting senior citizens appeared to be up to his old tricks this year. Anthony Quick, who has been pursued and arrested by police departments across the country for years, was busted in Hudson County after allegedly bringing his well-traveled scams to Bayonne.

Quick was arrested in May after a pair of senior citizens separately accused him of tampering with their car doors in Bayonne and then offering to fix the damage for cash. He was eventually caught by police in Jersey City.

Patrick Villanova may be reached at pvillanova@jjournal.com. Follow him on Twitter @pvilla_nova. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        