
    
        
            By Taylor Tiamoyo Harris

tharris@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

"Give me an A, A-K, A-K-I-R-A-H"

A group of former Orange High School cheerleaders chanted in honor of a past member of their squad, 20-year-old Akirah Townes, on Saturday in Lincoln Gymnasium.

Townes, of Orange, was stabbed to death April 27 in Montclair, allegedly by an ex-boyfriend.

More than than 200 people from the community filled the gym, wearing purple shirts, hats and carrying signs and balloons to honor the life of Townes.

"All these people here, it's a testament to who she was," her oldest brother, Tyree Townes, 32, said. "Had it been one of us or anyone in the community, Akirah would have been the main one behind this -- knocking on doors, passing out flyers to those in the community."

During the memorial service, Akirah Townes' family announced they were starting a foundation called "Akirah Cares" in the slain woman's honor. 

"She was all the good things of her brother and sisters rolled into one," Tyree Townes said. 

According to Essex County Prosecutor's Office, Townes was found stabbed on Hartley Street in Montclair around 6 a.m. Taken to St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center in Paterson, she was pronounced dead shortly thereafter.

Her ex-boyfriend, Ahigjah Broomes, 21, of Orange, has been charged with  murder, unlawful possession of a weapon and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose in Townes' death, authorities said.

Broomes appeared for a detention hearing Thursday in Superior Court in Essex County, where a judge ordered him to be held in custody pre-trial and to undergo a mental health evaluation, authorities said. His next listed court date is May 21.

Akirah Townes, a Kean University junior, was studying to become a special education teacher to honor her brother, who died four years ago from a rare genetic disease. 

On Saturday, she was remembered as a daughter, sister, friend and beloved community member. One of her friends said during the ceremony that she was passionate about education and never wanted to skip class. 

In February, Akirah Townes posted a photo on her Facebook page of a letter naming her to the dean's list for the fall semester. 

Many promising lives have been scarred by domestic violence, according to statistics.

In New Jersey, an act of domestic violence happens every 7.29 minutes, according to 180 Turning Lives Around, Inc, a Monmouth County-based nonprofit organization dedicated to ending domestic violence. 

The Office of Domestic Violence Services in the state's Division of Women offers a 24-hour hotline with access to confidential safe-house counseling, support services, and advocacy for victims and children. 

Akirah Townes' family hopes to add to the agenda through the creation of "Akirah Cares," which a family friend said will focus on education, intervention, counseling and attacking the problem of domestic violence at its roots.

During the ceremony Saturday, which was also sponsored by the Orange Board of Education and Orange Police Department, many purple balloons began to pop as family and friends spoke about Akirah Townes. 

"She's here," a family friend said. "This is exactly what she'd want us to be doing." 

Taylor Tiamoyo Harris may be reached at tharris@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @ladytiamoyo. 


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        