
    
        
            By Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

A skateboarder was arrested Thursday in Lebanon after police say he pulled a knife on a driver, was ordered at gunpoint by a witness to drop the blade, then tried to flee and was detained by the witness and driver until officers arrived. 

Michael Van Gelder, 30, was arrested and booked into the Linn County Jail on suspicion of fourth-degree assault, unlawful use of a weapon, second-degree disorderly conduct and menacing. He is accused of hitting the male driver while being restrained.

Van Gelder was riding on Main Street about 7 p.m. and got into an argument with the 39-year-old driver while trying to cross an intersection, according to Lebanon police Sgt. Patrick O'Malley. The driver stopped, Van Gelder went up to the car and confronted the driver with a large knife, O'Malley said.

A witness at a nearby business saw the altercation, pulled his gun and ordered Van Gelder to put the knife down. The witness had a concealed carry permit for his firearm, O'Malley said. Van Gelder tried to run away, but the driver and witness chased after him.

By the time officers arrived, Van Gelder had been disarmed, the witness's gun was holstered, and Van Gelder was being restrained, O'Malley said. The driver was treated on the scene for a minor injury from being hit.

-- Everton Bailey Jr.

ebailey@oregonian.com503-221-8343; @EvertonBailey


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        