Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Support

Support

Chat Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Kenneth Smith, 39 is charged with possessing child sexually abusive material, using a computer to commit a crime and failing to register as a sex offender

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Kenneth James Smith, 39, of Flint, is charged with possession of child sexually abusive material, using a computer to commit a crime and failing to register as a sex offender.
(Photo: Livingston County Sheriff's Office)

A 39-year-old man is held on a $250,000 bond in connection to video surveillance provided by his employer, police said.


Kenneth James Smith of Flint was arraigned Oct. 5 on felony charges of possessing child sexually abusive material, using a computer to commit a crime and failing to register as a sex offender.


Livingston County Sheriff Mike Murphy said deputies were summoned to a Howell Township manufacturing facility Oct. 2, where the supervisor reported looking at plant surveillance video after noticing Smith was performing poorly on the job and taking extended breaks.


The video showed Smith viewing "pornographic material involving a female minor," on his phone, Murphy said, noting deputies viewed the video and came to the same conclusion.


“This business knew he had a history of criminal sexual conduct, but they were kind of giving him a second chance,” Murphy added. "He did talk to us and further implicated himself in child pornography."


Deputies obtained a search warrant to obtain Smith’s phone, as well as electronic devices from his home.


The Michigan Public Sex Offender Registry shows Smith was convicted of first degree criminal sexual conduct of a person under 13 in 2005 and required to register as a sex offender for life. The most recent charge of failing to register, Murphy said, was related to Smith failing to report a change of address. 


The case remains under investigation.


Smith remains in Livingston County Jail. He is scheduled for an Oct. 17 court appearance.


Contact reporter Laura Colvin at 517-552-2848 or lcolvin@livingstondaily.com or follow her on Twitter: @LauraColvin22 
