


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A white nationalist from Arkansas was convicted late Tuesday of malicious wounding in connection with beating a black man during a day of clashes at a Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville last summer.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

This photo combo of images provided by the Lonoke County, Ark., Sheriff's Office and Charlottesville, Va., Police Department, respectively, shows Jacob Scott Goodwin, left, and DeAndre Shakur Harris.
(Photo: Lonoke County Sheriff's Office and Charlottesville PD via AP)

A white nationalist from Arkansas was convicted late Tuesday of malicious wounding in connection with beating a black man during a day of clashes at a Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville last summer.


The jury recommended that Jacob Scott Goodwin, 23, be sentenced to 10 years in jail with the option for suspended sentence for the attack on DeAndre Shakur Harris, WVIR-TV reports.


Goodwin argued that he was acting in self-defense in the brawl at a parking garage on Aug.12.


“I believed I was going to be attacked,” he told the court.


“(Harris) came running at me from (the) right side, and fell down or tripped for some reason," he testified. "So when he tried to get back up, I kicked him because he was previously running toward me.” 


Prosecutors argued that Goodwin, who was wearing a military tactical helmet and brandishing a large shield during the assault, was the aggressor.


Harris, 20, a former special-education instructional assistant, suffered a spinal injury, a broken arm and cuts to his head that required eight staples.


The unrest on the streets of Charlottesville grew out of a rally by white nationalists protesting the removal of a statue of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee from a city park.


A 32-year-old counterprotester was killed during the upheaval when a self-proclaimed neo-Nazi rammed his car into a crowd of people.


 Although Goodwin wore white nationalist pins during the rally, including one honoring Hitler, neither the prosecutors nor defense questioned him during the trial about his possible ties to white-supremacist groups, The Washington Post reports.


Goodwin, who is from Ward, Ark., was tracked down and identified by online sleuths led by Black Lives Matter activist Shaun King, who pored over video of the attack frame by frame, the Post reports. Three other men have also been arrested in connection with the assault.


Harris was acquitted in March of misdemeanor assault and battery against one of the alleged white supremacists involved in the confrontation.
 
