© Copyright 2000 - 2016 Fox Television Stations, LLC. All Rights Reserved.


Privacy Policy Terms of Service Ad Choices Public File

© Copyright 2000 - 2016 Fox Television Stations, LLC. All Rights Reserved.


Privacy Policy Terms of Service Ad Choices Public File

Posted: Jul 03 2018 09:26PM PDT

Video Posted: Jul 04 2018 02:53PM PDT

Updated: Jul 04 2018 02:58PM PDT

(FOX 11) - Viral video of police arresting a woman in Inglewood that first sparked outrage, and questioned police use of force, is video of a kidnapping suspect being arrested, according to police and the Los Angeles District Attorney.


The video posted on Twitter by @x__ricardo has been viewed more than 2 Million times and appears to show a black woman with her hands raised in the air, walking backwards to police with their guns drawn.


In response the Los Angeles Police Department posted this on the departments official Twitter account:

We are aware this video has raised concerns from the community. Although we are limited in what info we can release, we can confirm this individual was arrested on a felony kidnapping warrant &amp; taken into custody without a use-of-force. She is being held on 1 million dollars bail https://t.co/ggrTsBWi3N

 According to court documents the woman in the video is one of three suspects charged with kidnapping actress Daisy McCrackin and her actor boyfriend Joseph Capone on May 3rd.


In a grand jury indictment that was unsealed today in Los Angeles County Superior Court, Keith Andre Stewart, Johntae Jones and Amber Neal were collectively charged with 17 felony counts, including kidnapping, assault with a firearm, grand theft, mayhem, conspiracy and possession for sale of a controlled substance, methamphetamine.


Police say the suspects allegedly went to the McCrackin's South LA home and pistol whipped Capone, placed black hoods over their heads and drove them to a home in Compton.


There they allegedly stripped Capone and held him in a bathtub naked for ransom as McCrackin was taken to multiple banks in an attempt to pull out cash for her boyfriends release.


The indictment says she was forced to write a check for $10,000 to Neal, who deposited it into his account. Later McCrackin was taken back to her home where she was able to call police.


According to a news release by the Los Angeles District Attorney Stewart and Jones face a maximum possible sentence of life in state prison without the possibility of parole if convicted as charged. Neal faces up to life in prison.


Bail for Jones and Neal was set at $1 million, and Stewart's bail was $2.08 million. The defendants are expected to appear in court July 23 for a pretrial hearing in Department 116 of the Foltz Criminal Justice Center.


Deputy District Attorney Craig Kleffman is prosecuting the case.


The case remains under investigation by the Los Angeles Police Department.


 

© 2000-2015 Fox Television Stations, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Privacy Policy Terms of Service Ad Choices