By

Ekin Karasin For Mailonline






  Published:
  13:59 EDT, 14 November 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  15:44 EDT, 14 November 2017







          22

View  comments

His estranged wife Mel B settled her domestic violence case against him last week, lifting his restraining order.


And Stephen Belafonte seemed to be in good spirits on Monday, as he  returned to the family home they once shared  in Los Angeles.


The music producer, 42, who declared that he was the 'happiest guy in the world' after the order was lifted, looked casual as he arrived at the house with his lawyers.


Scroll down for video 


Back to the homestead: Stephen Belafonte seemed to be in good spirits as he returned to the family home he once shared with estranged wife Mel B in Los Angeles on Monday

The father-of-two kept his look casual, wearing a black T-shirt and simple black tracksuit bottoms with bright red trainers.


He was accompanied by his lawyers as he strode into the house on the sunny Monday afternoon.


Belafonte's outing comes after Mel B also dropped her domestic violence restraining order against her former nanny on Monday, avoiding an embarrassing trial.


Settled: His outing comes after Mel B settled her domestic violence case against him last week, lifting his restraining order. She also settled the order against their former nanny Lorraine Gilles (pictured)

Relaxed: The music producer, 42, who declared that he was the 'happiest guy in the world' after the order was lifted, looked casual as he arrived at the home with his lawyers

Going under the radar: The father-of-two kept his look casual, wearing a black T-shirt and simple black tracksuit bottoms with bright red trainers

DailyMail.com understands lawyers for the former Spice Girl and her ex-nanny, Lorraine Gilles, reached a deal late on Friday after an eight-month legal battle.


Mel B took out restraining orders against Gilles and her husband, Stephen Belafonte after filing for divorce, alleging that the two had plotted to make embarrassing sex tapes of her.


The America's Got Talent judge settled her domestic violence case against Belafonte last week, lifting his restraining order.


Judge Mark Juhas issued a short statement at LA Superior Court confirming Mel's deal with Gilles.


'In the Brown v Gilles matter the court received information that the case has been resolved. As a result no one will be appearing this morning,' he said. 'The domestic violence restraining order has been dissolved. The civil harassment restraining order was dissolved last Thursday.'


Done: Belafonte's outing comes after Mel B also dropped her domestic violence restraining order against her former nanny on Monday, avoiding an embarrassing trial

 Agreement: DailyMail.com understands lawyers for the former Spice Girl and her ex-nanny, Lorraine Gilles, reached a deal late on Friday after an eight-month legal battle

Judge Juhas had merged both Belafonte and Gilles' restraining orders to be dealt with in the same trial scheduled to start on Monday.


Gilles, who claims she enjoyed group sex with Mel and Belafonte during their marriage, helped to raise the star's three children, Pheonix, 18, from her previous marriage to Jimmy Gulzar, Madison, six, her daughter with Belafonte and Angel, 11, her daughter with comic Eddie Murphy.


Mel later admitted in court that she had a relationship with Gilles. 


She has always denied the claims made by Mel, real name Melanie Brown, and sued her for defamation after the star branded her a 'prostitute' and a 'homewrecker' in court papers.


Moving forward: After the restraining order against him was removed on Thursday last week, Belafonte said he's the 'happiest guy in the world'

Content: The jubilant film producer said his family has been 'restored' and he's glad the 'cloud of suspicion' of domestic violence is no longer hanging over his head

The defamation case is pending. Gilles did, however, say she willingly took part in threesomes with Mel and Belafonte.


Her court papers claimed: 'At no point did Gilles and Belafonte engage in any sexual acts without Brown’s knowledge or participation and at no point did Gilles and Belafonte represent to Brown that Gilles was pregnant with Belafonte’s child.'


After the restraining order against him was removed on Thursday last week, Belafonte said he's the 'happiest guy in the world'.


In a video statement released exclusively to DailyMail.com, the jubilant film producer said his family has been 'restored' and he's glad the 'cloud of suspicion' of domestic violence is no longer hanging over his head.


He and Mel, both 42, can now move forward with hearings for their divorce.


Family man: It is thought that an agreement was reached so that Belafonte could see his daughter Madison, six, whom he shares with the America's Got Talent judge

It is thought that an agreement was reached so that Belafonte could see his daughter Madison, six, whom he shares with the America's Got Talent judge.


Custody of Madison and Belafonte’s application for step-father visitation of 10 year -old Angel - Mel B’s daughter by Eddie Murphy - are still to be settled.


Mel and Belafonte married in 2007 but the singer filed for divorce in March this year citing 'irreconcilable differences' and claimed domestic abuse.


Belafonte's legal team was planning on using 56 videos as evidence in the upcoming trial featuring Mel, claiming to show the star taking cocaine and in a 'sexual activity'.


Judge Juhas said he would return the controversial videos submitted as exhibits by Belafonte - 20 of which showed allegedly sexual situations involving Mel - to Belafonte. 




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group