Sign in using your wfxt profile

Need a profile? Register now.

Welcome back. Please sign in

By submitting your registration information, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

We have sent a confirmation email to {* data_emailAddress *}. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your account.

We look forward to seeing you on [website] frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.

Click here to return to the page you were visiting.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Edit your profile

Sorry we could not verify that email address. Enter your email below and we'll send you another email.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

EAST BRIDGEWATER, Mass. - Four teenagers were killed in a violent car crash on Route 106 in East Bridgewater, according to the Plymouth County district attorney Timothy Cruz.

One other victim sustained critical injuries and was transported to a local hospital.

"Three people had been pronounced dead at the scene, one person was taken to the Brockton hospital and was pronounced dead there," said DA Cruz.

Cruz added that all the victims were young men in their late teens.

Stoughton Public Schools put out a letter on Twitter, saying the five people involved in the crash were Stoughton High School students.

Please read this letter from Stoughton High School Principal Julie Miller about the five students from Stoughton High School were involved in a fatal car accident yesterday, Saturday, May 19, 2018, in East Bridgewater. pic.twitter.com/hbb0tPqWEX

Plymouth County District Attorney Tim Cruz tweeted Sunday morning with details on the crash, identifying the four victims as 17-year-olds Christopher Desir, Eric Sarblah and David Bell, and 16-year-old Nick Joyce.

The fifth teen involved was not identified, as he is still in the hospital.

Victims Identified, Investigation Ongoing in East Bridgewater Fatal Crash pic.twitter.com/Hsi4X8irFa

In a statement Saturday, Stoughton Public Schools Superintendent Marguerite Rizzi said that the community had experienced a tragedy, and said "there are no words to articulate the impact of this loss."

"This is a shock and a trauma for our entire community," Rizzi said. "It will not make sense because it does not make sense. For students, especially those who know the classmates involved in the crash, you will likely feel confused, angry, and sad, and sometimes all at the same time. You are not alone in your grief and you should not feel alone. Know that the adults in our community will feel the same way."

Police and firefighters responded to a report of a rollover crash at the intersection of Laurel and West streets shortly after 4:00 p.m.

DEVELOPING: Horrific crash in E. Bridgewater leaves 4 dead, one injured. Here’s the car being towed away. Details at 10PM @boston25 pic.twitter.com/HyWkVR9wUe

The car, described as a white sedan, was crushed and torn into pieces after flipping over off Route 106 before crashing against a tree in the front yard of a home on West Street.

Neighbors in the area say they've never seen a crash this bad before.

"It's awful, the poor families, that car is destroyed and there's nothing left of it at all," said Aaron Bill, a neighbor. "I felt sorrow for all the families that lost everything that happened, and I'm just hoping it’s no one I know really, cause I don’t know yet." 

Multiple sets of the Jaws of Life extrication tool were used to remove passengers from the overturned vehicle.

"It’s scary, I feel bad for their families and for the people, their friends," said Jessica Kehoe.

Three victims were pronounced dead at the scene. One of the deceased victims was transported to an area hospital, but later succumbed to their injuries.

Police are still trying to figure out the cause of the crash and are looking into whether speed and the rain may have been contributing factors. Investigators still haven't confirmed how fast the car was going.

The State Police Collision Analysis and Reconstruction Section and East Bridgewater Police are actively investigating this incident.



© 2018 Cox Media Group.

© 2018 Cox Media Group.

By using this website, you accept the terms of our Visitor Agreement and Privacy Policy, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.

This station is part of Cox Media Group Television.

Learn about careers at Cox Media Group.

