Sign in using your wfxt profile

Need a profile? Register now.

Welcome back. Please sign in

By submitting your registration information, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

We have sent a confirmation email to {* data_emailAddress *}. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your account.

We look forward to seeing you on [website] frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.

Click here to return to the page you were visiting.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Edit your profile

Sorry we could not verify that email address. Enter your email below and we'll send you another email.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

By: 
            			                                                                    Manoella Macedo
                                    			            

BROCKTON, Mass. - Brockton officials have arrested and charged a West Bridgewater man for allegedly causing a fatal crash over the weekend, Plymouth County District Attorney Timothy J. Cruz announced.

At around 6:30 p.m. on Wednesday, State Police detectives arrested Robert Kilday, 22, of West Bridgewater.

Kilday is set to be arraigned in Brockton District Court on Thursday on one count each of motor vehicle manslaughter, motor vehicle homicide by operating under the influence and reckless operation.

He was arrested on charges related to the Friday evening head-on collision in Brockton that killed 54-year-old Jorge Leite.

PREVIOUS: One dead, one injured after head-on crash in Brockton

At around 7:22 p.m. on Friday, Brockton Police received multiple 911 calls reporting a motor vehicle crash at 536 East Street. 

At the scene, officials found a two-vehicle crash involving a blue Ford truck driven by Kilday and a red Saturn sedan driven by Leite. 

Kilday was transported to Good Samaritan Hospital in Brockton for treatment of non-life threatening injuries, while Leite had to be extricated from his car and was taken to Brockton Hospital before being transported to Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.

Leite was pronounced dead at the hospital just before 3 a.m. on Saturday morning.

© 2018 Cox Media Group.

© 2018 Cox Media Group.

By using this website, you accept the terms of our Visitor Agreement and Privacy Policy, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.

This station is part of Cox Media Group Television.

Learn about careers at Cox Media Group.

