Subscribe to discover fast, unlimited access.

Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account.

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

Some clouds this morning will give way to generally sunny skies for the afternoon. High near 95F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph..

A clear sky. Low near 70F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 6:53 am

Brandon Williams, of St. Louis, was charged in April 2018 in the shooting death of Chuckie Marion in Hazelwood.

ST. LOUIS COUNTY • A St. Louis man has been charged with murdering a man in Hazelwood on Saturday.

Brandon Williams, of St. Louis, was charged in April 2018 in the shooting death of Chuckie Marion in Hazelwood.

Brandon Williams, 25, of the 4200 block of East Kossuth Avenue in St. Louis, was charged Saturday with second-degree murder, armed criminal action and first-degree burglary in the shooting death of Chuckie Marion.

Hazelwood police said Williams about 12:45 a.m. Saturday broke a window and entered a bedroom of an apartment in the 1100 block of Knollwood Parkway Drive. Once inside, Williams kicked in a bathroom door and shot Marion, 24, of Florissant, several times with a semiautomatic pistol.

A woman who lived at the apartment told police she was there with a coworker when Williams, her ex-boyfriend, forced his way in. Williams and Marion exchanged gunfire; police said Williams was shot once in the leg and Marion died of multiple gunshot wounds. 

Bail for Williams was set at $250,000 cash-only.

Joel Currier covers state courts in St. Louis city and county for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.


                                    
                                        Whenever Joel Currier posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.



Get breaking news delivered to your inbox as it develops.