A few passing clouds. Low 64F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph..

A few passing clouds. Low 64F. Winds ENE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 5:54 pm

The marquee of the Rees Theater in downtown Plymouth offers a message for the city's residents Wednesday afternoon. Tribune Photo/JOE DITS

Volunteers fill sandbags at River Park Square near Garro and Water streets in Plymouth Wednesday afternoon. Tribune Photo/JOE DITS

The marquee of the Rees Theater in downtown Plymouth offers a message for the city's residents Wednesday afternoon. Tribune Photo/JOE DITS

Volunteers fill sandbags at River Park Square near Garro and Water streets in Plymouth Wednesday afternoon. Tribune Photo/JOE DITS

PLYMOUTH — As floodwaters from the Yellow River rose several yards behind them on Wednesday, teacher Matt Arvesen and four of his students from Triton High School filled sandbags. Another crew loaded them onto a pickup truck and hauled them out to flood victims since, Arvesen said, "This is what people should do; people need help."

It was just in back of the Hoffman Bros. Auto Parts store, with a small wall of sandbags and a pump to drain a foot of water inside.

Just beyond that, the city's new River Park Square was completely swamped — paths and picnic tables that had opened in 2014 at Garro and Water streets, now drawing curious onlookers to snap photos.

Republican officials tossed a few sandbags by the GOP office across the street, an hour after water crested the curb.

The Yellow River also filled Gill Park and a wide swath at Cleveland and Jefferson streets, surrounding a bakery, mini market and lawyers' office.

This week's floods inundated rural parts of Marshall County, especially in German Township near Bremen. Unincorporated parts of the county were under a travel warning Wednesday because of flooded roads.

Plymouth Mayor Mark Senter said that the city is issuing just a travel advisory for today, which wouldn't entail any closures. That's because he anticipates flooding could worsen by Friday, when the city may need to increase the restrictions. He said projections are that the Yellow River could hit 18 feet by this evening, which would surpass the record of 17.1 feet in the 1954 flood.

A few downtown businesses had closed Wednesday because they were inaccessible, and eight to 10 homes had been evacuated, the mayor said. Several schools were closed.

In rural areas, a series of lagoons appeared in farm fields. The Bremen area was difficult to reach since so many of the flat country roads were flooded in low areas.

It wasn't just in this county, but also in southern parts of St. Joseph County, where Madison Township Fire Capt. Rob Elkins used his department's new, tall-wheeled vehicle to roll through the high waters and reach homes. He'd used a portable pump to drain a half dozen basements. Overnight, he said, a farmer loaned the use of his airboat — typically seen in the everglades — to pull out a vehicle that had floated into a field.

On U.S. 331 just south of Riley Road, Frederick Atkins of South Bend thought his sedan could cross the waters.

"I'd seen that car; I thought it was moving," he said of a van that, as it turns out, had been stranded in the water overnight. "I thought I'd be OK."

He called, then waited for a tow truck.

The materials for sandbags are available 24 hours a day at the old civil defense building next to the county highway garage at 9515 King Road, Plymouth, and behind the Hoffman Brothers Auto Parts store at 211 E. Garro St., Plymouth. Bring your own shovel.

The town of Bremen also provides the materials for sandbags, including shovels, at the water plant on Dewey Street.  

Marshall County residents can dispose of some flood-damaged household items at the Recycle Depot, 1900 Walter Glaub Drive, Plymouth. The Depot will accept household chemicals, LED or fluorescent light bulbs, batteries (except alkaline), tires, appliances and electronics. Fees may apply for Freon-containing appliances such as refrigerators and freezers. Businesses in the county may also bring flood-damaged goods, but business owners need to first call the Depot at 574-935-8618 to schedule a drop-off appointment.

The Depot won't accept items such as carpet, furniture, textiles, drywall, shingles, ceiling tiles and vinyl siding. To dispose of these items, residents may place one or two large household items, such as a chair or mattress, next to their trash tote for their waste hauler to pick up along with their regular trash disposal. For large loads of debris, residents need to contact their waste hauler directly to schedule a pickup.

PLYMOUTH CITY STREETS CLOSED 

Garro St. from Water St. to Indiana Ave. 

S. Plum St. from Pierce St. to the S. Dead End 

S. Walnut St. from Pierce St. to the S. Dead End 

Polk St. From Jefferson to Memory Ct. 

Gill St. 

Cleveland St. 

E. Adams St from Simon W.to the Dead end. 

E. Jefferson St from Michigan to Simon 

The viaduct on Michigan Street at Pennsylvania 

MARSHALL COUNTY ROADS CLOSED 

Quince North of 17 

Hickory Bridge North 

8B - 7th to Hickory 

9B - County line to Upas 

Pine - 19C to 20A 

Rose Rd - Lincoln way 

Peach - 13th to Menominee 

Gumwood - 15B to 10 

Pine - 18B to 19th 

Beech 2B to 3B 

3rd - Birch to Beech 

Sycamore - ST17 to 9C 

Elm - Hwy30 to Lincolnway 

12th - Beech to Cedar 

King - 9A to 7th 

Plymouth Goshen - Linden to King 

County line - 12th to 100 

4th - Grape to Fir 

18B - Elm to Douglas 

11A - Hickory to Lincoln 

1A - Tamarack to US6 

8th - Cedar to Apple 

Beech - 9B to 10B 

Thorn - ST6 to 1C 

Quince - 3rd to 2C 

Elm - SR10 to 16B 

Beech - 10B to 12th 

Grape - Ply Goshen to 4th 

Beech - 7th to 6th 

Tamarack - US6 to 1st 

12th - Beech to Cedar 

6th - Chestnut to Beech 

20th - Elm to 331 

Thorn - 6th to 1st 

1C - Union to thorn 

20th - Birch to Chestnut 

20th - 331 to Elm 

Union - US6 to 3B 

Beech - 12th to 10B 

Dogwood - US6 to Tyler 

Douglas North of C rd 

Elm – 18B to 19th 

Douglas – US6 to Tyler 

8th - Fir to Gumwood 

Filbert – 14th to 12B 

jdits@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6158






Health departments field calls on how to remove water from basements and how to properly clean up


                                    
                                        Whenever Joseph Dits posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Be the first to know about breaking news with email alerts sent right to your inbox.

The news you need to start your day, sent weekday mornings.

The day's top 5 news headlines, sent weekday afternoons.