Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

As an attorney in 1946, Thurgood Marshall was called on to help in a case involving 25 black men from Columbia, Tenn., accused in a racial uprising.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The film follows a young Thurgood Marshall during his time as a lawyer for the NAACP and the historic case that shaped his prestigious career. 
    USA TODAY

In this Aug. 8, 1962, file photo, Thurgood Marshall appears before a Senate Judiciary Subcommittee in Washington for a third hearing on his nomination as a judge of the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals. Marshall became the first African-American Supreme Court judge in 1967.
(Photo: Associated Press)

More than 20 years before he became the first black justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, Thurgood Marshall helped a small Tennessee town find its own justice after a racial uprising.


It began as a disagreement over a broken radio.


Gladys Stephenson, a black woman, went to pick up her radio at a Castner-Knott shop on Main Street in Columbia, Tenn., around midmorning on Feb. 25, 1946. She had a disagreement with store repairman William Fleming, a white man.


Fleming reportedly slapped Stephenson. In retaliation, Stephenson's son, a 19-year-old Navy veteran who had accompanied her to the store, pushed Fleming, who crashed through the store window.


More:  Tennessee artist brings little-known but historic Thurgood Marshall trial to life


Fleming was not seriously injured, but it was the beginning of a significant racial clash. By evening, both Stephensons were in jail and a white mob gathered outside to condemn them. Police moved the Stephensons secretly to safety, but the angry crowd found a different target, converging on Mink Slide, a residential and business district formed by black families.


Many of the black men armed themselves and stood guard. 


Four white officers were hit and a violent clash ensued. 


By daybreak, 100 highway patrolmen and 500 members of the State Guard walked the streets, seizing weapons. More than 100 African-Americans — a substantial portion of the black male population of Columbia — were incarcerated in the Maury County Jail. 


Only two white men were arrested. They were quickly released.


Twenty-five black men sit in Maury Circuit Court on May 28, 1946, for a hearing in their case. (Photo: Nashville Public Library, Special Collections, Nashville Banner Archives, AP Photo)

The FBI was called in to investigate. And the NAACP provided four defense lawyers, including the young man named Thurgood Marshall who would later change history many times over.


The trial for 25 of the men indicted for attempted murder was heard in front of an all-white jury in Lawrence County, near the Alabama state line.


Spectators in the courtroom hurled insults and threats at the attorneys. Marshall fell ill, hospitalized in New York and unable to attend most of the trial. Nashville lawyer Z. Alexander Looby took the lead.


And, on Oct. 4, after all arguments had been presented, lawyers on both sides were shocked when all but two of the 25 black men were acquitted.


Archived letters written by Looby and published in The Tennessean describe the night of Nov. 18, 1946, when everything almost changed for Marshall.


The case was over. 


Twenty three black men had been acquitted in front of an all-white jury in Lawrence County.


Two others accused of murder had also been given justice, one acquitted, the other to serve only four months of a sentence before being pardoned by the governor.


Still, racial harassment continued. 


As Marshall, Looby, and a third NAACP lawyer, Maurice Weaver of Chattanooga, left Columbia for the final time, a convoy of patrolmen followed. 


The police stopped the civil rights attorneys three times that night. 


The first time, as the lawyers neared the city line, three cars drove up with their sirens open. One pulled in front of the lawyers' car, one to the side, and one to the rear. Eight officers jumped out and said they had a search warrant. 


“The searched they car thoroughly and found nothing,” Looby detailed in a letter dated Nov. 25, 1946, which he sent to Dr. Leon A. Ransom, a Washington attorney.


The second stop, they asked Marshall, then 37 years old, for his driver’s license. They inspected, found it satisfactory, and again let the lawyers go.


The third time, they arrested Marshall for drunk driving, placed him in a patrol car, and sped away. 


Looby and Weaver followed, fearing for Marshall's life. 


After a long journey through the countryside, and “several suspicious turns,” Looby said, the police noticed they were being tailed and stopped at a local magistrate's office.


"The magistrate was about to write a warrant, but on Weaver’s insistence he examine Thurgood to ascertain whether or not he was really drunk, he consented to do so and declared there was no liquor on Thurgood’s breath," Looby detailed.


He refused to issue the warrant. 


Marshall was free to go, but this time the attorneys asked Columbia friends to mount their own convoy to escort the three men safely to Nashville. 


A few days later, Marshall sent a telegram to the U.S. Attorney General charging that his civil rights had been violated by Maury County law enforcement. 


"This type of intimidation of defense lawyers charged with the duty of defending persons charged with crime cannot go unnoticed," Marshall wrote.


No criminal charges were ever placed.


“Marshall,” a movie about Thurgood Marshall’s early days as a lawyer for the NAACP, opens in theaters Friday.


 
