


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Maricopa County Sheriff's Office K-9 team has been outfitted with new protective gear thanks to a charitable donation, the office said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Maricopa County Sheriff's Office K-9s received bullet and stab protective vests from a non-profit.
    Wochit

Six K-9 unit dogs, including Ryker, received new vests designed to protect them from bullet and stab wounds. The non-profit Vested Interest in K9s Inc. provided the donated equipment.
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

The Maricopa County Sheriff's Office K-9 team has been outfitted with new protective gear thanks to a charitable donation, the office said.


Six K-9 unit dogs received new vests designed to protect them from bullet and stab wounds, officials said.


The non-profit Vested Interest in K9s Inc., whose mission is to provide protective vests and other assistance to police dogs throughout the United States, provided the equipment, the Sheriff's Office said.


K-9s Karl, Ryker, Bach, Hero, Osa and Bull received a bullet and stab protective vest, each embroidered differently.


Bull's vest was sponsored by Petra Keller of Washoe Valley, Nevada, the Sheriff's Office said.


The others were sponsored anonymously, MSCO said.


Each will include words honoring a person or another K-9 dog.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

According to the MSCO, one protective vest for a law-enforcement K-9 costs $950.


Vested Interest has provided more than 2,600 vests for dogs since its inception in 2009, thanks to more than $2.1 million in donations.


The program is open to public-safety dogs in the United States that are at least 20 months old, MCSO said. New K-9 graduates, as well as K-9s with expired vests, are eligible.


The vests work by shielding vital organs from both bullets and sharp objects. The average K-9 vest weighs 4 to 5 pounds and is designed specifically for the dog who will wear it.


Police work comes with risk for dogs. Officer Down Memorial Page, a nonprofit that collects data on officers and K-9s killed in the line of duty, reports 19 K-9s have died on the job so far this year. Of the 19, nine of the dogs died as a result of gunfire or stab wounds. Eight died of heat exhaustion.


It’s estimated that about 30,000 dogs work as law enforcement K-9s in the U.S.


For information about the program or to make a donation, visit the organization's website at vik9s.org.


READ MORE:


After MCSO split, Sun City Posse looks to recruit


Family seeks help finding couple's killer


Sheriff: Jail food adequate; media offered a taste


Judge: Media may photograph shooting suspect


MCSO K-9 Sgt. Vasku begins life as a civilian
