

WASHINGTON — The White House announced Friday that President Donald Trump has pardoned Kristian Saucier, a Navy submariner who unsuccessfully tried to use Hillary Clinton's personal e-mail server in his defense during a trial for taking pictures of a classified area.


Saucier, a Petty Officer, was sentenced in August 2016 to 12 months in prison after taking photos inside the engine room on the USS Alexandria, a nuclear attack submarine. The pictures taken of the vessel's propulsion system were classified "confidential," the lowest level of classification.


He admitted to taking the photographs on his personal cell phone, but argued for leniency — citing 110 classified emails found on Clinton's personal e-mail server.


Defense attorney Derrick Hogan wrote that the two instances were "similar," and that because Clinton was not brought up on charges it would be "unjust and unfair" to give Saucier a harsher sentence than probation.



  
                  
        
          

                                    


DES MOINES, IA - OCTOBER 28: Democratic presidential nominee former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton speaks to reporters following a campaign rally at Roosevelt High School on October 28, 2016 in Des Moines, Iowa. With less than two weeks to go until election day, Hillary Clinton is campaigning in Iowa.

(Photo by Justin Sullivan/Getty Images)

U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton holds an unscheduled news conference to talk about FBI inquiries into her emails after a campaign rally in Des Moines, Iowa, U.S. October 28, 2016.

(REUTERS/Brian Snyder)

U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton leaves after an unscheduled news conference on FBI inquiries about her emails after a campaign rally in Des Moines, Iowa, U.S. October 28, 2016.

(REUTERS/Brian Snyder)

US Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton answers a question during a press conference about the FBI's reopening of a probe into her use of a private email server while secretary of State, in Des Moines, Iowa, on October 28, 2016. The FBI dealt Hillary Clinton's seemingly unstoppable White House campaign a stunning blow Friday by reopening a probe into her use of a private email server while secretary of state. / AFP / JEWEL SAMAD

(JEWEL SAMAD/AFP/Getty Images)

See Gallery

The Clinton defense didn't keep Saucier out of jail, but one of Saucier's attorneys said at the time  of the sentencing that it probably helped lessen the time his client was sentenced to spend in jail.


Noting that Saucier served out his year-long sentence, White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Saucier "has been recognized by his fellow service members for his dedication, skill and patriotic spirit" and that "the sentencing judge found that Mr. Saucier's offense stands in contrast to his commendable military service."


A pardon doesn't erase the conviction, nor does it signify innocence, but it does remove certain civil limitations that can be imposed because of a crime, such as the ability to contract with the federal government, and it also "should lessen the stigma arising from the conviction," according to the Justice Department.


This is Trump's second use of the presidential pardon. His first pardon went to longtime supporter and controversial former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio, who was convicted of criminal contempt after ignoring a judge's order not to detain suspected undocumented immigrants.



  
                  
        
          

                                    


See Gallery


    More from NBC News:
                  Michael Cohen used Trump Org. email in Stormy Daniels arrangements
                  Tariffs may wind up hurting Trump voters most of all, warn automakers
                  Trump orders new tariffs, with exemptions for Mexico and Canada
        

Boredom Therapy

Honest To Paws

Honest To Paws

BrainCharm

BrainCharm

New Ravel

New Ravel

Scribol

© 2018  Oath Inc. All rights reserved.

Get breaking news and big stories on your desktop.

You can always change your mind later.

If you change your mind, here's how to allow notifications:

If you’d like to allow notifications, please go into your browser’s Website or Privacy settings and set the permissions for AOL.com to “Allow.”