


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Jacqueline Ades has entered a not guilty plea to charges of stalking a Paradise Valley man.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Maricopa County court documents show Jacqueline Ades of Phoenix was arrested on suspicion of stalking and harassing a man she met online.
    Maricopa County Superior Court

Jacqueline Ades
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

UPDATE: Jacqueline Ades pleaded "not guilty" to criminal trespassing and stalking Thursday morning in Maricopa County Superior Court. Her next court hearing is scheduled for July 5. 


See original story below. 


A woman accused of breaking into a man's Paradise Valley home and sending him 65,000 text messages agreed Wednesday to remain in jail without the possibility of posting bond.  


Jacqueline Ades, 31, waived her right to a bail eligibility hearing that would have required a Maricopa County prosecutor to convince a Superior Court commissioner why Ades should continue to be held without bond.


The victim's attorney, Marc Victor, told Commissioner Monica Garfinkel that his client would like to see Ades "get the help and counseling that she needs."


Ades is scheduled to appear for her arraignment hearing Thursday morning, where she will enter a plea to the formal charges against her. 


Paradise Valley police arrested Ades on April 8 after finding her taking a bath in the man's Paradise Valley home, court documents show. The man wasn't home.


Police found a large butcher knife on her car's passenger seat during the incident, the documents added. 


Court documents claim Ades sent the man threatening text messages, including one expressing a desire to bathe in his blood. Another text was anti-Semitic; Ades described herself as the "new Hitler." 


Police say Ades failed to appear for scheduled court appearances after that initial arrest, when she was allowed out of jail pending a return to court. 


Paradise Valley officers arrested Ades again May 8 after learning Scottsdale police had escorted her away from an office building where the victim worked. Ades had claimed to be the man's wife, police added.


Reach the reporter Perry Vandell at perry.vandell@gannett.com or 602-444-2474. Follow him on Twitter @PerryVandell


READ MORE:


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
