


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Photographing 'Street Shooter' suspect Aaron Saucedo during an upcoming hearing will not prejudice potential jurors, a Maricopa County judge rules.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Aaron Saucedo
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Maricopa County Superior Court judge ruled Monday that "Serial Street Shooter" suspect Aaron Saucedo will remain in shackles and may be photographed by the media during an upcoming court hearing.


Saucedo, 23, is charged with nine murders over the course of 12 shootings between August 2015 and July 2016, mostly in the Maryvale neighborhood of west Phoenix, though some of the shootings took place in east-central Phoenix.


Identity will play a great role in his eventual trial, and his attorneys argue that showing his face in the media — especially if he is dressed in a jail uniform and wearing handcuffs, belly chains and leg irons — will prejudice potential jurors against him and lessen his chances of getting a fair trial.


READ MORE:


Sheriff's Office balks at removing suspect's cuffs in court


Battle over coverage of 'Serial Street Shooter' suspect


The Serial Street Shooter struck mostly at night. All but five of his victims died.


One survivor whose description helped police create a composite sketch did not recognize Saucedo as his attacker from a photo shown to him by Arizona Republic reporters.


Partly to shield him from view, Saucedo's defense team has waived his presence at hearings so far. Court records indicate that, among other things, Saucedo's mental competency to stand trial is being evaluated. His hearings have been frequently postponed, most recently to Nov. 29.


Earlier this month, Saucedo's attorney, Susan Corey, asked Judge Joseph Mikitish to bar the media from photographing Saucedo's face while he is in court or at least be required to blur it out of still photographs and videos. 


Furthermore, Corey asked Mikitish to allow Saucedo to appear at pretrial hearings in street clothes and without visible restraints that might make potential jurors come to conclusions about his guilt.


In a ruling dated Monday and published Tuesday, Mikitish denied both requests. 


Mikitish wrote in his minute entry that he had consulted with the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office, which is charged with court security and with transporting jail prisoners to court hearings. The office felt that it would be too risky to allow Saucedo to appear without restraints, given the offenses he is charged with and the size of the courtroom.


Furthermore, Mikitish stated that Maricopa County was large enough that an impartial jury could still be found despite media coverage, that images of Saucedo have already been distributed and that any taint would be further lessened because an eventual trial would be years off.


The judge noted, however, that his ruling applies only to the next pretrial-conference hearing, and that if coverage results in harm to Saucedo's case, he might re-evaluate.


READ MORE:


Saucedo pleads not guilty in 'Serial Street Shooter' case


Saucedo charged in 'Serial Street Shooter' murders


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 
