Mecklenburg County Detention Center

A high school teacher in Cherokee County, North Carolina has been charged with engaging in sex acts with a student while employed by the Cherokee County Schools System.

Kayla Alayne Sprinkles, 26, was indicted on five counts of sexual activity with a student, 16, while teaching at Andrews High School. She taught at the high school and coached softball and cross country from 2016-2017.

Facebook

Sprinkles’ relationship with the pupil is alleged to have lasted from around December 2016 to April 2017.

When news of the relationship was brought to the high school’s attention, they alerted local authorities who began an investigation in late March 2018. Investigators presented their findings to the grand jury on June 4th, and the jury made the decision to indict the teacher.

After hearing of the indictments on social media, Sprinkles turned herself into the Mecklenburg County Detention Center and was released on $25,000 bond.

via Daily Star:

Sheriff Derrick Palmer said: “Our youth and our students are one of the greatest resources that Cherokee County is blessed to have.

“It is incumbent upon all of us to ensure their safety and well being as they grow and mature.”

Facebook

Over the course of just a few months, educators across the country have been arrested for engaging in inappropriate relationship with their students. Kentucky Teacher Haley Reed, Miranda Pauley, Tennessee teacher Janet Smothers, LaToya Parker, Florida teacher Caroline Lawson, 26-year-old Allyson Moran and Katherine Ross Ridenhour were all arrested on similar charges.

The list goes on to include 22-year-old Oklahoma science teacher Hunter Day, 28-year-old teacher Megan Kotarski, 23-year-old history teacher Michelle Schiffer, 29-year-old Alyssia Marie Reddy, special education teacher Jordan Ondish and 28-year-old Samantha Fitzpatrick have all been allegedly carrying on inappropriate relationships with their students.

In addition, 31-year-old Nicole Marie Andrews, 32-year-old Jessica Langford, 29-year-old Andrea Baber, 27-year-old Robin Dunlap, 27-year-old Jennifer Olajire-Aro have also been charged with these charges.

42-year-old Heather Butts of California was arrested on a second-degree felony charge, Nancy Leigh Ann Brann, a former Christian school teacher, was arrested for having sex with a student, Coine Audiat pleaded no contest to having sex with a minor in 2016 and 23-year-old Darci Lake was arrested for an inappropriate relationship. 27-year-old Brittany Zamora from Arizona was arrested on similar charges. Keri Hoffman, 35, was also arrested for an alleged relationship with a student. More recently, 29-year-old Tiffany Ranweiler-Oblander and 33-year-old Maren Oates were arrested on similar charges.


						© 						COED MEDIA Group LLC.
						 All Rights Reserved.


						Powered By 						Wordpress.com VIP
					