HODINKEE at Live


                      
                      A Week On The Wrist
                      — In-depth reviews of modern watches with historical context and detailed technical information.
                    


                      
                      Talking Watches
                      — An original video series featuring interviews with notable watch collectors.
                    


                      
                      Hands-On
                      — Original photography of watches with concise product analysis.
                    


                        
                        A Week On The Wrist
                        — In-depth reviews of modern watches with historical context and detailed technical information.
                      


                        
                        Talking Watches
                        — An original video series featuring interviews with notable watch collectors.
                      


                        
                        Hands-On
                        — Original photography of watches with concise product analysis.
                      

About

Contact

Learn

Follow

Introducing The ICON Duesey, The First Watch From Jonathan Ward

Photo Report The HODINKEE Summer 2018 Meet-Up In New York City 


      Baselworld 2018 Your Complete Guide To All The New Watches
    

Editors’ Picks

A Week On The Wrist The Cartier Santos

Hands-On The A. Lange &amp; Söhne 'Homage To Walter Lange' Unique Piece In Steel At Phillips Geneva

Editors' Picks Our Favorite Guilty Pleasure Watches Of 2018

Last weekend, the Miami Design District was a watch lover's mecca.

Last weekend, the Miami Design District was the center of the watch world in North America as it hosted the very first Watches &amp; Wonders Miami. Organized by the Miami Design District and the Fondation de la Haute Horlogerie (FHH), this edition of Watches &amp; Wonders (which in previous years has taken place in Hong Kong) was an opportunity for watch lovers to discover both the boutiques, shops, and hospitality of the Design District, as well as, for many of the participating brands, new watches just introduced in January at the 2018 SIHH. A gala opening night event, attended by over 1,000 guests (including, of course, many HODINKEE readers) was followed by three days of events, including lectures and panel discussions on a wide range of subjects, including the basics of how a mechanical watch works, aspects of collecting and investing, complications, and more.

Guests were also treated to the Miami Design District Concours, with a truly remarkable lineup of both vintage and new automobiles, and were also able to view special lots in the upcoming Phillips Daytona Ultimatum auction (as well as a watch that once belonged to Elvis Presley). And, of course, many of you were there sporting your favorite timepieces, and were kind enough to share them with us. 

Red Bar founder Adam Craniotes.

Watchmaking demonstration at A. Lange &amp; Söhne.

Leading a watchmaking class, at Jaeger-LeCoultre.

The new-for-2018 Lange &amp; Söhne Saxonia Copper Blue.

The Bulgari Magsonic Grande Sonnerie: a tourbillon, minute repeater, and grande sonnerie with Westminster chimes.

Opening night watch browsing at Jaeger-LeCoultre.

Vintage Jaeger-LeCoultre Memovox Polaris.

The 2018 Parmigiani Fleurier Kalpagraphe Chronometre, at the Parmigiani Fleurier boutique.

There were many truly memorable automobiles at the Concours, from timeless vintage cars, to modern supercars.

The TAG Heuer boutique featured a wonderful collection of vintage Heuer watches, including some rarely seen quartz LCD models from the 1970s.

Heuer Autavia "Dark Lord" 1975

A 1974 Autavia GMT, with caliber 14

A Heuer Microsplit split seconds wrist timer, 1978, with waterproof case and fabric strap

A Heuer Senator analog-digital quartz chronograph, 1977

A Heuer Carrera, 1970, with caliber 11

A selection of independent watch brands exhibited as well, including, among others, Kari Voutilainen and F. P. Journe.

Phillips' Paul Boutros showed us some upcoming pieces which will be on the block for the Daytona Ultimatum and Geneva Watch Auction: 7 auctions.

'The Ricciardi Panda' Rolex Daytona Reference 6263

'Pintabian' Rolex Daytona Reference 6265 With Brown Sub-Dials

'The John Player Special' Rolex Daytona Reference 6241 In Yellow Gold

An unusual Breguet triple calendar chronograph, with moonphase, using the rare Valjoux 88 caliber; also unusual for its steel case. Coming up in the Geneva Watch Auction: 7. 

The Elvis Presley Omega

Watch expert and lifelong collector Paul Boutros, of Phillips

One of the weekend's events: a discussion and book signing with Matt Hranek, author of A Man And His Watch, and Revolution Magazine USA Editor in Chief Keith Strandberg, at the Vacheron Constantin boutique.

One of the most enjoyable aspects of the weekend, of course, was having a chance to meet HODINKEE readers, many of whom were kind enough to share their watches with us. It was amazing to see such a variety of tastes and timepieces, and it just goes to show you that HODINKEE readers have incredibly wide ranging tastes and interests. Getting together to share our common enthusiasm for watchmaking was a major highlight of Watches &amp; Wonders Miami for us, and it was fantastic to be able to meet so many HODINKEE readers!

Inside the Van Cleef &amp; Arpels boutique.

The Hublot boutique

The Hublot Big Bang Sang Bleu.

Vintage diver dress, at Panerai.

A model of the W-16 engine of the Bugatti Chiron on display at the Parmigiani Fleurier boutique.

Thanks to Miami Design District and the Fondation de la Haute Horlogerie, and of course all our friends who joined us in Miami – hope to see you again next year!

By Jon Bues

By Jon Bues

By Justin Hast

Top Discussions

Photo Report The HODINKEE Summer 2018 Meet-Up In New York City 

Recommended Reading Dr. Ludwig Oechslin Explains The Logic Behind His Unusual Date Display

Happenings 'Chronographs As Tools' Exhibition At The National Watch &amp; Clock Museum

Found Sir Robin Knox-Johnston's Rolex Explorer

By Jason Heaton

Our Favorite Dive Watches For The Summer

By HODINKEE Shop

Hands-On The Rolex Everose GMT Master II Vs. The GMT Master II In Oystersteel And Everose Gold

By Jack Forster

Review The Panerai Luminor Due 38

By Jon Bues

Introducing The First Omega Wrist-Chronograph Limited Edition, With An Original Omega Movement From 1913

By Jack Forster