Plus 2 free gifts!

The ultimate source of travel inspiration plus 2 free gifts

Calling all pizza-lovers—you can now get your favorite New York-style pies in Miami. Brooklyn's very own Roberta's, the wildly celebrated pizzeria once hailed as "one of the more extraordinary restaurants in the country" by The New York Times, will debut a pop-up food truck in Miami this October. Known for its wood-fired pizzas, in-house charcuterie, and punky playlists, it's safe to say that this is one culinary ride you don't want to miss.


All of the restaurant's signature favorites will be served at the truck, including the mouthwatering "Bee Sting" pizza, covered in red sauce, mozzarella, sopressata, chili, and a drizzle of honey. Visitors can also sink their teeth into the Margherita or the Famous Original, which adds caciocavallo and chili to your classic tomato and mozzarella pie. Roberta's pop-up will offer two different pizza sizes, and prices will range from $9-$18 per pie. Though the food truck won't be open quite as late as the original Brooklyn location, pizza cravers can still get their fix until 10 p.m.


Inside Roberta's Brooklyn location.

Roberta's also has a reputation for supporting the arts community—there's now an annual pop-up restaurant at Frieze art fair in New York—making Miami's Design District the perfect spot to house the food truck. “Roberta’s has always been a supporter of art, design and ideation, which is why we chose the Design District for our first venue in Miami. We love the vibe, style and continual evolution of the neighborhood and are thrilled to be a part of its next phase,” said co-founder Brandon Hoy in a press release. The Design District is a one-stop destination for galleries, museums, and installations—including the Institute of Contemporary Art—so there's plenty to explore while you're scarfing down a slice.


The food truck will only be cruising through Miami until April 2018, so be sure to head over before all the Bee Stings are gone. But the pizza festivities don't end there—international travelers can look forward to a Pizza and Prosecco festival in the U.K. later this fall.

show

on Condé Nast Traveler magazine!

Will be used in accordance with our User Agreement and Privacy Policy

© 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our  User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18). Your California Privacy Rights The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 


CNT Collection