By

Forrest Hanson For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  21:30 EDT, 6 November 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  12:07 EDT, 7 November 2017







           1

View  comments

Murder suspect Antoine Adams, 27, escaped from Marshall County Detention Center in northern Mississippi early on Sunday

A multi-state manhunt is underway for a murder suspect who broke out of prison and is branded as 'very dangerous'.


Antoine Adams, 27, was serving time in Marshall County Detention Center in northern Mississippi, Fox13Memphis reports.  


Adams escaped from the jail between 1am and 1.30am on Sunday by squeezing through a cell window and crawling under a fence not outfitted with razor wire. 


Surveillance video from the jail caught his escape on video, authorities say. 


Police say they believe he fled to the Memphis area. He grew up around the Tennessee city. 


'We consider this guy very dangerous,' Criminal Investigator Kelly McMillen told Fox13Memphis.


Police also say they believe Adams is armed.


Scroll down for video 


A multi-state manhunt is underway for Adams, who police say may have fled to the Memphis, Tennessee area

Pictured is the jail from which Adams escaped. The local sheriff said: 'Had that jailer or jailers been watching and doing what they’re paid for, they would have caught it'

Adams is six feet tall and weights 180 pounds. He has a neck tattoo and gold grills on his teeth. Police say he might have removed the grills

The jail was due to begin receiving major security upgrades the day following his escape.


Specifically, steel plates were due to be placed over cell windows, WREG reports. 


The local sheriff had harsh words for the jailer on duty at the time.


'Had that jailer or jailers been watching and doing what they’re paid for, they would have caught it,' Sheriff Kenny Dickerson told WREG. 


Adams has been charged with the December 2016 murder of DeAundra McNeal and is accused in two other murders, WMC Action News 5 reports.


He was apprehended by authorities in Texas this August after he went on the run.


Adams has previously served jail time for assault, aggravated robbery and domestic violence, among other convictions.  


He is six feet tall and weighs 180 pounds. He has a neck tattoo and gold grills, though police say he might have removed the latter. 


Anyone with information about his whereabouts is asked to call 911 immediately.  




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group