By

Jessa Schroeder


and 
Hannah Parry For Dailymail.com







  Published:
  18:42 EDT, 15 June 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  08:19 EDT, 16 June 2018







           2

View  comments

Fired 3 Doors Down bassist Todd Harrell was arrested Friday at his Mississippi residence on charges of domestic violence, possession of firearms and drugs.


Police in Jackson County responded to the scene after an alarm went off and they were alerted about the matter, the department said in a press release this week.


When officers arrived, the wife of the former musician, Jennifer Fields, told police she and Harrell had been involved in a verbal dispute that became physical.


Officers  also noticed weapons and drugs lying around inside the home while performing a search warrant, which led to Harrell's arrest.


The 46-year-old has been booked to the Jackson County Adult Detention Center without bond, as further investigation is underway.


Police also said Harrell is wanted for probation violation in Tennessee.


Fired 3 Doors Down bassist Todd Harrell was arrested Friday at his Mississippi residence on charges of domestic violence, possession of firearms and drugs. He is seen in a current mugshot

The musician (right) was one of the founding members of 3 Doors Down along with former guitarist Matt Roberts and lead singer Brad Arnold

Harrell previously caused a fatal car crash while under the influence of drugs in 2013. The crash had cost him his membership to 3 Doors Down (pictured) famed for early 2000s hits Kryptonite and When I'm Gone

Friday wasn't the first run in with the law for Harrell, who was the original bassist of famed early 2000's American rock band, 3 Doors Down.


Harrell spent two years behind bars beginning in 2015 for causing the death of another motorist in Nashville where he was driving under the influence of drugs and alcohol.


Driver Paul Shoulders Jr., 47, who was not wearing a seat belt, succumbed to his injuries in hospital after the deadly crash on April 19, 2013, KHOU reported.  


Harrell had been speeding down the Interstate 40 near Hermitage at 101mph when he hit the pickup truck, sending it rolling over the guardrail.


Harrell's Cadillac finally came to a stop when it hit the retaining wall a quarter mile away. 


Police discovered Harrell had anxiety medication Alprazolam and pain killer Oxycodone in his system the night of the fatal accident.


They also found 36 pills hidden inside his sock - which contained 8 Xanax pills, 24 Oxycodone pills and 4 Oxymorphone pills.


Harrell (pictured left on his arrest for another DUI in 2014, and right in the band) was jailed for two years in 2015 for causing the death of another motorist while driving on drugs

Harrell admitted to taking prescription drugs and drinking hard cider before he got behind the wheel the nightmarish evening.


He was charged with vehicular homicide by intoxication the following day.


The musician was released on bond and immediately went and checked himself into rehab for his drug addiction.


The crash cost him his membership to 3 Doors Down, famed for early 2000s hits Kryptonite and When I'm Gone, as bandmates kicked him out the group.


While waiting for his trial for the fatal crash, Harrell was charged with a second-offense DUI involving a substance other than alcohol, according to D'Iberville police Chief Wayne Payne.


Harrell was found 'slumped over the steering wheel of his vehicle' by officers responding to a citizen's call about an impaired driver of an SUV in February 2014.


Shoulder's sister, Tina Baltz, said the moment she was told her brother had been killed was the 'biggest nightmare' as she struggled to cope with his loss.


Driver Paul Shoulders Jr., 47, (seen) who was not wearing a seat belt, died from his injuries in hospital after the crash on April 19, 2013

Harrell had been speeding down the Interstate 40 near Hermitage (pictured) Nashville at 101mph when he hit a pickup truck sending it rolling over the guardrail

She told KHOU that the healing process had been made more difficult by Harrell's second arrest for driving under the influence.


'I hoped after the first time maybe this would wake him up,' Baltz said. 'He has an addiction.'


Harrell (pictured on his arrest in 2013) is currently being held without bond in Mississippi

Aside from his two year jail sentence, Harrell was ordered six years probation where he was advised to speak at schools about drug addiction.


He was also ordered to attend Narcotics Anonymous meetings and work with the Governor's Highway Safety Office on its new anti-DUI campaign.


As part of those conditions, he would appear in at least two public service announcements about driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol.


Harrell apologized to the victim's family at his four-hour sentencing at the time, when he pledged that he never wanted to use drugs again.


He explained that he had began to take prescription pain pills for injuries sustained to his neck from playing football as a child and after surgery on his knees from running around on stage with the band.


Since 2009, he realized he had become addicted and checked himself into rehab for stints of between a couple of weeks to three months.


But his promise to stay away from drugs came too late for the heartbroken family of Shoulder - who they described as a 'simple kind of guy' who had quit his own job to care for his ill mother.













Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group