


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Born in 1929, King was educated at Morehouse College and raised in church to become one of America's most enduring leaders.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    Historical comments by the great civil rights leader Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. PBS special on black America since his assassination is due in November.
    USA TODAY

In this Dec. 10, 1964, file photo, U.S. civil rights leader Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. holds his 1964 Nobel Peace Prize medal in Oslo, Norway.
(Photo: AP file)

 


Jan. 15: Michael King is born in Atlanta. His father changes the boy’s name, as well as his own, to Martin Luther King several years later.


Sept. 20: King enrolls at Morehouse College after passing the entrance exam at age 15.


Aug. 6:The Atlanta Constitution publishes a letter to the editor from King supporting minority rights.


Feb. 25: King is ordained and becomes assistant pastor at Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, his father’s church.


June 8: King graduates from Morehouse College with bachelor’s degree in sociology.


Sept. 14: King enters Crozer Theological Seminary in Chester, Pa.


May 8: King graduates from Crozer with bachelor of divinity degree. He delivers valedictory address.


Sept. 13: King begins graduate studies in systematic theology at Boston University’s School of Theology.


From boyhood to last days, King pursued equality


Voices: In the shadow of King's mountaintop


 


January: King meets Coretta Scott in Boston.


June 18: King and Coretta Scott are married near Marion, Ala. King’s father officiates at the service.


Sept. 1: King begins his pastorate at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Ala.


June 5: King earns doctorate from Boston University.


Dec. 5: King is named president of the Montgomery Improvement Association.


Jan. 30: King’s home is bombed while he is speaking at a meeting. His wife and daughter are unharmed.


Jan. 10: King is named chairman of what becomes the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC).


Feb. 18: King appears on the cover of Time magazine.


May 17: King delivers his first national address, “Give Us the Ballot,” at the Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 


June 23: King and other civil rights leaders meet with President Dwight Eisenhower in Washington.


Sept. 20: At a book signing in Harlem, King is stabbed with a letter opener  by a mentally ill woman. Doctors remove the seven-inch blade from his chest.


Feb. 1: King moves from Montgomery to Atlanta to focus on the civil rights struggle.


Oct. 19: King is arrested at a sit-in demonstration at an Atlanta department store. He is sentenced to four months of hard labor — for violating a suspended sentence in a 1956 traffic violation. He is released on $2,000 bond.


Dec. 16: King and hundreds of others are arrested in desegregation campaign in Albany, Ga.


July 27: King is arrested at a prayer vigil in Albany and spends two weeks in jail. He leaves Aug. 10.


Sept. 28: A member of the American Nazi Party hits King in the face twice at an SCLC conference in Birmingham.


April 16: After being arrested for ignoring an Alabama state court injunction against demonstrations, King writes his famous Letter from a Birmingham Jail, a defense of nonviolent resistance to racism.


Aug. 28: King delivers his “I Have a Dream” speech at the Lincoln Memorial as more than 200,000 demonstrators take part in the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.


Sept. 15: Four girls are killed when a bomb explodes at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham.


Sept. 18: King delivers eulogy for three of the slain girls.


Jan. 3:Time magazine names King “Man of the Year” for 1963.


June 11: King and 17 others are jailed for trespassing after demanding service at a whites-only restaurant in St. Augustine, Fla.


Dec. 10: King wins Nobel Peace Prize.


March 17-25: After voting rights marchers are attacked and beaten by police in Selma, Ala., King peacefully leads civil rights marchers from Selma to Montgomery.


Aug. 11: Rioting in the Watts section of Los Angeles leads King to address economic inequality.


Aug. 12: King gives his first speech against the Vietnam War.


Jan. 26: King and his wife move into a Chicago slum apartment to demand better housing and education in northern U.S. cities.


April 4: In speech at a New York City church, King demands U.S. make greater effort to end Vietnam War.


 


Dec. 4: King unveils plans for a Poor People’s Campaign, a mass civil disobedience protest, for the spring in Washington. It was intended as an expansion of his civil rights activities into the area of economic rights.


March 23: King leads 6,000 protesters in support of striking sanitation workers in Memphis. The march ends with violence and looting.


Coretta Scott King, center, widow of slain civil right Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. walk in the funeral procession with their children and family in Atlanta, Ga., April 9, 1968.  From left are, daughter Yolanda, 12; King's brother A.D. King; daughter Bernice, 5; widow King; Rev. Ralph Abernathy; sons Dexter, 7, and Martin Luther King III, 10. (Photo: ASSOCIATED PRESS)

 


April 3: King returns to Memphis, intending to lead a peaceful march. At an evening rally, he delivers his final speech, “I’ve Been to the Mountaintop.”


April 4: King is shot and killed on the balcony of the Lorraine Motel.


April 9: King is buried in Atlanta.
