Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

When Martin Luther King was fined for leading the boycott of segregated buses, the Asbury Park Press ran a campaign to raise the money.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    In honor of the 60th anniversary of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, a special reenactment is presented on Dec. 1, 2015, in Montgomery of Rosa Parks refusing to give up her bus seat.
    Shannon Heupel/Advertiser

Gene Herrick/AP
 The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. is welcomed with a kiss by his wife Coretta after leaving court in Montgomery on March 22, 1956. King was found guilty of conspiracy to boycott city buses in a campaign to desegregate the bus system, but a judge suspended his $500 fine pending appeal.
AP
The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. is welcomed with a kiss by his wife Coretta after leaving court in Montgomery on March 22, 1956. King was found guilty of conspiracy to boycott city buses in a campaign to desegregate the bus system, but a judge suspended his $500 fine pending appeal. AP
The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. is welcomed with a kiss by his wife Coretta after leaving court in Montgomery on March 22, 1956. King was found guilty of conspiracy to boycott city buses in a campaign to desegregate the bus system, but a judge suspended his $500 fine pending appeal.
The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. is welcomed with a kiss by his wife Coretta after leaving court in Montgomery, Ala., March 22, 1956. King was found guilty of conspiracy to boycott city buses in a campaign to desegregate the bus system, but a judge suspended his $500 fine pending appeal. (AP Photo/Gene Herrick)
(Photo: Gene Herrick, AP)

When a little-known Baptist minister named Martin Luther King Jr. was indicted for his role in the Montgomery bus boycott of 1956, one sympathetic Northern newspaper decided to launch a fundraising campaign to pay his $500 fine and court costs.


That was the Asbury Park Press in an appeal to its readers on the front page of the paper on March 24, 1956.


“Press Starts Fund To Help Clergyman,” was the headline above the fold on that date’s Saturday edition.


MLK assassination: How the Jersey Shore mourned 50 years ago


“The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., was found guilty Thursday of leading an illegal boycott against the Montgomery city bus lines. He was fined $500 and assessed $500 in court costs,” the article read. “Since early last December, nearly all of Montgomery’s 50,000 Negroes have refused to ride buses over segregated seating. Following his conviction, the 27-year-old minister, a leader in the protest, vowed to continue fighting for ‘justice and equality.’”


First, a quick history recap: The Montgomery bus boycott started shortly after Rosa Parks, 42, famously refused to give up her seat to a white passenger as was required under city law in Montgomery, Alabama, in that era. Parks was arrested and taken to the city jail. Watch a video below of the unveiling of a sign recognizing Parks' contribution to history.



    A new historic marker honoring Civil Rights icon Rosa Parks and the 60th anniversary of the Montgomery Bus Boycott was unveiled outside the Rosa Parks Library and Museum in Montgomery on Tuesday, Dec. 1, 2015.
    Shannon Heupel/Advertiser

The event was not only a key moment in the civil rights movement, but elevated King, a local pastor at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, to national prominence. King joined the Montgomery Improvement Association, established to organize a boycott against the city transit system in the wake of Parks' arrest, whose members selected King as its president. A video at the top of this story shows depictions of the boycott at an anniversary commemoration.


Towns: What I learned about Martin Luther King through conversations with his son


When the boycott began to hurt the city economically – 75 percent of Montgomery’s bus passengers were black – King was charged along with other leaders “of the conspiracy” under a 1921 Alabama law that made it a crime to organize boycotts against lawful businesses.


An exhibit at the Rosa Parks Museum in Montgomery, Ala., shows Martin Luther King Jr. and other civil rights activists riding in the front of a city bus after segregation was ruled illegal. (Photo: Tracey Teo)

Wayne D. McMurray, the editor of the Press, sent King a telegram.


“We of the Asbury Park Press, outraged at the conviction of a fellow American for asserting a right our Constitution guarantees to all, want to help you in your fight for justice,” McMurray wrote. “We are starting a fund drive among our readers for money to pay for your fine and court costs. The Press itself is contributing $50.”


OK, so old man McMurray was a tightwad, but his heart was in the right place. For context, that’s $462.44 in 2018 money when adjusted for inflation, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. 


MLK50: MLK’s speech in New Jersey was one of his last. Hear from those who witnessed it


In an editorial published on the same day, the Press wrote: “This newspaper feels that the treatment accorded to Rev. Dr. King is a disgrace to the state of Alabama which must, in part, be shared by the whole country.”


Reaction from Alabama’s white establishment was swift and wholly unsurprising.


The next day, comments from Alabama state Sen. Sam Engelhardt, executive secretary of the Alabama Association of White Citizens Councils, were published in the Montgomery Advertiser.


The senator’s sarcasm dripped with racial contempt. The campaign did not go far enough, he said. And no, he wasn’t talking about that $50 kickstart from McMurray.


“We think donations to pay King’s fine are not enough,” Englehardt began. “Donations should also be solicited to move King, the Montgomery Improvement Association and every member of the National Association for Agitation of the Colored People in Montgomery to Asbury Park.”


The senator wasn’t finished.


“If this is done we predict within one year other donations will be requested to move them away from Asbury Park,” Englehardt continued. “Apparently, the Asbury Park Press’s circulation among Negroes has been slipping lately.”


From its editorial page two days later, the Press retorted that it wouldn’t know if its circulation among blacks was slipping because unlike some people, we’re not segregationists.


The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. speaks at a mass meeting at Holt Street Baptist Church in Montgomery, Ala., during the Montgomery Bus Boycott.  (Advertiser file) (Photo: File)

Public reaction to the campaign, which included a national sampling, was mixed, since the campaign was picked by up wire services.


“In an effort to show how tolerant the North is, the rights of white people have been ruthlessly destroyed,” wrote Chester Griffin of Atlanta in a letter to the editor. “Mixed schools increase juvenile delinquency, lower morals and retard white children. … You are without guts if you don’t publish this! … White supremacy is truly American.”


The Press published the letter on March 27, 1956, under the headline: “WE’VE GOT GUTS!”


U.S. Rep. James Roosevelt, D-California, the son of the late President Franklin D. Roosevelt, offered praise for the Press.


“We need much more active voices for true tolerance and good will in the United States,” Roosevelt said. “The Asbury Park Press is to be heartily commended for initiating a splendid project. This is a fine thing to witness, especially now at Eastertime.”


The congressman predicted that the U.S. Supreme Court would rule against the City of Montgomery and order the desegregation of its transit system – which is exactly what the justices did when they upheld a lower federal court’s ruling the next November.


Here at home, the money poured in through big and small donations. The Monmouth County Civil Liberties League wrote a check in the amount of $100. Through the mail, $1 to $10 denominations were sent.


In the end, the Press exceeded its goal with a total amount of $1,403 (the equivalent of $12,927.78 in today’s money) received by April 1, 1956.


The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was pastor at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, AL. (Photo: Courtesy of the Montgomery Chamber Of Commerce)

King himself addressed the Press’s campaign – first in a telegram expressing gratitude to McMurray and the people of Asbury Park, and then while on a trip to New York on March 25 when he granted an interview to a Press reporter.


“Things like this, let the Negroes in the South know just how many fine people throughout the rest of the country are behind them in their struggle for equal rights,” King told the reporter.


Erik Larsen: 732-682-9359 or elarsen@gannettnj.com
