


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Lawyers for Aaron Saucedo, the suspected "Serial Street Shooter," want to block media photo coverage of his trial, arguing it could prejudice jurors.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Aaron Saucedo
(Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

How much does media coverage taint a potential jury in a murder case? That's an as-yet-unanswered question posed to the judge in the case of "Serial Street Shooter" suspect Aaron Saucedo.


Saucedo, 23, is charged with nine murders over the course of 12 shootings between August 2015 and July 2016, mostly in the Maryvale neighborhood of west Phoenix, though some of the events took place in east-central Phoenix.


In a hearing Friday in Maricopa County Superior Court, one of Saucedo's defense attorneys argued the media should not be allowed to film or photograph Saucedo's face or show him in chains and jail clothes because it would unfairly influence his case in the eyes of the jury pool.


There is ample case law barring jurors from seeing defendants in restraints.


"When you chain them up to look like a wild animal, that has the effect of making him look guilty," said defense attorney Susan Corey. "That's just showing the scary guy."


Corey has made no secret that the defense case rests on identity. Most of the victims of the Serial Street Shooter are dead and cannot identify their attacker. And four survivors may not have had a good look at the attacker.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Shortly after Saucedo's arrest, reporters from The Arizona Republic showed his mugshot to one of the survivors whose description aided police in creating a composite drawing of the attacker. The victim told the reporters it was not the photo he had picked out of a lineup when questioned by investigators.


Corey and her co-counsel, Thomas Glow and Peter Jones, want to prevent potential jurors from being prejudiced by images of Saucedo projected in the media.


Attorney Craig Hoffman, who represented The Republic and five other local media outlets at Friday's hearing, noted, "Identification is an issue in quite a few cases." He said the potential of tainting the jury is normally handled during jury selection by questioning prospective jurors.



    Aaron Juan Saucedo appears before a judge for the first time since being indicted on charges for crimes Phoenix police have attributed to the "Serial Street Shooter."
    Maricopa County Attorney's Office

Furthermore, he said, Saucedo's photograph has already been broadcast around the world, and a video of his initial court appearance was posted on the court website and widely disseminated.


The Saucedo case has been a challenge toanyone hoping to follow it closely.


Saucedo's attorneys have waived his presence at nearly all of his hearings to keep him out of the line of sight of journalists and their camera lenses.


And lately, hearings have been canceled and rescheduled at the last minute, making it hard for reporters to know they are even taking place.


MORE: Timeline in the Phoenix 'Serial Street Shooter' case


The judge in the case, Joseph Mikitish, has been slow to post his rulings on the record and, at the order of the Maricopa County Attorney's Office, they are not available on the court's public website and must be accessed at the court's records facility.


Prosecutor Juan Martinez did not take a position on the photography issue in court Friday.


One catalyst for Friday's hearing was a hastily called hearing in late September at which Corey wanted to argue her motion to prohibit photography. The judge noted in his minute entry that media were not present. In fact, the media and their attorneys had not been informed of the hearing.


Attorney David Bodney filed an objection on behalf of The Republic, the Associated Press, Telemundo and Channels 3, 5, 12 and 15. A news story by 12 News on the incident was played in court Friday by Corey as her idea of proof of prejudice against her client. Hoffman stood in for Bodney in Friday's hearing.


"The claim from the media is that we are trying to keep them out of the courtroom, and that is not the case," Corey said. "We are simply asking that Mr. Saucedo have a fair trial."


MORE: 'Republic,' other media outlets win battle for access in 'Serial Shooter' case


The media do not have a greater right than the general public to attend trials, she argued.


Hoffman responded that the media serve as a conduit for the general public, most of whom do not have the opportunity to exert their right to attend trials.


Mikitish took under advisementthe matter of how the media may cover the case, meaning he will rule at a future date.


But in a minute entry filed a few hours after Friday's hearing, Mikitish noted that he had asked the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office to assess whether Saucedo can safely attend a hearing scheduled for Oct. 23 without wearing visible restraints, which would nullify one of the defense arguments against allowing photography.


Corey had stated during the hearing that perhaps the media could practice "self-censoring" and blur out Saucedo's face in its photos and videos.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

READ MORE: 


Saucedo pleads not guilty in 'Street Shooter' case


Trying 'Street Shooter' case in post-Arias era


The case against 'Serial Street Shooter' suspect


Loose ends, dead ends in 'Street Shooter' case
