A Florida insurance agent has been arrested after allegedly submitting a fraudulent insurance policy to Citizens Property Insurance Corp., according to a statement from Florida CFO Jimmy Patronis and the Florida Department of Financial Services (DFS).

Richard Joseph Girard, a licensed insurance agent and owner of A-Rated Insurance Group, allegedly submitted a policy application for property insurance for a Key Largo client but provided fictitious supporting documentation that falsified the age of the roof of the property.


As a result, Citizens accepted the application, initiated a policy and Girard received commission on the successful insurance sale.

Following the acceptance of the insurance application, DFS said Citizens suspected the application submitted by Girard may have been fraudulent and referred the matter to investigators with DFS’ Bureau of Insurance Fraud.

As a result of the investigation, DFS investigators confirmed Girard submitted an inspection report and policy application for a property located in Key Largo, Fla October 2016. However, in order for the policy to be accepted and to receive his commission, Girard used older photos and an older inspection report from a previous property on the new application form. By doing so, Girard concealed the actual condition of the property’s roof and structure, allowing him to obtain the insurance policy and receive a commission of $1,528.

Girard was arrested and booked into Plantation Key Detention Center without incident on Nov. 13, 2017, and has been charged with insurance fraud, uttering forged instruments, forgery and grand theft.

This case will be prosecuted by the Monroe County State Attorney’s Office and if convicted, Girard could face up to 20 years in prison.

Once formal charges have been brought forth, DFS’ Division of Insurance Agents and Agency Services will suspend Girard’s insurance license.

Source: Florida Department of Financial Services

Was this article valuable?

Thank you! Please tell us what we can do to improve this article.

Thank you! % of people found this article valuable. Please tell us what you liked about it.

Here are more articles you may enjoy.

Get the latest insurance newssent straight to your inbox.

Many carriers only accept roofs 15 years or newer and/or provide credits for newer roofs. I suspect this happens much more frequently as a passive form of insurance fraud to get a better rate. It’s puzzling why the DFS went after this specific agency and does not prosecute any others with application issues (roof age is not the only one – number of occupants, year built, alarm credits, etc). If they want to peel back the lid on this one, it’s pretty ugly underneath.

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Name *

Email *

Comment


                            
                            

                        







Notify me of comments via e-mail

We have updated our privacy policy to be more clear and meet the new requirements of the GDPR. By continuing to use our site, you accept our revised Privacy Policy.