

By Dana Burke, Robert Downen,  and Meagan Ellsworth

Caption


Close

Carl Bible, 35, died Dec. 19 after being hospitalized for flu. Bible was an inmate at the Montgomery County Jail when he became ill.

Carl Bible, 35, died Dec. 19 after being hospitalized for flu. Bible was an inmate at the Montgomery County Jail when he became ill.

Mosheer Rashid, 41, died Dec. 19 after being hospitalized for flu. Rashid was an inmate at the Montgomery County Jail when he became ill.

Mosheer Rashid, 41, died Dec. 19 after being hospitalized for flu. Rashid was an inmate at the Montgomery County Jail when he became ill.

Montgomery County Jail

Montgomery County Jail



Two MontgomeryTwo Montgomery County Jail inmates who tested positive for the flu recently died at an area hospital, the Montgomery County Sheriff's Office confirmed Friday.

The deaths of inmates Mosheer Rashid, 41, and Carl Bible, 35, bring the total number of flu-related deaths in Montgomery County to three this season. The third victim, a 70-year-old man, passed way Tuesday in the hospital.

"It's been a horrible flu season for everybody," MCSO Lt. Scott Spencer said. "It's nationwide."

Dr. Michael Blocker, Infectious Disease Specialist from Novant Health joins us to discuss guarding yourself against the flu.

Rashid was booked into jail Sept. 27 on a felony assault charge. He was first seen for an illness Dec. 8 by medical staff at the jail. He then improved with treatment until feeling ill again Dec. 10, the Sheriff's Office said. The next day, Rashid was rushed to Conroe Regional Medical Center to seek treatment for Influenza A.

As his condition worsened on Dec. 17, a judge released Rashid from custody on a personal recognizance bond. He died two days later in the hospital.

Although his death is not considered an in-custody death by law, MCSO jail administration, homicide and violent crimes detectives and the Texas Rangers are investigating it.

Bible was booked Dec. 21 on a charge of possession of a controlled substance and a Harris County warrant for failure to register as a sex offender.

Bible first complained of difficulty breathing Dec. 23. He was treated several times by jail medical staff Dec. 24 and Dec. 25.

On Dec. 25, he was taken to Conroe Regional Medical Center for treatment for influenza pneumonia. He was moved to intensive care Jan. 4 and died Jan. 5.

His death also is under investigation by the Montgomery County Sheriff's Office jail administration, homicide and violent crimes detectives and the Texas Rangers.

Spencer was unsure whether the inmates were housed together or near each other when they were both in the jail. He did say the Sheriff's Office is offering free flu shots to inmates.

Inmates, jailers and other jail staff are not, however, required to have a flu shot, he said.

"When we learn about a person being sick, we start a contamination (process)," Spencer said. "We have medicine, an upgraded medical staff. If we find an individual with the flu, we have the option of ... putting them in an isolation area."

As of Jan. 7, a Montgomery County flu activity report provided by the Montgomery County Public Health District showed 546 reports for flu-like illness, 211 for Rapid Flu A and 20 Rapid Flu B.

At the beginning of the season in the week ending Oct. 7 in Montgomery County, there were 15 cases of Flu A, five cases of Flu B and 441 flu-like illnesses for a total of 461 cases reported. The most cases so far this season were reported in the week ending Dec. 16, with 273 Flu A, 18 Flu B, 104 non-differentiated and 748 flu-like illness for a total of 1,143 cases. The week ending Dec. 30, there were 379 Flu A, 27 Flu B and 405 flu-like illnesses for a total of 811 cases.

The MCPHD recommends everyone 6 months and older should get a flu vaccine. People who are more vulnerable to serious flu complications include older people, very young children, pregnant women and people with certain health conditions. However, MCPHD noted it is possible to get sick with the flu even with the flu vaccine. According to the health district, certain strains are chosen to be included in the vaccine each year, flu viruses are constantly changing, and not every strain can be covered by the vaccine.

"In addition to having a flu vaccine, the most important ways a person can prevent getting influenza is to wash their hands frequently with soap and water or sanitize with alcohol hand sanitizer and to avoid touching your own face, nose, and eyes, which can spread virus on your hands into your own respiratory track," Public Health Clinic Medical Director and Local Health Authority for Montgomery County Dr. Charles Sims stated. "If you think that you have influenza symptoms, you can avoid spreading it to others by covering your cough and avoiding school, work, or crowds while you have fever or other influenza symptoms."

Joan Kelley, vice president of Quality at Conroe Regional Medical Center, said while there has been an increase in flu cases in 2017-18 compared with 2016-17, this year's outbreak is not as severe as the H1N1 pandemic in 2009.

"Seeing a surge of flu cases in both vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals may seem worrisome, but is not that unusual," Kelley said. "In order to allow the months of time it takes to manufacture hundreds of millions of doses of vaccine, production must begin well in advance of flu season. Although researchers and scientists try their best to anticipate what flu strains will cause this year's outbreak, they cannot be 100 percent accurate and the result can be only partial protection against this year's strain of flu."

"Nevertheless, routine annual vaccination against influenza is highly recommended and is your best line of defense against catching the flu," she added.

Conroe Regional Medical Center follows the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines for how to prevent getting or spreading the flu.

"Every day preventative actions include avoiding contact with those with the virus, covering your nose and mouth with a tissue for coughs or sneezes, then immediately disposing of the tissue, washing your hands frequently with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand rub, avoiding touching your eyes, nose and mouth, and disinfecting surfaces and objects that may have been contaminated with germs," Kelley stated. "If you have the flu, you should limit your contact with others! The CDC recommends you stay home for at least 24 hours after your fever is gone without the use of a fever-reducing medicine."

The flu season started in October and can last as late as May, according to the CDC. Montgomery County did not have any flu-related deaths in the 2016-17 flu season, MCPHD stated.

Jay R. Jordan contributed to this story



