A 78-year-old Coconut Creek woman is among the dozen passengers killed in a bus crash in Mexico, according to family members.



A 78-year-old Coconut Creek woman is among the dozen passengers killed in a bus crash in Mexico, according to family members.

After her husband died in February, a South Florida woman set out for some quality time with her family by vacationing with them in Mexico.


But the excursion ended in horror Tuesday when a tour bus that Fanya Shamis and her family were riding in crashed, killing the 78-year-old Coconut Creek woman; her daughter, Anna Behar, 46; and her grandson, Daniel Behar, 11, a relative said Wednesday.


They were among 12 who died when the bus — filled with tourists from two South Florida cruise ships — flipped over on the way to Mayan ruins in eastern Mexico, said Shamis’ son-in-law, Haim Shababo of Fort Lauderdale.


“We are waiting for the bodies to come home,” he said.


Behar’s family had come from their home in Lorton, Va., to pick up Shamis for a seven-day Caribbean cruise that left from Miami on Saturday. They departed on the Celebrity Equinox.


Behar’s husband, Moises Behar, also of Lorton, Va., was injured in the bus crash and taken to a hospital.


How safe are shore excursions for cruise line passengers?

That’s a question that resurfaces after highly publicized accidents such as Tuesday’s fatal bus crash in eastern Mexico that killed passengers of two ships owned by Royal Caribbean Cruises. Eleven foreign tourists and a Mexican tour guide...

A Mexican state prosecutor said the crash was caused by driver negligence and excessive speed.


Quintana Roo state prosecutors in Mexico said a preliminary manslaughter investigation indicated the driver lost control of the bus and when he tried to get back on the narrow highway, the bus flipped, struck a tree and landed in vegetation along the roadside.


“Due to a lack of care, the driver lost control of the bus, steering to the right, leaving the asphalt,” state prosecutor Miguel Angel Pech Cen said at a news conference.


He said evidence found at the scene indicated the driver was going too fast.


Shamis’ neighbors in Coconut Creek said they couldn’t believe Shamis died. She had just lost her husband, Arkady Shamis, in February, and traveled to ease the pain of his death, said Richard Weinstein, who lives on the same street in the gated community.


“They were really friendly neighbors,” Weinstein said. “When we moved in, her husband, who was known as ‘Arky’ in the neighborhood, came over to help us with repairs. They were such nice people. We’re sad to miss them.”


He said it was not uncommon to see Shamis and her husband walking their relatives’ dogs, he said.


Shamis’ neighbor, Stephanie Edmunds, said the couple, originally from the Soviet Union, first moved to New Jersey, then to Coconut Creek, just as the neighborhood was being built. The loss left her shaking her head.


“You are here today and tomorrow you aren’t,” she said.


In addition to Anna, Shamis had another daughter, who lives in Fort Lauderdale.


Miami-based Royal Caribbean Cruises said in a statement that passengers from two of its ships, the Celebrity Equinox and Serenade of the Seas, were involved in the crash.


Mexican police and paramedics work at the scene of a bush crash in Quintana Roo state on Dec. 19, 2017.

Mexican police and paramedics work at the scene of a bush crash in Quintana Roo state on Dec. 19, 2017.

The Serenade of the Seas departed from Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale on Friday.


In addition to the members of the Shamis family, five Americans, two Swedes and a Canadian were among those killed, officials said Wednesday. A Mexican tour guide also died.


The Quintana Roo state government said the injured included three Canadians, four Brazilians and four Americans. Two Swedes were taken to the United States for treatment. Seven others slightly injured in Tuesday's accident have returned to their cruise ships, officials said.


A state government statement early Wednesday said the bus driver was injured and taken into custody.


But Pech Cen, the prosecutor, later said the driver was not in custody. He said the driver was taken from the scene for medical treatment.


They knew the driver's identity and would get a statement from him but were not sure if he was in a hospital or still at home, the prosecutor said.


He did not elaborate on the conflicting government statements.


Video images from the site of the bus crash showed the vehicle on its side off a two-lane highway, with some survivors on the pavement and others walking around.


Chris Brawley, a passenger on the Serenade of Seas, was on another bus headed to the same Mayan ruins when they came on the scene minutes after the accident.


It was shortly after 9 a.m. and a convoy of buses from the cruise port at Mahahual was headed to Chacchoben, he said. They had been on the road for 35 to 40 minutes before the accident.


Brawley said the sky was clear and the road was dry. He didn't see any sign of any other vehicle being involved in the crash, which happened on a narrow, two-lane road with no shoulder or guardrail.




At least 12 tourists who arrived in the Mexican Caribbean on U.S. cruise ships were killed and another 20 injured in a road accident on Tuesday when they were heading to an archaeological zone, the Quintana Roo state government reported. 

He said he did not see the crash, but "the bus clearly lost control somehow as there were swerve marks all over the road surface."


Brawley, of Haslet, Texas, said he and other tourists were in Roatan, Honduras, on Monday and were scheduled to be in Cozumel on Wednesday.


Michael Schuenemeyer, a minister from Cleveland, was on another bus that passed the crash about an hour later.


Tow trucks were lifting up the bus when they passed by, he said.


"It was in pretty sad shape," Schuenemeyer said.


Staff writer Tonya Alanez contributed to this report. 


Information from The Associated Press was used in this report.
