


Mike Epps (The Hangover, Death Wish, Girls Trip) and Katt Williams (Friday After Next, Norbit, the upcoming Father Figures) will star in the upcoming sequel to the Deon Taylor film Meet the Blacks, entitled The House Next Door. Epps and Williams starred together in the 2002 film Friday After Next.


Deon Taylor (Traffik, Motivated Seller, Supremacy) is directing The House Next Door as well as producing the film with partners Roxanne Avent and Robert F. Smith. Mike Epps is a producer on the film via his Naptown Productions banner along with producing partner Niles Kirchner, who is executive producing. Katt Williams is executive producing as well.


In addition to Mike Epps, who starred in Meet the Blacks, many of the original cast will return for the sequel, including Bresha Webb (Ride Along 2, Marlon), Zulay Henao (Fighting), social media star Andrew Bachelor (aka ‘King Batch’), and comedians Lil Duval, Michael Blackson and Tyrin Turner.


After surviving a night of terror and becoming a best-selling author, overstressed Carl Black (Epps) moves his family back to his childhood home where he hopes to work in peace and quiet on a new book that he owes his publisher. But when his quirky neighborhood becomes host to a mysteriously extravagant pimp (Williams), Carl’s work is interrupted after his dead-beat cousin becomes convinced the new neighbor is actually a vampire and is trying to steal Carl’s entire family away. Carl is forced to team up with an oddball cast of neighborhood characters as they take the fight to the vampire pimp in a hilarious battle for Carl’s family… and the future of his old hood.


Principal photography is set to commence next week in Atlanta, Georgia.


Said Taylor, “Mike and Katt are so comedically explosive together. I don’t know how we’re going to keep it together on set with these two at the top of their game, but we’re happy to have this as our problem to deal with! Audiences really responded to Meet the Blacks so we’re happy to give them another dose of dysfunction with House Next Door.”


Are you guys interested in The House Next Door? Are you happy to see the return of Mike Epps and Katt Williams? Let us know in the comments.

 ComingSoon.net is a property of Mandatory, an Evolve Media, LLC company. ©2018 All Rights Reserved Copyright 