By

Hannah Parry For Dailymail.com



and 
Associated Press






  Published:
  15:50 EDT, 22 May 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  18:52 EDT, 22 May 2018







           4

View  comments

Missing CDC worker Timothy Cunningham was found dead on April 3 after being missing for more than six weeks. His death has been ruled a suicide

A Centers for Disease Control employee whose body was found in a river six weeks after he went missing, has been ruled a suicide.


Timothy Cunningham's body was recovered from the west bank of the Chattahoochee River in northwest Atlanta on April 3 - more than six weeks after he disappeared.


Fulton County chief medical examiner Dr. Jan Gorniak said Tuesday that 35-year-old's death was a suicide by drowning.  There also was evidence that the epidemiologist had used marijuana but that was not a contributing factor in his death.


His disappearance sparked a huge manhunt and a flurry of conspiracy theories although the CDC were quick point out he did not work in a classified department.


Cunningham had been missing since February 12, when he left work at the Atlanta CDC early, telling co-workers he was feeling ill.


His family reported him missing on February 16 after going to his home and finding his belongings and vehicle there.


The CDC worker, who was a jogger, was found wearing a running suit and had crystals in his pocket, which he liked to collect.  


Fishermen first discovered Cunningham's body and called authorities, fire-rescue department spokesman Sgt. Cortez Stafford said.


Satfford, who noted that the body was found in an area authorities had searched in February without finding anything. 


Cunningham's body was recovered from the west bank of the Chattahoochee River (pictured) in northwest Atlanta on April 3 

Cunningham is pictured above with his parents, Terrell and Tia-Juana Cunningham 

The site where the body was found was not far from Cunningham's house, in a spot where rescue crews had to use boats and special equipment to reach it because it was in difficult terrain in a 'remote area not easily accessible.' 


The decomposing body was positively identified using dental records, Gorniak said. 


Last month, more than 500 people gathered for his memorial service at Morehouse College chapel in in Atlanta, Georgia. 


His parents, Terrell and Tia Cunningham, were among those in attendance. 


Cunningham’s parents told investigators at the time that their son had not been diagnosed with depression, but was suffering from mood swings.


Cunningham, 35, was an epidemiologist at the Atlanta-based federal agency. He left work early on February 12 and his family reported him missing four days later when they went to his home and found his belongings, vehicle and dog there.   


Hundreds of people gathered on Saturday for the memorial service of Timothy Cunningham, a CDC employee who went missing in February after leaving the office because he felt sick

When Cunningham first went missing, there were reports that he had recently been turned over for a promotion. 


But the CDC issued a statement saying that wasn't true and that Cunningham received an 'exceptional proficiency promotion' in July, and was promoted to the position of commander - an early promotion reflecting his excellence as an employee.


Still, those who knew Cunningham said he was struggling. 


Cunningham's mother, Tia-Juana Cunningham, told the Today show in February that her son sent her a mysterious text message the morning he went missing.


At 5:21am, he sent her a text asking 'are you awake?'


His father also said he was dealing with issues at work and in his personal life.


'I will say that we, as a family, were aware of some personal issues that were going on with Tim. There was also some work issues that had occurred,' Timothy's dad, Terrell, said. 


The day before his disappearance, he also called his sister who said he sounded different. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group