




The first question of the evening was: "What does the opioid epidemic look like in our community?"

About 70 people, sitting around small tables in groups of five or six each, wrote an answer on bright pink sheets of paper.

"My neighbor," wrote one.

Join the conversation at Facebook.com/DispatchOpinion

"Too much hate, not enough hope," said another.

"Syringes in bathrooms, in the park and along the walking path," wrote another.

"Kids," said yet another.

That one stopped me cold.

It had the same sobering effect on a lot of us attending a community conversation in Washington Court House last week about the opioid crisis in that city about an hour southwest of Columbus. It's really no different there than in other communities, but in a small city in a rural area, the crisis is pronounced and alarming.

The conversation was sponsored by Your Voice Ohio, a collaborative effort by nearly 40 Ohio news media outlets, including The Dispatch, driven by the priorities and perspectives of Ohioans. Read more about it online at YourVoiceOhio.org.

The coalition also held a forum in Wilmington last week and has been holding them around the state, primarily in the Miami and Mahoning valleys. The goal is to make sure that journalists are hearing from — and then reporting about — people all over the state, and that the thoughts and experiences of workaday Ohioans are guiding our coverage of topics that are important to you.

It's a deliberate effort to make sure that you (or your family, friends and neighbors) literally have a seat at the table when it comes to helping guide our coverage. In the earliest days of Your Voice Ohio, we focused on issues that Ohioans wanted the presidential candidates to address. Now, it's the opioid crisis in Ohio, which has one of the worst overdose death rates in the country.

Ohio’s drug overdose deaths rose 39 percent — the third-largest increase among the states — between mid-2016 and mid-2017, according to federal figures reported by The Dispatch last week.

The state’s opioid crisis continued to explode in the first half of last year, with 5,232 overdose deaths recorded in the 12 months ending June 31, 2017, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports.

In Washington Court House, a city of about 14,000 people and the Fayette County seat, folks from all walks of life talked about their addictions, or how the addictions of relatives and friends have changed lives — and ended lives.

They're all concerned about the children of the community, because some are growing up in homes where parents or siblings are addicted to powerful pain pills or heroin, and others are becoming addicts at very young ages.

A representative of an addiction-services agency told the group that the vast majority of child addicts they see get drugs from someone in their own home — often their parents. This was no surprise to addicts in the room, but I'm pretty sure that I made an audible gasp when I heard that statement.

The second question we all wrestled with: What are the causes of this crisis?

One said it's a lack of good jobs and positive, affordable, fun things to do. Another mentioned over-prescription of powerful drugs. Peer pressure. An inability to cope with despair and pain caused by traumatic experiences, such as the man to my left who said he found the body of a friend who took his own life.

Another said peer pressure and easy access to drugs help fuel the crisis, so I asked where I'd find drugs in town. Two older gentlemen at my table looked at each other and, almost in unison, said the name of a fast-food restaurant where they said they have watched drugs being traded openly in the parking lot.

And some said the problem persists because too many people see it as someone else's problem. "We're not invested enough in our neighbors. We're not connected to each other like we used to be," a woman said, waving her cellphone to indicate we're insulated from reality by the distracting technology in our hands.

Yet another barrier, one said, is what she described as a stigma around recovery — that especially in a small city, people with addictions can never be anonymous at a Narcotics Anonymous meeting and always carry the label of addict.

And some said that some news organizations add to that stigma by reporting the names of those arrested on drug charges and rarely, in their view, report the stories of those who recover. Those stories, they said, would provide hope for others struggling with addiction and for the community at large.

The final question was: "What steps can we take to combat the epidemic?"

"Listen to what addicts need," said one. "And realize that they are not defined by their addiction," added another.

"Provide more recovery programs," wrote another, noting that it can take weeks to get into treatment programs.

"Less hate and more love for those who are struggling."

I learned much that will help inform our coverage. And I agree with and greatly appreciate the passion in the voice of a young woman who was among the last to speak that night:

"We need to keep this conversation going," she said. "We can't let it stop here. The conversation has to keep going."

Alan D. Miller is editor of The Dispatch

amiller@dispatch.com

@dispatcheditor


							Choose the plan that's right for you.
							Digital access or digital and print delivery.
						

© Copyright 2006-2018 GateHouse Media, LLC. All rights reserved  •  GateHouse News

Original content available for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license, except where noted.
							The Columbus Dispatch  ~ 62 E. Broad St. Columbus OH 43215 ~ Privacy Policy ~ Terms Of Service

Choose the plan that’s right for you. Digital access or digital and print delivery.