By

Germania Rodriguez For Dailymail.com







  Published:
  12:39 EDT, 5 February 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  14:46 EDT, 5 February 2018







          10

View  comments

Nathaly Ramos, 22, is accused of stabbing her two-year-old son to death on Sunday before trying to kill herself. Her mugshot shows a wound to the neck

A South Florida mother attempted to kill her boyfriend and stabbed her two-year-old son to death before turning the weapon on herself, police say.


Nathaly Ramos, 22, was arrested on Sunday afternoon and charged with second-degree murder and attempted murder after killing her son Alphonse at his  home near Homestead, jail records show.


Police received a 911 call at about 6am that day, with the caller saying family members took the boy and his mother to the hospital, where he was pronounced dead.


Ramos was taken to Homestead Hospital in critical condition, but has since been released and is being held in jail without bond.


Her mugshot shows a wound on her neck.  


Miami-Dade Police added that Ramos had a knife in her hand at the hospital which has since been confiscated as evidence. 


The unidentified male victim was airlifted to Jackson South Community Hospital in unknown condition.


According to police reports cited by CBS12, he was Ramos' boyfriend, who told investigators he woke up in his home to severe pain in his body on Sunday morning and realized his girlfriend has stabbed him multiple times.


Scroll down for video 


Alphonse was taken by family members to the hospital, where he was pronounced dead

Ramos admitted to stabbing her boyfriend and then going to her mother's house, where she stabbed her son in the throat before trying to kill herself, police said

She then allegedly chased the man around the house armed with a knife and a taser before fleeing when he locked himself in a bathroom.


Ramos admitted to stabbing her boyfriend and then going to her mother's house, where she stabbed her son in the throat before trying to kill herself, police told WPLG. 


Neighbors told local news outlets the child lived in the government housing complex with his grandmother because Ramos was unstable and lived in a shelter.


'The daughter, who is the mother of the baby, she's very depressed,' a neighbor who did not want to be identified told 7News.


'She's not right in her mind, so Grandma wouldn't let her come see the baby like that.' 


Ramos' Facebook posts show her going from doting mom to a depressed state

The mother once documented family outings, such as their time on a cruise, but began posting about depression and aliens sometime last year

'It's beautiful how much comfort and love emanates from your children,' Romas once wrote

Ramos often shared posts about aliens and depression on her Facebook, including images that read 'you must betray the humans' and 'suicide is badass'.


She wrote on November 29: 'Can you save. Can you save my heavy dirty soul, For me?'


But, despite her latest posts, her Facebook once showed her in a happier place, and doting over Alphonse.





'I love the time of the day when my son throws himself on me and gets all comfy'd up next to me. It's beautiful how much comfort and love emanates from your children,' she wrote on August 2016.


The mother also documented family outings, such as their time on a cruise. 


Neighbors told local news outlets the child lived in the government housing complex with his grandmother because Ramos was unstable and lived in a shelter

Ramos (pictured pregnant in 2015) was taken to the hospital in critical condition on Sunday but has since been released

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group