Welcome! 

Subscribe to Business Wire:
    Email Alerts
    Get Business Wire via: Homepage
    Mobile
    RSS
    Facebook
    Twitter
    LinkedIn
    

News Feed Item




      Panasonic is proud to introduce the KX-HN3001W Baby Monitor, a smart, 
      easy-to-use, new monitoring system with Digital Enhanced Cordless 
      Telecommunications (DECT) technology, the same powerful technology built 
      into Panasonic’s long-range home telephone systems and that provides a 
      clear, secure and interference-free signal strength up to 1500 feet1. 
      The system also includes a compact, handheld 3.5-inch color monitor that 
      syncs to a wide-angle monochrome night-vision camera, a 13-hour 
      long-life rechargeable battery, as well as smart sound, motion and 
      temperature sensors to monitor the child’s safety and well-being.
    



This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: 
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180322006094/en/



Parents can move freely about the house, knowing their child is safe, comfortable and content in their crib with the Panasonic KX-HN3001W Baby Monitor (Photo: Business Wire)  


      11500 feet achievable in straight line-of-sight. Actual 
      distance will vary based on some types of objects in the path.
    



      Panasonic is the Global No. 1 Cordless Phone Brand with DECT technology. 
      DECT technology in the Panasonic Baby Monitor provides a transmission 
      range more than the length of four football fields and twice the range 
      of comparable monitors. Most video-type monitors that use a 2.4 GHz FHSS 
      system or Wi-Fi can lose signal due to interference with other 2.4 GHz 
      devices (Wi-Fi, microwaves, etc.). Panasonic Baby Monitors use 
      interference-free DECT technology for signal strength that effectively 
      extends to every room inside as well as outside of the house, no matter 
      how distant, for reliable baby monitoring while working or entertaining.
    



      With the compact, handheld Panasonic Baby Monitor, every parent can rest 
      assured, knowing their child is safe, comfortable and content in their 
      crib or bed, giving parents freedom to move about the house. A 
      long-life, built-in rechargeable battery provides power for up to 13 
      hours of standby time (audio on, screen off) and up to 5 hours of 
      continuous monitor use (audio on, screen on) in or outside the house. 
      Parents can also plug the monitor into any household outlet using an 
      included AC adapter to power and recharge the monitor while working in 
      the kitchen or home office while the baby naps.
    



      The color monitor unit syncs to the wide-angle, wall-mountable 
      monochrome night vision camera unit in the child’s room to enable 
      parents to clearly see the baby even in a pitch-black environment. The 
      camera can be controlled by the monitor to pan, tilt and zoom to look in 
      on the child at anytime. The Pan and Tilt function covers a range of 
      ±136 degrees and 0 to -44 degrees, respectively. The baby’s face can 
      also be clearly viewed with the Zoom function. The Baby Monitor system 
      is expandable up to four cameras. The optional camera is expected to be 
      available in fall 2018.
    



      Surrounding-noise suppression in both camera and monitor minimize 
      background sounds to enable interference-free, two-way communication to 
      keep the baby happy by talking with them while doing household chores or 
      working outside. The noise reduction function reduces background noise 
      to hear sound from the camera clearly, helping parents sleep well 
      without being disturbed by background noise. Users can simply press and 
      hold the TALK button to speak clearly with the child.
    


      Smart sensors for motion and sound in the Baby Monitor alert 
      parents with a chime and illuminated LED on the monitor screen when the 
      child is awake or stirring, and when they are talking or crying. Smart 
      sensor options make it easy to customize sound and motion notifications 
      to suit parent needs and preferences. Another sensor alerts parents 
      automatically when the baby’s room environment goes above or below the 
      set temperature range.
    



      To help the child sleep more deeply and restfully, a built-in sound 
      library provides natural listening experiences automatically or 
      manually. These gentle, soothing sounds include five choices of white 
      noise and lullabies, respectively, so there is no need for a separate 
      sound device.
    



      Panasonic Baby Monitor KX-HN3001W is expected to be available in stores 
      in April 2018. Suggested retail price is $149.95. Available in White.
    



      The Panasonic Baby Monitor KX-HN3001W system includes: KX-HNM300 Color 
      Monitor unit, KX-HNC300 Night Vision Camera unit, Wall Mount for Camera 
      unit and two AC Adapters for Monitor unit and Camera unit.
    



      To learn more about the Panasonic Baby Monitor, please visit Panasonic.com/baby. 
      You can also follow Panasonic on Twitter (@PanasonicUSA) and Facebook.
    



      About Panasonic Consumer Electronics CompanyBased in 
      Newark, NJ, Panasonic Consumer Electronics Company is a division of 
      Panasonic Corporation of North America, the principal North American 
      subsidiary of Panasonic Corporation. The company offers a wide range of 
      consumer solutions in the U.S. including LUMIX Digital Cameras, 
      Camcorders, Blu-ray players, Home Audio, Technics, Cordless Phones, Home 
      Appliances, Beauty, Grooming, Wellness and Personal Care products and 
      more. Panasonic was featured in Fortune Magazine’s 2016 ranking of 50 
      companies that are changing the world and doing well by doing good. 
      Specifically cited were its smart and sustainable technologies, 
      including its contributions to smart cities and the electric vehicle 
      revolution.
    



      Follow Press Updates for Panasonic Consumer Products:Internet 
      - http://us.panasonic.com/newsFacebook 
      - http://www.facebook.com/panasonicusaconsumerpressInstagram 
      - http://www.instagram.com/panasonicusa_consumer_press
    





View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180322006094/en/


                  Published March 22, 2018                                    
                  Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.
                  
                  Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.
                

Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.

Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©2018 DXWorldEXPO, LLC.All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC.
Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO is prohibited.