Skip to comments.

Posted on 06/17/2018 3:24:00 AM PDT by Libloather

The odor of decomposing bodies has renewed calls to replace a county morgue in northern Illinois. 


The Daily Herald reports the Kane County morgue only has room for two bodies in its freezer. The facility has seen a sudden influx of decomposing bodies over the past few weeks. 


Officials have been storing the bodies in coolers, which doesn't completely mask the smell. Employees in neighboring buildings have started to complain.

(Excerpt) Read more at nbcchicago.com ...

Gee, I wonder why?!?


Every grocery store has a deep freezer that could hold 6-12 bodies, so why can’t a county afford a walk in?

One can smell Newark from 20 miles away.Are they sure that the odor in question isn’t caused by the *city’s* decay?

Run like the board of ed in Illinois, freezer upgrades? we needs some new flat screen TV’s, up da pensions and my pay and give me mo time off from work Im tired

Run like the board of ed in Illinois, freezer upgrades? we needs some new flat screen TV’s, up da pensions and my pay and give me mo time off from work Im tired

Is that NJ or is there another?

More formaldehyde stat!

I know what you mean 

Live 15 miles from Newark

Recently had back window broken out and tool bag stolen off back seat when parked near train station

Flat screens. Reminds me of the story from years ago where some government warehouse workers built a secret man cave deep in the building and hid out for most of the day playing video games.

They can afford it. They just blew the money on (for example) “essential travel” to Las Vegas for the County supervisors and their baby mamas and the baby mamas’ half sisters and the half sisters’ baby daddies, etc.

Put it in the basement of the obama library and bath house.

Are there no fish in the lake that need feeding?

There was a story on FR this week that the corrupt state gov’t of IL was spending $200 Million Dollars in support of the O’Muslim Library and Choom Parlor construction.

Might be better spent to chill out the stiffs at the morgue.

Reset the thermostat on the walk-in cooler. Hello...?







    Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.
