Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

An Evening of Gospel Choirs, Saturday, Feb. 3 at Rutgers in New Brunswick, will be dedicated to the memory of Rev. Hannah

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    You’ll want to turn up the volume for this. Mikayla Serrano, 14, of Asbury Park who won a singing contest at the McDonald's Gospelfest 2017 in Newark, sings Amazing Grace in her middle school's music room.
    Tanya Breen

Rev. Marion Hannah.
(Photo: Joe McLauglin)

He had musical connections to everyone from James Brown to Jaheim.


But perhaps his greatest achievement was as a pillar of the community as the pastor of Antioch Christian Church in New Brunswick. In a year of noted musicians’ deaths, Rev. Marion Hannah’s passing on May 20, 2017 hurt close to home for the state’s gospel music community and those whose lives he affected.


“He was a joy,” said Richard Boyce, who sang with Hannah in the legendary gospel group, the Soul Seekers of New Orleans. “He loved the lord, loved people and he loved all of us.”


The Soul Seekers produced several hit records in the late 1950s and early ‘60s, Including “Something’s Got a Hold on Me.” The group toured the South and Northeast during the years, including venues like the Metropolitan Opera House in Philadelphia, the Apollo Theater in Harlem and Boston Garden.


More: Whitney Houston, NJ influenced by gospel


The Soul Seekers shared bills Gospel Starlighters, who featured a young James Brown.


“James Brown was certainly good for our times,” said Hannah to Gannett NJ. “James said it’s good to be black and proud. They used to make us think being black was a sin.”


Brown, who would later become known as “The Hardest Working Man in Show Business,” was full of energy when Hannah knew him.


“All of us were a little wild in those days,” Hannah said. “But he was a good guy and good-hearted. He always had compassion for the fellas around him.”


Hannah, who sang with Mahaliah Jackson and Sam Cooke,  was a positive role model for Boyce and his brother, Frankie Boyce, who would both back up the Parliaments of Plainfield, led George Clinton of Parliament Funkadelic fame.


“I never seen him mad, ever,” said Boyce of Hannah. “I’ve known Rev. Hannah since I was 7 years old and he was always the same, he always had kind words, he always looked out for us. He was a joy.”


The deaths of Frankie Boyce in Vietnam in 1969, and other members of the Soul Seekers, affected Hannah deeply.


“It took the starch out of us to lose those guys,” Hannah said.


Hannah sang with the Blind Boys of Mississippi and the Blind Boys of Alabama after the Soul Seekers, but it wasn’t the same.


 “There was a hollow feeling in my stomach when I sang with those guys,” Hannah said. “It was hard to stand there with them. I never got the same enthusiasm.” 


Hannah, a native of Beckley, W.Va., close to McCoy-and-Hatfield country, owned and operated Hannah Trucking Co. in Lakewood for 30 years and he was the pastor of Antioch for the last 35 years. The flock grew from 80 when Hannah arrived in 1982 to 1,800 a few years later.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The challenges were many in New Brunswick, where the streets are rough and dead ends are often around the corner.   


“I had a young man try to sell me some drugs when I was walking up the church steps,” Hannah said.


Later, the young man came to church — without the drugs.


Hannah kept the music in his heart and he used his singing voice in services. He was often a featured performer in the annual An Evening of Gospel Choirs, held in February on the Douglass College campus of Rutgers University in New Brunswick.


“More times than I can count we would save the best for last, the Antioch Church Choir, and then invite all to participate in the gospel songs,” said  Angus Gillespie, professor of American Studies at Rutgers University and producer of the Gospel Choirs concerts. “He would lead the choirs and then he would deliver the benediction.”


More: The year in music: The 10 biggest Jersey songs of 2017


Hannah had a starring role in the 2016 video for “Struggle Love” by R&amp;B star Jaheim, whose family members, including his grandmother, worshiped at Antioch.  


Hannah’s wife, Naomi Hannah, passed away two months prior to Hannah. His survivors include eleven children, three siblings, a host of grand and great grandchildren.


The upcoming Evening of Gospel Choirs, Saturday, Feb. 3, will be dedicated to the memory of Hannah.


“He was a God fearing man who would not want us to sit around and sulk,” Boyce said. “That’s what Rev. Hannah preached.”


Chris Jordan: cjordan@app.com. Twittter: @chrisfhjordan


 
