
								Posted by
								
									zo								
								
								
									10 months ago								
							


								
									
										
    
        
            
        
    

									
								
								
									
										
    
        
            
                
            
        
    

									
								
								
									
										
    
        
            
                
            
        
    

									
								
							



Over the last year, Gallant has conducted a series of intimate In The Room performances with various artists, including Sufjan Stevens, John Legend, Andra Day and others.

WATCH: Gallant &amp; Andra Day Sing Smokey Robinson’s “Cruisin'”

Today, he’s shared a new installment, featuring British singer, Dua Lipa, joining him in a tender, slightly-swung live rendition of Amy Winehouse‘s Back To Black classic, “Tears Dry On Their Own,” accompanied by Gallant’s band. The clip was released on the late singer’s birthday. Gallant’s 2016 album, Ology, was a critically and publically acclaimed debut. No word on a follow-up just yet, but this should hold you over in the meantime.

HEAR: Gallant Hooks Up With Saba For His New Version of “Bourbon”

Lipa, on the other hand, released her self-titled debut at the top of the summer. It’s available to purchase via iTunes below. Watch Gallant and Dua Lipa deliver a stunning Amy Winehouse cover above and scroll on for the remaining dates on Lipa’s tour.

Dua Lipa Tour Dates:
Sep 14 @ Spectrum Center – Charlotte, NC
Sep 16 @ Piedmont Park – Atlanta, GA
Sep 17 @ FedExForum – Memphis, TN
Sep 19 @ KFC Yum! Center – Louisville, KY
Sep 20 @ Schottenstein Center – Columbus, OH
Sep 22-23 @ Madison Square Garden – New York, NY
Sep 24 @ Life Is Beautiful – Las Vegas, NV
Sep 26 @ Prudential Center – Newark, NJ
Sep 27 @ KeyBank Center – Buffalo, NY
Sep 29 @ Verizon Center – Washington, DC
Sep 30 @ Capital One Arena – Washington, DC


							
								
									
    
        
            
        
    

								
							
							
								
									
    
        
            
                
            
        
    

								
							
							
								
									
    
        
            
                
            
        
    

								
							
						


						2 hours ago					


							Music						


						2 hours ago					


							Audio/Music						


						19 hours ago					


							Video						


						22 hours ago					


							Music						


						23 hours ago					


							Music/News						


						23 hours ago					


							Music						

Okayplayer's Mission is to carry the Creativity, Conversation and Critical thought of the original Okayplayer Artists Collective into limitless arena of digital space.


								Copyright Okayplayer 2018							