Sign in using your wjax profile

Need a profile? Register now.

Welcome back. Please sign in

By submitting your registration information, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

We have sent a confirmation email to {* data_emailAddress *}. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your account.

We look forward to seeing you on [website] frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.

Click here to return to the page you were visiting.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Edit your profile

Sorry we could not verify that email address. Enter your email below and we'll send you another email.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

By: 
            			                                                                    Action News Jax 
                                    			            

QUICK LINKS: 7-day forecast | Free weather app with alerts  | Freezing conditions for the Jacksonville area to impact road conditions

A hard freeze warning goes into effect at 6 p.m. Wednesday and will last until 11 a.m. Motorists are urged to stay off the roads if possible. The First Alert Weather Team warns that black ice on roads is a real possibility.

The effects from the the winter weather is leading to closures for some local offices and the opening of shelters. 

Glynn County is under a Winter Storm Warning and the Governor of Georgia has declared a State of Emergency for 28 counties, including Glynn and Camden, through Jan. 5.  

PSA: Winter Storm Warning for Glynn County

GLYNN COUNTY, Ga – Glynn County is under a Winter Storm Warning and... https://t.co/kUFJyrH29Z

Road closures:

The outside northbound and southbound lanes of Interstate 95 at the Georgia/Florida line have been closed due to ice on the road. Crews are currently working to remove the ice from the roadway. Motorists are urged to proceed with caution.

TRAVEL ADVISORY: The outside northbound and southbound lanes of Interstate 95 at the Georgia/Florida line have been closed due to ice on the road. Crews are currently working to remove the ice from the roadway. Motorists are urged to proceed with caution.

Winter storm closures:

All Duval County city government offices are closed on Wednesday for nonessential personnel. Call 904-630-CITY with questions. City offices will reopen Thursday, Jan. 4.

Duval County Public Schools administrative offices will be closed Wednesday for all nonessential employees. Normal operations will resume Thursday, Jan. 4.

Offices at the University of North Florida and Florida A&amp;M University in Jacksonville will be closed Wednesday.

The Glynn County School System has canceled school on Thursday, Jan. 4 due to the severe weather conditions in southeast Georgia. A decision regarding opening schools on Friday, Jan. 5 will be made as soon as possible on Thursday after consultation with emergency management officials. The Glynn County Board of Education meetings scheduled for Jan. 4 and Jan. 9 will be rescheduled for one week later. 

All nonessential portions of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office will close Wednesday. JSO says normal visitation will be suspended at all three detention facilities. Normal operations at JSO will resume Thursday. This includes the Police Memorial Building, the six zone substations and the jail facilities.

The Jacksonville Transportation Authority has announced that they will suspend service starting at 9 p.m. on Wednesday. JTA will resume operating normal service for all modes of transportation (fixed route, paratransit, Skyway and the St. Johns River Ferry) on Thursday, January 4, 2018. 

The Brunswick and St. Simons airports are closed until 11 a.m. Thursday.

All district offices and schools in Clay County will be closed Wednesday. All essential employees in Maintenance, IT, and Transportation Departments need to report to work Wednesday. All district schools and offices are open Thursday as scheduled.

All health departments in Camden and Glynn counties will be closed Wednesday. They are expected to reopen at noon on Thursday.

Glynn County offices are closed Wednesday. Public safety services will continue normal operations.

School closures on Thursday:

Winter storm shelters:

@salarmyjax is asking for your help in donating winter items for those staying in the organization’s Cold Night Shelter. The shelter needs new adult-sized gloves, hats, scarves and jackets. Drop off the items at Towers Center of Hope at 900 W. Adams St. . . . #jacksonville #Duval #Florida #coldweather #fightforgood

A post shared by  ActionNewsJax.com (@actionnewsjax) on Jan 1, 2018 at 6:23pm PST

RELATED: First Alert Weather 7-Day Forecast | Winter Storm Watch in effect for Jacksonville on Tuesday | Is there a chance of snow flurries in Northeast Florida, Southeast Georgia this week? | Latest forecast updates in the Buresh Blog

Winter storm flight cancellations 

Southwest Airlines canceled all flights in and out of the Jacksonville International Airport through 1:30 p.m. Wednesday. American Airlines canceled all flights in and out of the airport through noon Wednesday, which is about nine flights. 

Power Outages

Winter Storm Delays
DUVAL COUNTY - Due to the project weather forecast, NAS Jacksonville will observe a three-hour delayed opening tomorrow, Jan. 4 for non-mission essential personnel. NAS Jacksonville employees are authorized to report to work at 11 a.m. The use of liberal leave is authorized. Tenant command personnel should contact their commands for further information and instruction. Mission essential personnel should report at their normal duty hours including child care employees. 

All Naval Station Mayport services to include MWR services, Child and Youth Programs (CYP) and Branch Medical Clinic will commence at 11:00 a.m on Thursday, January 4 due to projected weather forecast. All tenant command personnel are encouraged to contact their chain of command for further reporting requirements.

 



© 2018 Cox Media Group.

Interactive Radar
	First Alert Doppler HD

© 2018 Cox Media Group.

By using this website, you accept the terms of our Visitor Agreement and Privacy Policy, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.

Learn about careers at Cox Media Group.

