Scattered thunderstorms early, then becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%..

Scattered thunderstorms early, then becoming clear after midnight. Low 71F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:35 pm

A Big Rock woman was among the eight defendants who pleaded guilty to drug related charges Wednesday in Henry County Circuit Court.

Misty Dawn Wallace, 38, received a sentence of eight years in the Department of Correction on each charge when she pleaded guilty to a pair of charges of the possession of meth with the intent to deliver.

She was additionally fined $2,000 on each of the charges.

Her sentences will be served concurrently and in the community corrections program in their entirety.

A charge of possession of drug paraphernalia and five charges of possession of a controlled substance against Wallace were dismissed according to the terms of her plea agreement.

Other defendants pleading guilty to drug related charges — listed with age, last known address, charges and sentences — include:

• Richard E. Argo Jr., 44, 7605 Rabbit Creek Road, Buchanan — Possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver and possession of drug paraphernalia.

Argo pleaded guilty to an amended charge of simple possession of a controlled substance and was sentenced to serve 11 months and 29 days in the Henry County Jail. He was additionally fined $500.

He will serve his sentence split with ten days in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

The drug paraphernalia charge against Argo was dismissed.

• Teri Priddy, 34, 300 Eagle Creek Drive, Buchanan — Possession of meth and possession of drug paraphernalia.

Priddy was sentenced to serve eight years in the DOC and was fined $2,000 on the meth charge while the paraphernalia charge was dismissed.

Her sentence will be served split with one year in continuous confinement with the balance on state probation.

• Eric Scott Adams, 34, 160 Browning Lane, Paris — Possession of meth with intent to deliver.

Adams was sentenced to serve three years in the DOC and was fined $2,000.

His sentence will be served split with 180 days in continuous confinement and the balance in the community corrections program.

He has jail credit for 126 days.

• Dylan Oakley, 20, 102 Chickasaw Road, Paris — Two counts of possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver.

Oakley was sentenced to serve two years in the DOC and was fined $2,000 on each of the possession charges.

The sentences will be served consecutively and split with 120 days in continuous confinement and the balance on supervised probation.

• Trena Beecham, 30, 285 Nobles Road, Paris — Aggravated child neglect, possession of meth, possession of a controlled substance and possession of drug paraphernalia.

Beecham was sentenced to serve 11 months and 29 days in the county jail on an amended charge of child neglect.

She was additionally sentenced to serve 11 months and 29 days in the county jail and was fined $150 on the paraphernalia charge.

The sentences will be served consecutively to each other and on probation in their entirety.

• Jacob Connelly, 24, 285 Nobles Road, Paris — Aggravated child neglect, possession of meth, possession of a controlled substance and possession of drug paraphernalia.

The sentences will be served consecutively to each other and on probation in their entirety.

• Richard Treyvon Tharpe, 19, 3710 Highway 77, no. 3, Paris — Two counts possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver and possession of a firearm during the commission of a dangerous felony.

Tharpe was sentenced to four years in the DOC on one of the drug possession charges. He was additionally fined $2,000 on that charge.

The other charge of drug possession and possession of a firearm were dismissed.

Tharpe was placed on deferred probation, which means his guilty plea was not accepted. If he complies with the terms of his probation, the charge against him will be expunged.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription