

This bright and airy 100-year-old cottage just 15 miles from Huntsville is the perfect romantic spot for two. The Winchester Manor has many charming details like a courtyard, antique brick floors, and a jacuzzi tub. It once served as a post office, doctor’s office, and even a jail. The best part: It rents for just $95 per night! While you’re there, check out this beautiful nature trail.

You can view the Northern Lights from this log cabin just five minutes from the city’s downtown. While the cabin is utterly charming, you will be roughing it a bit thanks to a cedar-lined outhouse and outdoor shower. But the rest of the cabin is plenty comfy with a full kitchen, large bedroom, and outdoor fire pit.

Check out these gorgeous pics of America’s last wild places.

Stay in an authentic Southwestern casita at this cozy Airbnb, which can accommodate four guests. There’s a private backyard with patio and desert landscaping where you can enjoy an outdoor meal on the grill in Arizona’s temperate weather. Or hop on one of the complimentary cruiser bikes for a ride around town. Find some more unusual Airbnb homes by checking out these houseboats you can rent.

This lovely one-bedroom lakefront home is about an hour from Little Rock. You’ll get a bedroom with bath that has its own entrance separate from the rest of the home. It has a small deck and comes with a microwave and refrigerator. This Airbnb rental is ideal for those who love the outdoors, as you can enjoy swimming, access to kayaks, more than 25 miles of walking trails, and nine golf courses. For even more adventure, head to nearby Hot Springs National Park. Don’t miss these gorgeous National Park photos.

The Golden State offers many amazing Airbnb rentals, including this uber-cool “Hobbit”-style house near trendy Venice Beach and Los Angeles International Airport. Newly built, this unique wooden home comes with a garden and sun deck, though you will share an outdoor bathroom and shower with nearby rentals. The house is close to bike paths (with an easy bike to the beach), restaurants, and a free shuttle to Venice Beach.

Step back to 1885 with a stay in a suite at this Victorian home close to Denver’s Theater District and Coors Ballpark. Guests enjoy the entire second floor of the historic home, which was restored in 2004 and featured on HGTV. The suite has a living room, bedroom, bathroom with jacuzzi tub, kitchenette, and modern amenities like Wi-Fi and a large flat screen TV with Apple TV.

For a unique experience, try this geodesic dome on a farm in the countryside that rents for just $29 per night. For that price, you’ll have to forgo electricity, heat, and air conditioning, which may feel a bit like camping. The dome has a double bed and a floor mattress with a bathroom and kitchen available in the main home. Between Litchfield and Woodbury, the dome is close to antique shops, historic sites, and 4,000 acres for hiking and exploring.

Step into a tropical paradise: Biscayne Park is nicknamed “bird’s sanctuary” and is only about 15 minutes from the beach, a neighborhood that the host says is Miami’s best-kept secret. The 400-square-foot cottage is set behind the owner’s main home within a lush tropical garden with private pool and tiki hut. Inside, there’s a queen bed with doors opening onto the garden, a bathroom, as well as a microwave and refrigerator.

Make your home in one of the hippest areas of downtown Atlanta at this Airbnb studio in a carriage house. In a separate building from the main house, the small studio is ideal for one or two people with a queen bed, bath, and kitchenette. In the heart of the action in Atlanta, you’ll be close to the Fox Theater, Georgia Tech, and the MARTA mass transit station.

Calling all artistic types! This Hawaiian cabin positions itself as ideal for artists with its peace, quiet, and stunning forest views. It makes a great home base for exploring the Big Island’s Kalapana lava flow and Volcano National Park between 30 and 40 minutes away. The cabin has a first floor and a loft with room for up to four guests, as well as a kitchen and bathroom. Here’s what you should know before booking your Hawaii vacation.

This gorgeous, newly renovated private suite will let you live in luxury for a few days for as low as $58 per night. Located in South Boise Village, the suite, which is decorated in light and bright modern decor, has its own entrance and comes with a private bedroom, bath, living room, and mini-fridge. Plus, you can rent a Tesla from the owners to drive around town in style.

This large loft space lets you enjoy big-city living in Chicago’s Wicker Park—where the movie High Fidelity was filmed. This fun vacation rental, a shared space with the owners, features bright colors, a pool table, exposed ductwork, and a checkered-tile bathroom. Your bedroom has room for two, and you’re just a few minutes from the “L” train, which can take you anywhere in Chicago. They also throw in access to a local gym just a block away.

Want to stay in one of Indianapolis’ hippest neighborhoods? Book this two-bedroom home in Fountain Square. The two-story home also comes with a kitchen, dining room, small backyard, and living room with smart TV. The trendy neighborhood has lots to do, including easy access to Indy’s lauded restaurants, quirky boutiques, duckpin bowling, and swing dancing at the Fountain Square Theater.

A good choice for families, this new apartment in the Peninsula neighborhood comes with a collapsible crib, two bedrooms—each with their own bathroom—and it overlooks a playground. Convenient to the University of Iowa and near I-80, the luxury apartment sleeps up to nine people and comes with a full kitchen. Be sure to make use of the expansive private deck with grill and table for outdoor dining.

This Airbnb rental grants you access to the second floor of a minimalist modern home in the eclectic Strawberry Hill neighborhood of the city—about a five to ten-minute drive to downtown. The second floor is set up as a studio with kitchenette, living area, bedroom, separate bathroom, deck, and private entrance.

When else will you have the chance to stay the night in an Airstream? Enjoy overnight accommodations in this vintage 1960 trailer situated in downtown Lexington near historic Grant Park and Transylvania University. The Airstream comes with twin beds, as well as a sofa that converts to a full bed, and a charming outdoor area with a fire pit behind a historic Victorian home. There’s even a small bathroom with shower inside.

Jump into the New Orleans vibe with this colorful and fun historic guest cottage close to the French Quarter. Filled with character and funky decor from its blue bedroom to its quaint pool surrounded by pillars, the two-story cottage has one bedroom with a queen bed and a pull-out sleeper sofa, as well as a kitchen, living area, and balcony set underneath a magnolia tree and overlooking a shared courtyard. It also comes with free bikes to explore the city.

A popular spot for honeymoons, this modern Bailiwick Cottage is a wonderful place to get away into Mother Nature and enjoy outdoor adventures. With views of the Maine seashore, the home is also only a mile from Wolfe Neck Woods State Park where you can bike, hike, and explore. The nearby L.L. Bean outfitter offers guided outings for kayaking, paddleboarding, fly fishing, cross-country skiing, and more. The cottage comes with a queen size bed, bath, and kitchenette, as well as an outdoor patio with table for the warmer months.

Located in the Fells Point area just a few blocks from the inner harbor, this restored studio apartment delivers all kinds of character, from exposed brick and hardwood floors to vaulted ceilings and downtown Baltimore views. A third-floor walk-up, it can sleep four people. There’s also a kitchen for preparing meals.

This funky loft in Boston’s North End—one of the city’s most historic areas—is steps from pubs, restaurants, and lots of historic sites like the Paul Revere House and Old North Church, making it an ideal tourist’s base. The loft features hardwood floors and modern touches and includes a bedroom with queen bed, as well as another single bed and small kitchen.

Make yourself at home in a private room inside this townhouse, once the gymnasium of Grand Rapids’ first high school. The Airbnb rental, which has the original gym floors, includes a private suite, taking up the full third floor, with 24-foot windows that have views of downtown. The townhouse, which also features a lovely outdoor patio, is close to many breweries in the “beer city” and is a ten-minute walk to the city center.

You’re only a four-block walk from the Blue-Line Metro, but you’ll feel like you’re miles away from the busy metropolis when staying at this loft apartment in the city’s Ventura Village neighborhood. The studio has two queen beds, wood panels, vaulted windows, and is surrounded by trees. Fire up the wood-burning stove on cold Minneapolis nights, or enjoy the outdoor deck during the warmer months.

Experience Southern charm in this adorable cottage with its front porch, rocking chairs, and colorful decor. The small but comfy space has two twin beds, a small kitchen, cedar-lined closet, and bath with shower. Enjoy the courtyard with outdoor fire pit (shared with the main house), and when you’re ready to dine, you’ll find several top restaurants nearby.

This modern renovated loft with exposed brick is just off Washington Street and close to restaurants, bars, Busch Stadium, and the convention center. There’s also plenty of digital entertainment in the apartment with a Xbox, Apple TV, and Netflix. You can hang out in the spacious living area connected to a large dining space and kitchen.

Before you book your trip, be sure to avoid these vacation rental mistakes.

You might conjure images of Mad Men‘s Don Draper in this funky mid-century apartment. Brightly colored inside and out, this rental is just minutes away from the University of Montana and the Clark Fork River. Inside are two beds to host up to four guests, a cozy desk area, bedroom, bath, and eat-in kitchen. You can even bring Fido along, as the apartment is pet-friendly.

You’ll feel like you’re back in the 1950s in this cleverly decorated bungalow in the Hanscom Park neighborhood, which is known for its early 20th-century homes. Especially good for families, the place comes with an outdoor playhouse, bunk beds, toddler bed, collapsible crib, and kid-size table. You’re actually getting the lower level of a 100-year-old bungalow with its own entrance, a kitchen, bathroom with tub and shower, and two bedrooms.

Stay in your very own penthouse suite for less than $100 right on the Strip. This two-bedroom studio condo at the MGM Signature Tower is connected to the MGM Grand and its monorail station, and it’s near the convention center. It features a large granite bathroom with a jacuzzi tub, a king bed, a kitchenette, and it comes with free valet parking and use of the MGM Resort amenities.

Don’t miss these must-see Las Vegas attractions that aren’t casinos when you’re in town.

Located on the border of New Hampshire and Maine, this rustic property sits on 200 forested acres about 15 minutes away from the nearest major town. Near hiking and snowshoeing trails (the owners will loan you snowshoes if you need), the cabin provides plenty of opportunities for outdoor activity. Don’t worry—the wooden outhouse comes with a comfy cloth seat cover. You’ll be relying on well water and propane heat (no electricity).

If you like rustic, check out these tree houses you can rent.

Enjoy all Atlantic City has to offer and save money at the same time: This three-bedroom home is just $58 a night, five minutes from casinos, and one block from the beach. It can host up to eight guests and has plenty of space to spread out after a day of fun on the boardwalk or at the tables. Highlights include a large deck, three flat screen TVs, and a fireplace for cooler nights.

It doesn’t get more Southwestern than this pretty little Adobe-style casita. The one-bedroom, one-bathroom Casita de la Luz offers spectacular mountain views and puts you close to the city’s top destinations such as the Canyon Road Art District, San Miguel Mission, and St. John’s College. You’ll get pressed tin ceilings, a large deck, charming outdoor areas, and a bedroom fireplace.

If you love beautiful views, don’t miss these hotel rooms with absolutely stunning views.

Explore the hip side of Brooklyn in this colorful duplex with space for two. Guests have access to a one-bedroom, one-and-a-half bathroom apartment with eat-in kitchen decorated with Moroccan tile, and a small but quaint backyard. Close to the subway, it puts you just 15 minutes from Manhattan. The duplex is also within walking distance of many popular restaurants, bakeries, and wine bars.

Don’t miss these 50 Airbnb houseboats you can rent.

If you love hanging out on the deck, this is your Airbnb rental. Snow’s Nest in Kill Devil Hills on the Outer Banks is surrounded by decks and boasts the highest crow’s nest on the island. But there’s much more to this vacation rental. It fits eight guests in three bedrooms. You get ping pong, board games, puzzles, and a Play Station along with a full kitchen—plus, the Wright Brothers Museum is right down the road. Amazingly, rent starts at just $85 per night.

Love the area’s lighthouses? Check out these lighthouses you can rent on Airbnb.

Nicknamed “The Shire” from J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit, this adorable home is in the small town of Mandan across the river from Bismarck. There are two bedrooms for up to six guests, a full kitchen, a washer and dryer, and a nice outdoor space with covered patio and fire pit. One past visitor noted that “The Shire was a perfect, quiet, serene space to relax and enjoy the space.”

Near the downtown, this eclectic one-bedroom apartment is in Over the Rhine, a vibrant area of the city known for its historic 19th-century Italianate architecture. The location is close to bars, breweries, boutiques, and the Reds’ Great American Ball Park, as well as some of the best art and music venues, including Music Hall and the Cincinnati Museum Center.

Although it’s pre-1920s architecture, this bright and airy 300 House has a modern flair. The open studio design gives you a kitchenette with breakfast bar, Murphy bed, full bath, and private patio. Located a few minutes from the city’s Plaza District, midtown, and downtown, there are plenty of things to do nearby. Plus, you can help yourself to anything growing in the owner’s organic vegetable garden.

Stay in style in this modern loft for up to four guests. The loft, filled with natural light, features a kitchen, living area with sleeper sofa, and bathroom downstairs along with a queen bed upstairs. You’ll also have access to a covered outdoor patio with grill. Located in Southeast Portland, the property is one block from bustling Division Street.

Indulge yourself with a stay in the Alexander Hamilton Suite, a part of a grand Victorian residence. The two-bedroom space includes a living area, full kitchen, bedroom with an ornate bed, and full bath. You can also kick back and relax in the peaceful outdoor courtyard.

Check out the world’s most popular Airbnb—it’s a tree house!

For a comfy stay, check out this simple apartment in the city’s Armory District. With two bedrooms and two bathrooms, there is room for up to four guests, and amenities include a full kitchen, garden access, free parking, and park views. Find out why Providence was named a Reader’s Digest Nicest Place Finalist.

Enjoy glamping in a vintage Airstream located just across the Ashley River from historic downtown Charleston in the city’s West Ashley area. The completely remodeled camper features two twin beds, smart TVs, shower, kitchenette, and a small table for eating or working. Downtown Charleston, which boasts some of the country’s top restaurants and is home to popular sites like Ft. Sumter and the Battery, is just a short drive away. Here are some other wacky places you can rent on Airbnb.

Just a quarter-mile from Black Hills National Forest and close enough for day trips to Deadwood, Badlands, Mt. Rushmore, and Custer State Park, this wood cabin in Spearfish makes a great base for exploring South Dakota. Handbuilt in the 1970s, it can host six guests with two queen beds—one in the loft and one downstairs—and a futon. Be sure to keep an eye out for wildlife like deer, foxes, eagles, and turkeys just outside your front door, and enjoy views of Spearfish Canyon out the large bay window.

Visit the home of country music and stay in a cozy cottage in the heart of Music City. The newly renovated one-bedroom, one-bathroom cottage in the South Inglewood area of East Nashville has a big patio and large backyard complete with free-roaming chickens. Inside you’ll find an open layout studio-style home with a full bed, bath with shower, and dining area. 

Experience tiny house living in this space ideal for one or two visitors. The bed is cleverly suspended from the ceiling, there’s a small sitting area, a bathroom with shower, a kitchenette, and a private outdoor deck. The home is set in one of the city’s most historic neighborhoods, Brooke Smith Heights, with bars, restaurants, and shopping. Here are more tiny houses for rent around the United States.

South Carolina – done

https://www.airbnb.com/rooms/6535475?location=Charleston%2C%20SC%2C%20United%20States

Experience tiny house living in historic Charleston, South Carolina, with a stay at The Cedar House named because of its spot next to a cedar tree. Inside these small quarters, you’ll find a loft with queen bed, full bath with rain shower, kitchen with gas stove and microwave, a desk/table, and futon that folds out into an extra bed. The owners also throw in two cruiser bikes, beach chairs, hammocks, board games, and more. The tiny home is

If you love to ski, this large condo across from Park City Mountain Resort is in the perfect spot. It’s an easy walk to the gondola, and there is an on-site ski storage unit for all your gear. Guests can also access the outdoor hot tub during ski season. The condo interior has two floors with a queen bedroom and bath and two twins with another bathroom, which can host up to six guests. See even more towns that are beautiful during winter.

A quintessential New England barn, this property sits between notable Vermont cities, like Middlebury and Burlington (both about 30 minutes away), and near the Green Mountains and Lake Champlain. While there is no kitchen, the barn’s rustic charm and unique character make up for it. There is plenty of outdoor adventure to stay entertained, but you might also consider a visit to a local winery, brewery, or cidery.

Here are some haunted places you can check out on Airbnb, if you dare.

Lay your head in a mid-century modern home inspired by Frank Lloyd Wright. The 4000-square-foot house starts at just $85 per night and can host up to 14 guests. Finer features include a chef’s kitchen, wet bar, all-season porch, and several acres to roam. Situated on Lake Whitehurst, the home is five minutes from the Chesapeake Bay and 15 minutes from Virginia Beach.

Built by the owner, this unique loft space in Beacon Hill offers radiant floor heating, a gas stove, and a large patio with hot tub. This warm and inviting space features tall ceilings and lots of natural light when the sun decides to shine in Seattle. You’ll find the bed in the upstairs loft.

Here’s your chance to stay in a school bus that’s been converted into a living space. This unique rental near Shepherdstown, West Virginia, manages to squeeze in a full bed along with a sofa, table, and wood stove. There’s even electricity, wood floor, and wood siding, but you’ll need to walk to the main house for the kitchen and bathroom.

Hang out in Milwaukee’s hip—yet historically significant—Walker’s Point district in this loft apartment over the owner’s garage. The studio apartment has a queen bed, cathedral ceilings, hardwood floors, a full kitchen with gas stove, and a full bath. Located in one of the city’s three original neighborhoods, there are some nearby homes that date back to the Civil War. The property is also close to the lakefront, theater, and museums.

Yes, you read it right! You can actually rent a sheepherders’ wagon on Airbnb. This tiny accommodation in Cody has been transformed into a sleeping area, allowing you to experience how the early settlers sometimes slept. You’ll find a bed, a table, and chairs inside, and a comfy deck just outside with views of the beautiful Wyoming landscape.

Don’t miss more popular Airbnb rentals in every state.

 





