By

Hannah Parry For Dailymail.com



and 
Associated Press






  Published:
  13:18 EDT, 12 February 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  16:27 EDT, 12 February 2018









View  comments

A Raleigh car mechanic dressed up in military uniform and chartered a helicopter, claiming he was a general on a special mission, to impress a woman he was hoping to date, a court heard.


Christian Desgroux, 57, appeared Monday before a federal magistrate on a charge of pretending to be a military officer. If found guilty, he could face up to three years in jail and a $250,000 fine.


The court heard that Desgroux had chartered the helicopter to SAS software company, in Cary, wearing full battle dress with combat patches and three stars, in November, the News and Observer reports.


Christian Desgroux, 57, appeared Monday before a federal magistrate on a charge of pretending to be a military officer

When he landed, he saluted the security guards, who saluted back.


He allegedly then told them he was picking up his companion on a secret mission from President Donald Trump, for a classified meeting at Fort Bragg.


Federal agent Tony Bell testified that Desgroux and the woman had flown around for 30 minutes before he returned to the SAS headquarters.


The woman, who hasn't been named, later told the Department of Homeland Security that she's known him for 20 years and got the impression he was trying to impress her to date her.


Desgroux flew to the headquarters of SAS software company, in Cary, Raleigh (pictured)

She said she'd been stunned when he arrived in the helicopter, as she was expecting him to pull up in a car.





'She said they did nothing,' Bell said. 'They flew around for 30 minutes. She had no idea he was flying a helicopter to pick her up.'


The pilot confirmed he flew Desgroux, who described himself a former military piot who flew Apache helicopters during the Gulf War, and his female companion, and revealed that his passenger even told him he wanted to take a trip to the White House.


This is the second time Desgroux, originally from Chile but who legally moved to the US in 1978, has chartered a helicopter in military garb to try and impress a lady.


The court heard that Desgroux had chartered a helicopter (stock image) to pick up the woman in November

Last year, Desgroux reportedly took a chopper to Jacksonville, landing at a KOA Kampground so he could meet briefly with a woman there. On that occasion, he said he wanted to land the aircraft on an airfield in Norfolk.


Desgroux, who works as a mechanic at his garage on Mt. Vernon Church Road in  north Raleigh, appeared Monday before a federal magistrate on Monday to face the charge of pretending to be a military officer.  


The judge ordered Desgroux to remain in jail pending his arraignment.


The suspect is also facing charges for unrelated alleged crimes including assault on a female last April) misuse of the 911 system and violating a domestic violence protection order, fleeing arrest and stalking.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group