The state’s district attorneys are backing a $5 million budget request on Beacon Hill for residential reentry programs designed to prevent inmates from reoffending when they’re released from custody.


Norfolk District Attorney Michael W. Morrissey’s office said Wednesday that the Massachusetts District Attorneys Association, which he currently heads, voted unanimously to support the budget outlay for the nonprofit Community Resources for Justice.



The organization would use the funds for “programs designed to decrease recidivism — the return to jail of the newly freed,” the statement said.


“The recent study of Massachusetts incarceration done by the Council of State Governments — at the request of all three branches of state government — made very clear that while we do not share in the national crisis of mass incarceration, we do have a challenge of recidivism,” Morrissey said in the release.


He said the state’s low incarceration rate is “the result of significant hard work by the Legislature, the district attorneys and other stakeholders in crafting a system that keeps incarceration and crime rates simultaneously low,” but “we can do more to reduce recidivism.”


The state’s top prosecutors, Morrissey continued, have been “working at this for quite a while. We believe Community Resources for Justice and the defense bar, in advocating here to meaningfully address recidivism, reinforce our position at a critical time; we hope this funding is written into law.”


Morrissey’s words were echoed by Suffolk District Attorney Daniel F. Conley.



“More than ever before, Suffolk prosecutors are trained and encouraged to find alternatives to incarceration,” Conley said in a separate statement. “That’s how we’ve cut the population of the Suffolk County House of Correction by 40 percent over five years. But when a defendant is sentenced to a prison or house of correction, he or she deserves a fair chance at success after release. Meaningful re-entry services are a route to that success, helping to build new lives and prevent new crimes. I fully support this budget request.”


Community Resources for Justice, based in Boston, says on its website that it “serves men and women transitioning out of prison and back into the community through a network of six residential reentry centers operated under contracts with federal, state, and county agencies. The division also runs a residential program for young adults with complex clinical needs.”





© 2018 Boston Globe Media Partners, LLC