Clara Ponsati says charges filed by Spanish authorities are 'political persecution' 

A former Catalan minister who fled Spain after last year’s independence referendum has been freed on bail after handing herself in to police in Scotland.

Clara Ponsati faces extradition after being formally arrested in Edinburgh over charges of “violent rebellion and misappropriation of public funds”.

She has described the charges – punishable with a jail term of up to 30 years – as “political persecution” and said she would fight attempts to return her to Spain.

Ms Ponsati travelled to Scotland this month to resume work as an economics lecturer at the University of St Andrews, a post she left for a role as education secretary in former Catalan president Carles Puigdemont’s government last July.

Mr Puidgement, Ms Ponsati and three other Catalan ministers fled for Belgium in October after the failed bid for secession following the independence referendum that Madrid says was illegal.

Mr Puigdemont was detained by German police while crossing from Denmark on the way to Belgium at the weekend. His arrest sparked angry protests among separatist supporters in Catalonia’s main city of Barcelona.

Ms Ponsati voluntarily attended a police station on Wednesday morning after Spanish authorities issued new European arrest warrants for the five fugitives last week. The country's Supreme Court had withdrawn previous arrest warrants in December.

She appeared at the Edinburgh Sheriff Court, before a full hearing in April.

The academic told The Independent earlier this month she had faith that Britain would not comply with Madrid’s “politically motivated” extradition request.

“I am confident British justice works, unlike Spain,” she said.

Ms Ponsati has received public support from her university and Scottish National Party leader Nicola Sturgeon, as well as thousands of people who have contributed to a crowdfunding appeal to pay for her legal fees.

Speaking outside the police station, her solicitor Aamer Anwar said: “Clara remains defiant, resolute and is determined to fight back.

“She wants to thank the many hundreds of thousands of ordinary people especially in Scotland who have shown her such love and support.

“She is truly humbled by the unconditional support from students, colleagues and the principal at St Andrews University.

“Clara wishes to thank Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish government and politicians for their solidarity. Scotland has been a true friend to Catalonia in her darkest hours.

“However it is absolutely right that the independence of the judiciary in Scotland is respected and that no government should ever interfere in that process. Clara accepts her fate now lies in the hands of the Scottish justice system.”

St Andrews described Ms Ponsati as “a valued colleague” and said it was “deeply concerned by recent developments, their motives and potential consequences”.

In a statement, the university added: “In the current circumstances, we believe there are legitimate arguments that Clara is being targeted for standing up for her political beliefs.

“That is anathema to us, and we will continue to offer her every appropriate support, while respecting due legal process.”

Ms Sturgeon has said the Scottish government “strongly oppose the Spanish government’s decision to seek the arrest and imprisonment of independence-supporting politicians”, but had no power to intervene in the case.

A crowdfunding drive to raise money for Ms Ponsati’s extradition defence reached £100,000 just over two hours after it was launched on Wednesday morning.

On Monday, a group of protesters congregated outside the Spanish consulate in Edinburgh to demonstrate against the arrest warrant and the actions of the Spanish government.

A crowd of demonstrators also showed up to support Ms Ponsati outside the police as she handed herself in.

Xavier Oliver, 35, a software engineer from Catalonia, said: “The Spanish government is using this excuse to put people in jail and let them rot.

“They should tackle the problem politically. In their minds putting people in jail on ridiculous charges is enough to change the minds of two million people.”

or register with your social account

Already have an account? Log in

You can find our Community Guidelines in full here.

Are you sure you want to submit this vote?

Are you sure you want to mark this comment as inappropriate?

Are you sure you want to delete this comment?