CCTV footage shows Jake Killick, 23, being dragged to the floor after grabbing the victim's wallet


A brave victim fought back against a homeless sex predator as he carried out a terrifying three-hour crime spree in a busy city centre.

CCTV footage shows Jake Killick, 23, grabbing the man's wallet during his rampage of robberies and sex attacks.

But as Killick calmly walks away the victim jumps on his back and drags him to the floor.

The man grabs Killick around the neck and holds him for a few moments before the attacker is able to break free and run off.

It was Killick's final crime after prowling the streets of Norwich “imposing his sexual will" on women and mugging people at random, a court heard.

A judge has warned the predator that he faces “many years” behind bars following the crime spree last March 30.

Killick denied six rapes, three robberies, sexual assault and false imprisonment with intent to commit a sexual offence.

A jury of seven men and five women found him guilty of those crimes in just over seven hours at Norwich Crown Court.

Killick was cleared of one earlier alleged rape but also found guilty of breaching a restraining order on January 5 last year.

Judge Stephen Holt adjourned sentence until March 16 and ordered reports to assess the threat the dangerous thug posed.

Killick, who didn’t give evidence and fell asleep during his trial, was warned by Judge Holt: “I have no doubt that the sentence will be a long sentence.

“You will be in prison for many years. My concern is protecting the members of the public.”

The judge ordered a psychology report and said it was up to Killick if he co-operated or not.

Judge Holt praised police who hunted him down and thanked the jury for their role in such a “difficult and very unpleasant case”.

Last night Det Insp Chris Burgess, of Norwich CID, said: “Killick went on a horrid crime spree which significantly impacted on the lives of his victims.

“These horrendous crimes will undoubtedly stay with them for a long time and I hope today’s verdict offers them a form of closure in what has been a very difficult time.

“I’ve never seen a series of crimes, so serious in nature, committed in such a short space of time.”

He added: “Killick’s actions on that day are inexcusable and he should expect to spend a considerable time behind bars where he is no longer a threat to the public.

“This case shows how the community, including businesses, can come together to bring violent offenders to justice, and I would like to thank them for their help in securing a positive outcome.”

Killick spread terror and mayhem after he was quizzed by police over the alleged rape in Thetford, Norfolk, on January 5 last year.

The maniac was questioned by cops just hours after being freed from prison.

Killick, who’s from Thetford, was homeless at the time that he launched his horrific one-man sex and robbery crime blitz in Norwich.

He began in darkness by targeting a terrified woman on her way to the train station in the early hours.

During the trial the traumatised victim told how she was grabbed by Killick on Riverside Road at about 4.35am.

She said she told him she’d like him to go away and tried to remove his arm from her shoulder.

But aggressive Killick became far more threatening and snarled at her: “You don’t touch me, I touch you.”

She said he touched her between the legs and he tried to drag her down St Matthews Road. The victim told the court: “The thought I had was that I’m going to be raped.”

She said she “grabbed hold of a road sign” and started screaming in a desperate bid to end her ordeal and get help.

“It was an absolute last-ditch attempt. I thought something horrible was going to happen at that point.

“So I was desperate to attract anyone whatever way I could so I screamed as loudly as I could.”

Killick’s next target was a woman who had been walking through Chapelfield Gardens on her way to work. He grabbed her and pulled her into an alleyway where he raped her.

The terror-stricken woman was then forced to go to Ten Bell Court in Norwich where depraved Killick repeatedly raped her. The petrified victim was told she would be “hurt and murdered” if she told anyone.

Her nightmare only came to an end when a resident opened her door and let the woman into her home.

The Good Samaritan immediately alerted police as they comforted his devastated victim. But Killick’s horror rampage did not end there.

He coolly strolled into the city centre where he sexually attacked one woman before grabbing a 16-year-old girl in St Stephens Street underpass. The terrified teenager managed to break free and escape.

Killick then robbed a man of his mobile in the Chapelfield Gardens area before snatching a phone from the ear of an unidentified victim at Norwich Bus Station.

CCTV showed him being chased by the victim and a woman who had gone to his aid. But Killick was off and on his way to stealing cash from another man in London Street.

The stunned victim could be seen fighting back on CCTV as a massive police manhunt was launched.

But Killick broke loose and headed to the railway station where he was finally arrested as cops flooded the platform while shocked rush-hour commuters looked on.

Killick has a string of previous convictions for offences including burglary, battery, threatening behaviour assaulting a police officer, criminal damage and breaching restraining orders.

At the time of the crime spree on March 30 he’d been interviewed about a rape allegation just a couple of days before.

Killick’s interview, on March 28, followed an allegation of rape on January 5 last year which was made just hours after he was released from Norwich Prison.

The trial jury heard police interviews in which Killick said he had slept rough.

He also said he had very bad anxiety and depression and was on medication, although had not taken it for four days before his astonishing rampage.