Partly cloudy with isolated thunderstorms developing this afternoon. High 91F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:54 am

Roanoke roared about getting passenger service. A new train station could be next, but those talks are barely above a whisper.


Saying the issue is too preliminary and sensitive to discuss in public, city leaders have met four times in closed session to discuss transit facilities.


What’s on deck appears to be a real estate buy, sale or trade for a new mass-transit passenger center in the next few years.


A decision isn’t imminent, Roanoke City Manager Robert Cowell said.


“It’s a pretty fairly complex set of questions that the council is really wrestling with, never mind how to pay for any of this,” Cowell said.


A modern multi-modal transit hub is a way station for riders of trains, buses and taxis. Some provide bicycle racks and lockers in a bid to support any transportation mode other than private passenger vehicles.


The closest thing the city has to such an amenity is the Campbell Court bus station, which belongs to Valley Metro, the city-owned transit operator. It’s 250 feet from the railroad tracks, but antiquated.


The land under its three floors, two of which are mostly vacant, could be put to a more productive use, Cowell said.


Earlier this decade, a paid consultant recommended construction of a $10.9 million multi-modal facility near the tracks. Campbell Court could then be decommissioned and redeveloped with stores, offices and housing, the consultant said.


City leaders delayed the launch of any project until after Amtrak service began, a decision that has produced some official regret. The launch of Amtrak service to and from Roanoke on Oct. 31 feels incomplete without a new passenger station, said city council member David Trinkle.


“I think there’s a lot of energy, there’s just not a lot of money,” Trinkle said.


The latest budget anticipates $4.5 million being available for the project, said Sherman Stovall, assistant city manager. That’s less than half of what the consultant said the facility will cost.


Cowell said the city, as the operator of Valley Metro, doesn’t own immediately available land in the area for the project, a fact that “obviously drives us into some conversation regarding some type of public-private partnership. There’s just no way that facility is going to be built without that.”


Campbell Court is a Valley Metro asset that’s part of the equation, according to Trinkle. City assessors value the bus terminal, which occupies more than an acre and has frontage on Salem and Campbell avenues, at nearly $5.4 million.


Elected leaders met for the first time behind closed doors this summer.


Acting as the sole stockholder and owner of Valley Metro, the city council met to discuss or consider the purchase of “real property” for public use or the “disposition” of the 13 real estate parcels that make up Campbell Court, or both, according to a purpose statement for the meetings.


The meeting on Sept. 18 ran for an hour and 50 minutes, the longest of the four. Valley Metro staff and city staff members were the only other people in the room, records show.


They cited an exemption to the state’s open meeting act that permits secrecy where meeting publicly would “adversely affect” its bargaining power or negotiating strategy.


Several participants declined to describe the discussions.


Even Jennifer Mitchell, who directs the Virginia Department of Rail and Public Transportation, said she had no details of the city’s depot planning when asked at the Amtrak launch celebration.


“I know they’re working on something,” she said. “We’ve asked them to keep us posted.”


Minutes of a February council budget meeting refer to “an approximately 5,000 square foot passenger station” but include no other details.


There are only four obvious spots for a passenger depot if it’s going to shift away from Campbell Court to a place immediately adjacent to the platform: the renovated buildings known as Warehouse Row, which are leased to tenants; the Roanoke Station Garage, a parking deck; the surface parking lot across from Campbell Court operated by Tennessee-based Premier Parking; and the corner of Jefferson Street and Norfolk Avenue, occupied by multiple commercial buildings with tenants.


The Jefferson/Norfolk corner is “a great location” for a station, said Walton Rutherfoord, a retired insurance executive who co-owns a pair of buildings there. “Pretty much like a gateway to downtown, right there at the foot of Jefferson Street and the new platform.”


Rutherfoord said he would possibly agree to sell the property for the right price. But the overall viability of the location is far from clear.


Rutherfoord’s property abuts another structure whose owner responded coolly to the idea of selling out for a transit center when approached by The Roanoke Times.


Seth Walters of Walters LLC, the owner of 11 Jefferson St. S.W., said his company has put “a lot” of resources into the property and it is fully leased. A more sensible place is the surface parking lot, he said.


The surface lot won favor with the city’s consultant, Wendel, which in 2015 suggested replacing the partially enclosed bus terminal with outdoor bus boarding and waiting platforms spread across the lot.


This would become the new boarding area for Valley Metro, which uses one waiting room and a boarding island cluster inside Campbell Court now, and for the intercity Greyhound bus service, also based at Campbell Court.


The transit depot itself would be built to one side under this scenario. Wendel provided the city with a 100-page report, which cost $284,000.


John Lampros, who owns the surface lot, said Friday he doesn’t want to sell it.


The Wendel plan is a bad idea anyway, said Roanoke developer Lucas Thornton, who called the outdoor boarding plaza concept “a heat island” and an “unwelcoming” use of land smack in front of people arriving on Amtrak.


Thornton declined to disclose any of what he said are four better concepts he presented to city administrators.


Rutherfoord is his father-in-law.


Though Thornton declined to show his concepts to a reporter, he has shown them to others. Lampros said Thornton showed him concepts on “nice renderings on architectural board.” One showed a tall building — perhaps 10 floors high — where Campbell Court now sits, Lampros said.


Thornton is an active developer.


He has completed Gramercy Row, a Williamson Road apartment complex; Big Lick Junction, which houses Community High School and apartments; and renovations of the former Boxley building for student housing and apartments.


Here’s a possible sequence for the decisions that lie ahead.


Valley Metro, which carries more than 7,000 riders a day six days a week, is under review until spring for possible changes.


Its current bus routes are like spokes that tie remote parts of Roanoke, Vinton, Salem and a small part of Roanoke County to the Campbell Court hub.


A depiction of possible future system improvements recommended building eight small transfer pads dispersed across an expanded network, rather than operating Campbell Court as the only hub, which has been the layout since the mid-1980s.


A detailed report is due out next year.


Only after experts weigh in could city officials know whether to build a new passenger center the same size as Campbell Court. It is possible it could be smaller and still accommodate Amtrak users, Cowell said. That information must be in hand before tackling the project, he said.


Council member John Garland said he likes the possibility of shutting down Campbell Court.


“I hate Campbell Court,” Garland said. “I’ve called it from the time I was running for council the ‘abominable abyss.’ To me that’s exactly what it is. It’s like a big, dark dungeon that you got to walk in to the catch the bus. That block of Campbell Avenue is a block in downtown that people try to avoid.”


The bathrooms? “Despicable,” Garland said. “It looks like they have correctional, jail-type plumbing fixtures down there.


“Whoever rides the bus deserves a decent place to go into,” he said.


In a move that appears to buy the city time, bathroom renovations began last week.


Reporter Matt Chittum contributed information to this report.


Jeff Sturgeon covers business, banking, transportation and federal court. Phone: (540) 981-3251. Email: jeff.sturgeon@roanoke.com. Mail: 201 W. Campbell Ave., Roanoke, VA 24011.


                                    
                                        Whenever Jeff Sturgeon posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.