Two women, one of whom is a lawyer, were arraigned Thursday on charges that they worked together to smuggle Suboxone into the Plymouth County House of Correction last week for an inmate, officials said.


Attorney Elana Gordon, 42, of Bridgewater, pleaded not guilty to possession with intent to distribute Class B, Suboxone, conspiracy to violate drug laws, and delivering drugs to a prison, according the Plymouth District Court. 


Gordon was arrested Wednesday night in connection with “a several-months-long investigation . . . into smuggling of contraband substances” at courthouses and the jail, prosecutors said.


Investigators said that on May 4, Gordon“utilized her attorney privileges to gain entrance to the jail and meet with an inmate who is not her client.”


“Gordon brought 61 Suboxone strips in two manila envelopes and allegedly passed them to an inmate,” prosecutors said. “The inmate returned to his cell with the envelopes before they were seized by investigators.”



Minoska Bello, 20, of Roslindale, who has a relative inside the prison, allegedly “conspired with Gordon to make arrangements for the delivery of those substances,” prosecutors said.


Bello turned herself in at the Plymouth District Court on Thursday, and pleaded not guilty to conspiracy to violate drug laws and accessory before the fact of delivering drugs to a prisoner, according to prosecutors.


On Wednesday, William Holts, 51, a corrections officer at Massachusetts Correctional Institute in Norfolk, was charged with allegedly plotting to smuggle more than 100 Suboxone strips into the state prison for an inmate.


Holts allegedly agreed to trade the Suboxone for $2,000 and previously brought in other contraband for the prisoner, prosecutors said. 


Suboxone, a Class III controlled substance used to treat heroin addiction, is frequently smuggled into lockups nationwide, according to authorities.


Gordon was admitted to the Massachusetts bar in 2012, according to the state Board of Bar Overseers website. The site on Thursday listed disciplinary proceedings “pending” against Gordon as of September 2017. 


Gordon was ordered held on $1,000 bail, according to prosecutors. She was ordered to wear a GPS monitoring bracelet and to not contact any inmates or correctional facilities in the state. Bello was released on personal recognizance.


Gordon is due back in court on June 11; Bello is due back on June 19.





© 2018 Boston Globe Media Partners, LLC