That Obrador wanting to run for President of Mexico, said if elected he will request Amesty, for the criminals in prison. That's dumb he is not in favor of the death penalty.


His numbers may soon dwindle due to his poor performance at the debate. Added with the controversial issue of amnesty. Anaya is close enough to make a surprisingly defeat if he plays his cards right. E42 


8:55 decriminalizing drug trafficking and addiction  does not mean impunity for criminals, also letting go of minor delinquents that owe 1 000 pesos fines or bonds would release law enforcement and prison space for the worst criminals, don't believe communist propaganda and read more about AMLO's platform, because it looks like somebody fed you the wrong koool-aid


Most people are just worrying about the drug/narco culture, but what really needs to change is the actual Mexican government/politicians.  México has enough resources to be one of the best countries in the world.  Money, money wouldn’t be a problem, if only, and only if all the government/politicians wouldn’t steal the Mexican citizens money. And yet, everybody is worrying about cartels, as a distraction, and if not that, a soccer game, lol. 


Interesting comment @9:48I recall many many years back when a celebrity believe to be Veronica Castro or something of similar to last name. She spoke on behalf of its citizens. Objectively  and criticizing the Mexican government for the lack of not doing enough on a tv show. Which resulted with a ban on her appearance for some time by government. Government censorship has eased up since then but still exists if pushed to do so. E42


Its called televisa.


“thinking out of the box”-Limit children that couples can have to 3 in order to curb the manpower of cartels(this could mean subsidized birth control or punishment)-introduce philosophy, logic/morals/ethics, finance, education on nutrition, a code of honor system into all levels of education-maybe introduce nationalism into the public conscious so citizens can ultimately care for one another and hopefully this will inject a sense of self-awareness into Mexicans-Mexico need to look deeply into Successful countries(low crime/high IQ/high standards of living) and take inspiration from them-schools should offer sports after school time to keep children fit and help those parents that have to work.-possibly, fully legalize drugs(this could easily be a slippery slope but hopefully my recommendation of altering the educational system limits the damage-jail and specifically prison should be seen as rehabilitation and not punishment. This will hopefully result in education for criminals but still limiting their freedoms.-execute criminals that keep going to jail(this only applies to people above the age of 24) which means 5 entries into jail/prison. people under that age will have an allowance of 5 offenses, if they reach that limit then they will be held in prison until the age of 24.This will deter crime and will hopefully jolt people into caring how their loved ones act-kill kingpins, sicarios, and drug dealers that are caught and currently in prison. Offenders can only be killed if the courts have 100% proof of the offenses. This will hopefully give a bleak and grim connotation to those that are thinking of joining a gang.When it comes to executing someone I've always been for a bullet to the head and cremating the body. This is cost affective, humane, and saves on space.


@10:05AM  Mexican birth rate is 2.1 (just about the same as US)  But even the idea would take more than decade to make any difference.  Those 3 babies have to grow up to at least early teens to be of any use to cartels.  Many of your recommendations regarding education show a lack of familiarity with Mexico. Drive by any school after classes let out and you will see the "futball (soccer team practicing Baseball and basketball are also popular.  Many of the subjects you propose to add to the curriculum are a pipe dream because they are beyond the comprehension of younger students.  A large percentage do not finish secondary school (or just don't go on to high school. I think the number is only 20 or 25 percent graduate from high school.  But your concept of drastically improving the educational system is spot on.  The Mexican Constitution already specifically says that incarceration shall be for rehabilitation and not for punishment. (hasn't worked to well has it).  Your proposal for Capos, sicarios  is not that different than mine except you prefer a bullet rather than a noose and yours is done behind prison walls.  Mine achieves humiliating them by hanging them in public and also in doing it in mass to get the other criminals attention make them realize that could happen to them. 


Rehabilitation has not worked in the US for some time. Most programs for educational purposes and trade programs have been eliminated. So rehabilitation for those have no way to succeed in society upon release. Moreover, the discrimination practices which continue by employers towards those individuals with a criminal record for a second opportunity to become productive members in society. IMO a repetitive cycle which has led to more ex- criminals to be recycled back into the judiciary system. Mexico has always lacked funding and resources to indicate prison systems actually rehabilitate. Overcrowding and poor housing conditions have allocated funds to other areas of dire needs. E42


 Batallion 3-16 Honduras, had the solution to the problems of drug addicts, drug traffickers, communists, guerrillas and the need to show work to get free days and furloughs from work, killing innocent citizens helped until people denounced the situation.Widely practised kidnappings, torture, extra-judiciary executions, are still denied all over LatinAmerica, specially now in mexico, but the US government has declassified "documents" full of reports from US government agents and Human Rights organizations that were suppressed for years, president Bill Clinton released a lot of them. Google: Latin American governments Death Squads.But there is hope, as soon as the involvement of the government destination squads is exposed, peace envoys propose the creation of commissions of trutb for peace and justice that forgives the worst criminals involved, military intelligence/ counter-intelligence, police and military sponsored and blessed by their government.Colombia excelled specially with alvaro uribe velez' autodefensas, guerrillas, FSRC, FMLN, paracos, milicos and a polesia nacional that rented police academy cadets by the hour or by the night, day, week, whatever you needed, from a catalog of fotos.  Even South Africa still has its truth commissions trying to save some face for the biggest SA criminals, so, the sooner they are exposed the sooner they start proposing the reconciliation through tokens of Decency.Meanwhile we can keep blaming the big bad evil narcos until Jesus comes back.


I like that idea of guillotine..in a pubic square. To cartel members and corrupt -cops public officials soldiers- it would send a strong message and put a slow down to all this mayhem!!!


A little barbaric and inhumane don’t you think? Humanity should not revert to the days of a civilization whose lack for human rights are displayed. E42   


@5:36 War is barbaric and inhumane but sometimes it is necessary. When Mexico became the 2nd or 3rd most dangerous country in the world, I think it is time for it take drastic and bold action to stop the spiraling violence now, not in 1 or 2 more decades.  Yes the human rights organizations will scream and condemn Mexico.  But the people of Mexico will stand up and cheer "Viva Mexico".  They will regain respect and trust in their govt. for doing something to stop the killings. not just talking and making promises.   From there they can move on to solving some of Mexico's problems.  


I see your point dd. Totally agree with your opinion of war being barbaric and inhumane.Moreover, actions that are necessary. However, war is not barbaric nor inhumane where the sounds of drums and trumpets are emanating. This reference pertains to wars of Nations.A justification for the atrocities that will be committed under law. ....,., Voltaire E42  


Mexico is not the dangerous barbaric part, --the Mexican government and its military and police and politicians that get to spend the 2 or 3 billion dollars the US feed them "to help fight crime" with their brand of terrorism of state, public corruption and narco-terrorism.Mexico is not about that like the American people are not guilty of its government crimes around the world.--DD, Why are you sponsoring more killings rather than due process? Have you got your contract on mexico?


Everything you describe of barbarism already is perpetrated by the gob and in more inhumane matters than has been described above. What are missing are just and open trials.  


This comment has been removed by the author.


It's silly to talk about this sort of thing, because you can't impose any type of penalty, even a slap on the wrist, unless the criminal is arrested and tried. And do you REALLY trust Mexico's criminal justice system to make decisions about peoples' lives?


NOOOO death penalty for Mexico. In a country where the Napoleonic Law "guilty until proven innocent", applies this is the stupidest idea of all!You want people to stop the killings? Then fight to stop consumption and or better wages across the country and hold politicians accountable for their promises also. Not easy to do but not entirely impossible either.


Well said.


10:21 you’re right. May I add schools for kids and parents too, 


2:31 no money for public schools for kids or parents, it all gets stolen and put in US Banks and real estate properties like La Chuky's but now the US is fighting for the education budget with their education reform to privatize all the money right away instead of wasting it on ignorant mexican oligarchs


10:21 - Completely agree.Phelpso


Stop the apologies.  Mexico has been Mexico for hundreds of years.  Blame the Spanish.  Blame Moors. Blame Aztecs.  Blame on.......stand up first.  Accept responsibility.  Look at the border.  Catholic nuns are the liberal heroes.  They should go to Mexico.  Evangelize from the inside.  I support Catholism but. ...Catholic priest trying to save the 1 sheep.  Loosing 99.


@4:07 no fuckin apologies here. Just stop consumption and stop with the barbaric thoughts of executions for the sake of "saving" drug addicts lives. One life is not worth more than another!


Barbaric? What the hell are you talking about? The cartels need to die, this is not barbaric at all. Even if drugs were legalized they would continue to oppress the population with other crimes such as kidnapping, extortions, human trafficking ecc. their greed knows no boundaries.  Put them all to death. Period.


Death Penalty should be a form of punishment in Mexico, do as they do in Texas, an eye for and eye. I'm troubled by the comments made by AMLO, he seems likely to win the presidential election. Give amnesty to those cowards that commit horrendous crimes? Ridiculous. 


But is punishment a deterrent???


@10:13AM Punishment is not a deterrent unless the criminal is afraid of it.  typically they are not afraid of incarceration, nor even the death penalty because they think it can't happen to them.  BUT if you hang 100 if them at a time in a very public place , some of the others (not all) will have second thoughts about that "could happen to me".  Add to that they will see many of them hanging from a gallows pee in their pants and defecate while they twitch at the end of that rope.  They may fear that humilation more than anything.  It might also make some kids decide they don't really want "the life" if they could end up like that.  Those kind of hangings, say once a week would definitely make recruiting by the cartels a lot harder.  


Thanks, dd.


Hang police and military commanders for incompetence, THAT WOULD LIGHT up A BIG piece of coal up their ass , hanging their Commander in Chief and secretary of defense would be priceless, maybe we could use some "real smart narcos" to do their work for them from inside their prison cells.


10:13 Every time you get rid of one of these cold blooded bastards , you saved lives . Deterrent ? Probably not for most but he will be gone and will cause no more problems . Better paying jobs ? Might help keep the petty criminal straight . Not going to change the evil people from acting evil .Its what they are 


Sounds good to me, and is pretty much what I have been suggesting as well. You can't rehabilitate someone that has no empathy, rehabilitation requires a sense of guilt and having done wrong. Instead of mass incarceration, and the monetary drain it creates, the government would simply be visiting punishment less heinous than the act that brought the individual to court in the first place. It is hard to argue "cruel and unusual punishment" with regards to hanging for an individual that has tortured and dismembered someone.KB


Hi KB, not sure your comment about monetary drain is correct. If you add up all of the legal fees that are involved in pretty much every death sentence's appeals, of which there are many, it costs more to kill someone than it does to incarcerate them for life.Most experts I have read agree that the death sentence itself is not a deterrent to murder, statistics prove such to be correct.So if its not a deterrent, and is more expensive in the long run, why do countries do it?It certainly is an emotive subject.


Its just More expensive because The trials Are delayed. Staying 15 years on DR is nit decreasing costs.Everyone who got life without parol should get killed instead of wasting tax Money.


Frankly, the appeals process is borked when it allows criminals to live long past when they should have been put to death. I understand not wanting to kill an innocent person, but 2-3 appeals should not take 30+ years and if you can't prove you are innocent with 2-3 tries, after having been proven guilty, you are unlikely to do so with further chances. It takes more time and money because we entertain their bullshit; we do not take decades to put down a rabid animal after we have determined they are rabid, yet we are willing to do so for humans that can be far more cruel than any wild animal.Most federal trials take 4 days to 2 weeks after they start (death penalty ones do tend to be longer though). State trials tend to be about the same length, but also involve more appeals. Time after submission to be heard by the US Supreme Court tends to be 12-24 months. Overall it can take 20+ years to go through the entire process for most criminals, and a lot of that time is spent waiting to find a lawyer willing to work for little, or no, pay compared to what they usually make. That's where most of the cost is, the incarceration time waiting on appeals, having to pay lawyers to review the cases (usually takes years there too), etc.I have to question the experts on the death penalty not being a deterrent though. It may not be so for those who lack empathy, but death sure as hell scares most people. There is a reason many criminals flip to get reduced sentences, and it's not just the threat of a long jail sentence. The reason it isn't much of a deterrent in Western nations is more likely because it takes so long to carry out the sentence. Most of the "experts" I have read are big on presenting evidence that the death penalty doesn't deter crime, but they rarely go into why, and they carefully leave out countries where the execution is swift after punishment in their assessments. We also care too damn much about how much pain someone is in when put to death. The drugs used are expensive as heck; hangings, guillotine, and firing squads are much cheaper. The concept of "cruel and unusual" should take into account the method(s) used by the guilty individual to commit their crime(s) and anything less cruel or unusual should not be considered so when searching for the method of death used on them.KB


The countries that are using the death penalty don't bother with all the appeals.  They just kill them and get it over with.


well we are talking about the death sentence in Mexico, not other countries, since the new Mexican law system is based on the current US system, one would think that the appeals process for death sentences would be similar.Given that, of all the articles I have read on the death sentence, as this is not the first time this subject has been raised in reader comments here, I can see nobody that actually releases any data to say that the death sentence is a deterrent.Does someone taking a life, justify taking their life in return? Im referring here to the judicial system here, and not someone defending their life against an attacker.As a Christian country, the religious position is to turn the other cheek, not to go old testament and an eye for an eye.If a criminal knows that the crime he committed carries the death sentence, is he more likely to shoot it out with law enforcement, and does this lead to the death of more officers on duty? There are many knock on effects of the death sentence, that make it hard to justify.As regards the method, if you are to do it, I would say hanging, as done in the far east, and in the UK up to the 1960's is a humane enough method, if the hangman knows his job, weight vs length of drop. Its certainly a lot cheaper than lethal injection.The finality of the death sentence is also a problem when we find that 4.1 percent of all people executed were then found to be innocent. That is twice the number of people who were exonerated. 


https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/documents/FactSheet.pdf


I have lived in Mexico as an ex patriot for nearly twenty years. I also have worked in several of the prisons here as a Christian missionary.  I've been a participant here on BB for about ten years as well.  I am personally acquainted with many Mexican men who have served time in the prisons.  In other words, I have some personal knowledge of the situation here.  In my opinion, the problem in Mexico isn't so much with the laws that are in place, but it's in the enforcement of them.  The truth is that most crimes are never prosecuted here.  Murderers kill people knowing that they'll never be prosecuted.  The justice system is fully corrupt.  The municipal police departments are owned by whatever cartel owns the plaza in which they work.  State and Federal police aren't much better.  The Army is corrupt. The Navy, not so much.  Changing laws will produce nothing.  The people of Mexico need to take back their country.  That, in my opinion, is the only answer.  How is the question.


Would likely require a revolution or outside intervention. The first solution is rather difficult in a country where gun ownership is effectively illegal though; that should be a lesson to people in other countries looking to take firearms from the law-abiding by the way...KB


@7:42AM Those countries thinking of banning guns might also look at countries like the UK and Australia that have effectively banned gun ownership and in doing so drastically reduced the homicide rate.


@9:41They have reduced the gun death rate, not the overall homicide rate. And with a gun you can have chances if you are attacked, if you are disarmed even wo thugs with knives would kill yo effortlessly. 


Well in the UK they have only banned pistols, and semi automatic rifles above .22 hornet in caliber. You can still buy semi autos in .22 LR and .22 mag.


The truth is it's the women in Mexico that have the balls.  The attitude of most of the men is, "no pase nada."


Hanging from their chins.


Vote for AMLO.


Yeah vote for AMLO.the man who wants a pardon for all criminals...let him win so we can have civil war. 


What's else can you do??? The hug a thug technique is not working for Mexicans living in this hell..


Public hanging.-Sol Prendido


Drastic times call for drastic measures


Interesting post dd.One thing is clearly visible today in many parts of the world; that implementations of laws and amendments are often applied due to circumstances facing the security of ones nation. This  proposal for the death penalty for those individuals whom you speak of should be applied. As long it’s applied fairly and unbiased. Furthermore,, through a judiciary system that allows individuals with rights to defend oneself in court accordingly. Killing one without due process will be no different from those who commit such atrocities. Besides there may be a curtailment for those who may want to participate in such behavior.There are many legal battles brewing here in the US; Gun control, privacy issues pertaining cyber information / security ect.Despite such implementations erected there will be many who oppose. Unfortunately, we cannot make everyone happy. A given truth of life. Well you are aware of my stance pertaining Amnesty for those narcos. Admittance of such atrocities can’t be overshadowed by form of forgiveness. E42


@E42Gun control????? Ahahahahahaha it has worked well in Mexico https://mises.org/wire/borderland-homicides-show-mexicos-gun-control-has-failedFor the narcos, i mean.... Tell the narcos to try and do that shit in the USA with 300 millions of guns around where many citizens are just as well armed as the narcos gunmen (but they are much more in numbers) and see what happens.The Narcos in Mexico are very happy about the gun control in the country. They can bully the population without having to fear anything, because the government is in cahoots with them and most normal people don’t have the means to fight back.Let me quote from the article “The pre-packaged retort to this phenomena often repeated in the media is that the US causes the high homicide rates in Mexico by exporting guns to Mexico. We're told that criminals go into the US, buy guns legally in Texas (for example) and then sell the guns illegally to cartels in Mexico. Dave Kopel has shown that this claim isn't true. But, even if it were true, it wouldn't explain much by itself since we're left asking ourselves why criminals don' just do the same thing to the same homicidal effect in the United States. If it's so fruitful for violent criminals to buy guns in the US and sell them to organized crime rings, why aren't those criminals doing the same thing in the US? Well, the answer is the criminals probably are are well armed in the US, and have a lot of guns just like criminals in Mexico do. The difference in actual crimes carried out, however, likely lies in the fact that law abiding Mexicans have been disarmed, while law abiding Americans have not. Gun laws are very restrictive in Mexico, as The Atlantic notes: Mexico can hardly be described as a heavily armed society. With around 2.5 million registered gun owners and at least 13 million more illegal arms in circulation, the country has a ratio of just 15 guns for every 100 people, well below the global average. Unlike in the U.S., civilian possession in Mexico is considered a privilege, not a right and is tightly regulated under federal law since the 1970s. Extensive background checks are required of all purchasers, and there are heavy penalties and even imprisonment for non-compliance. Astonishingly, there is just one legal gun shop in the country, compared to more than 54,000 federally licensed firearm dealers and thousands of pawnshops and gun shows scattered across the U.S.In other words, in Mexico, there is an immense asymmetry in gun ownership between violent criminals and law-abiding citizens. Criminals have abundant access to the means of violent coercion, and the will to use it. Ordinary citizens, on the other hand, have, practically speaking, no access. Meanwhile, local officials can be bought by the criminals, which means that private citizens will then find themselves facing two heavily armed groups who are free to behave maliciously toward the general population with little fear of reprisals. The Atlantic author notes that in Mexico, there are about 15 guns per 100 persons, which is likely referencing the data released by the Small Arms Survey. The same survey estimates that, by contrast, there are from 88 to 100 guns per 100  persons in the United States. The US far outpaces even gun-friendly Switzerland which has about 45 guns per 100 persons”.


Interesting comment.Note: I am a strong supporter of the second amendment. Family members carry FOID cards and in process of obtaining carry and conceal permits. As long as gun ownership display safety requirements and abide to the laws. I have no objections. Reference of past comments are regarding legal issues which are brewing nothing more. E42


DD: Great discussion issues!  I will post my reactions later on, after I give your important questions the deeper thinking they deserve. I hope to see many responses.Mexico-Watcher


Chivis we both know this would not be the answer maybe if we had law abiding police judge's you get the point. With what we have in our criminal sytem as the authority are just about as crooked as the rest. Innocent people would die left and right.


And that’s why honest people should raise their fists and fight back. We can’t rely on the government.


I agree.  No death penalty for Mexico it would be lethal to law abiding citizens who are "in the way" and social activists for starters.  there would be no living autodefensas...for sure


@ChivisWhat about El Marino Loco? That man was an idol, what is he doing now? Don’t tell me he is dead.


The current practice of death penalty as applied by the Mexican melitary and polesias and their myriad private security corporation like the 6 private security corporations run by former SSO veracruz state Arturo Bermudez zurita. now he still runs them from prison where yunes linares keeps him as his private singing parrot. 


Sorry but mexico already has DP. Last year, close to 30.000 death sentenced enforced in mexico. Mexican judges, prosecutors, police etc. are bribed, so how could DP help with this?Stalin once said, ...kill a few to scare thousends.Going after a bunch of narcos will only help if you also go after the worst politicians, judges...!Prison system requires improvements, increase min.wages and salary for the police. Mexico needs a much broader approach to fight all these things.But it is still not time for change, things aren't bad enough.elranarene


However, Stalin did not take into account that killing doesn't scare anyone when it comes to money and addiction. Different times.


Bank robber, terrorist, murderer, ladiesman Joseph Stalin escaped Siberia like 5 times, he was also a colleague of mine, a process operations technician specialized in shoveling boatloads of dirty mud on russia's oil fields probably with the Koch Brothers daddy developer of gasoline refineries for El Padrecito...


There will always be violence no matter what because of corruption  but Mexico needs advice from Colombia to control the  situation but then again I think the u.s is feeding of Mexico’s violence. I just don’t get it, if the u.s is so Nosy with other countries going into their territories but they won’t do it to Mexico? Maybe the u.s is already controlling Mexico in one way or another. Funny how the U.S has the right to own firearms but not there next door neighbor (Mexico) $$$Note: I’m not anti-government or none of that, I’m just going with the Obvious maybe I’m wrong 


Mexico doesn’t want help from the US and in the US it would not be seen as politically correct to be nosy in the affairs of a country that borders the USA... if Mexico did use help from the USA then maybe there wouldn’t be the build the wall campaign?? Mexico has be dropping off their illegal immigrates from Central America at the US border for years..  remember La Bestia??  An estimated half million per year ride La Bestia or el tren de la muerte as Mexico turns a blind eye... reminds one of Cuba dumping its criminals onto south Florida’s beaches... so if those countries are gonna play that game maybe the US should play hardball as well...but it would be easier if Mexico would just ask or cooperate...Allow Mexican citizens to arm themselves adequately just as the criminals do... taking a knife to a gunfight doesn’t work and in Mexico the pen is not mightier than the gun as evidenced by the murders of multiple journalists... the death penalty is used to instill fear into innocent people in Mexico so use it as well to do the same to the criminals... criminals run their businesses from Mexican jails but can they do it from a Mexican grave???GC 


This comment has been removed by a blog administrator.


9:51 hiding the truth will not help fix things, what, can't we handle the truth anymore?


I believe Mexico is too currupt right now pick up the death penalty. It's gonna be abused and witch ever cartel has backing from government will abuse the power. Everybody dies. 


Law and order  starts with our leaders. Without honest Leadership u Can't expect people to be honest and follow the the Rule Of law. God Bless Mexico Hope I can go back in peace someday


Burned alive like int the middle east


I am all for killing the scumbags as Chivo said, BUT, we live in Mexico, where any polititian can blame someone as a sicario and get rid of him, and with someone as AMLO up in the polls, this is a NO-NO. I get the idea, but the fact Marinas have been killing golfos, zetas, and treviños all over tamps(And I´m all for this BTW) and still they keep recruiting young idiots, so I´m not sure this is a good idea AS OF NOW. 


“I am all for killing the scumbags as Chivo said, BUT, we live in Mexico, where any polititian can blame someone as a sicario and get rid of him,”That’s why there is the need of a civil war, of an armed popular revolution. 


Luis Donald Colossio got the DP applied to him, but Carlos Salinas de Gortari had been murdering friend and foe since he was a young minister in de la madrid's bed


BTW, DD, what do you think of the proposed amnisty by AMLO? Do you think guys like those that killed the 3 students in Jalisco deserve some kind of amnisty?


Popular revolution is what needs to happen in Mexico. The autodefensas groups are kicking the cartels asses, but there should be more of them http://time.com/5755/mexico-vigilantes-knights-templar-cartel-michoacan/Mexican citizens are much more than the cartels, if they fight back, the cartels will go down, and what the cartels are doing in Mexico wouldn’t even be remotely possible in the USA, because you are not going to subdue an armed population (not to mention that neither the American government nor any european government would allow the cartels to have such power).To prove this point, Don Ajelo took down several cartels cumridden scumfucks http://www.borderlandbeat.com/2010/11/mexican-marines-reconstruct-death-of.html , now imagine what would happen if the entire population raised their firsts against the cartels shitbags.Here is the thing: the cartels need to die, but this is not going to happen as long as most Mexicans aren’t willing to fight back. because we know that the cartels in Mexico have state-like power, and most of the government is in cahoots with them (otherwise they wouldn’t have even a 1000th of the power they have), so a  popular revolution is the only way, to get rid of the cartels and this criminal political class. They need to create a country where the rule of the law prevails and where the citizens can actually trust their government, a country where no criminal syndicates is more powerful than the state itself.  And to achieve this goal, a massive bloodbath is required, there is no other solution.The cartels scumfucks would continue to ravage the country even if all drugs were legalized, they would just resort to human trafficking and the like, and they would increase their kidnapping activities. How do you think that rotten jizzbags who butchered people and skinned them alive will fit into society? They just have to be exterminated.In your article you talked about the rule of the law, but the rule of the law isn’t going to work where there is so much corruption.To establish the rule of the law, you need to get rid of the monsters who are ravaging the country first.


Revolutions always make things worse.


Impossible too much greed. Here's my OpinioN on your comment 1st stop consumption, how do u get rid of a commodity. 2nd better wages means bigger extortions, piso, fines,etc again greed humans are not satisfied with contempt majority hungers for more  And that just my thought. 3rd Hold politicians accountable how and who's going to do it? Government? Politicians? Public ? Vatican? Cartels?U.S.? Here's the thing remember like in any history fixing the problem has no profit and doing too much good you will  get wacked shot called by the elites .Listen boys girls ladies and gentlemen  Mexico is another chess piece of the elites and there the true Narcos. It's controlled from top and if wanted bottom included. My Mexican folks you have power by strength in the numbers physical mental all around key is don't be a slave no more that goes from every level of your society Rise and open your eyes and keep them open use the gifts our heavenly father gave each and all make a change think globally act locally.


Nice input.However, I have to admit that the lower house of Congress passed a bill overwhelmingly that abolishes the impunity of any government official from prosecution ( including the president ). Hopefully passed by the upper house soon. Better wages is direly needed to combat the criminal behavioral practices which are factors why many partake.Do admit the masses of its citizens do outweigh those criminal / political powers which have inflicted the issues facing Mexico today. Nevertheless, I must incline against foreign governments to resolve owns issues due to profiting for certain incentives and not in the interests of its citizens.Greed has always been the culprit for many of these issues. Politcal and business investments have taken advantage of many to undermine its constituents with nothing. A practice called capitalism. E42 


Popular revolution is what needs to happen in Mexico. The autodefensas groups are kicking the cartels asses, but there should be more of them http://time.com/5755/mexico-vigilantes-knights-templar-cartel-michoacan/Mexican citizens are much more than the cartels, if they fight back, the cartels will go down, and what the cartels are doing in Mexico wouldn’t even be remotely possible in the USA, because you are not going to subdue an armed population (not to mention that neither the American government nor any european government would allow the cartels to have such power).To prove this point, Don Ajelo took down several cartels cumridden scumfucks http://www.borderlandbeat.com/2010/11/mexican-marines-reconstruct-death-of.html , now imagine what would happen if the entire population raised their firsts against the cartels shitbags.Here is the thing: the cartels need to die, but this is not going to happen as long as most Mexicans aren’t willing to fight back. because we know that the cartels in Mexico have state-like power, and most of the government is in cahoots with them (otherwise they wouldn’t have even a 1000th of the power they have), so a  popular revolution is the only way, to get rid of the cartels and this criminal political class. They need to create a country where the rule of the law prevails and where the citizens can actually trust their government, a country where no criminal syndicates is more powerful than the state itself.  And to achieve this goal, a massive bloodbath is required, there is no other solution.The cartels scumfucks would continue to ravage the country even if all drugs were legalized, they would just resort to human trafficking and the like, and they would increase their kidnapping activities. How do you think that rotten jizzbags who butchered people and skinned them alive will fit into society? They just have to be exterminated.In your article you talked about the rule of the law, but it’s not possible to enforce the rule of the law when most of the government is ruled by the cartels. To establish the rule of the law you need to destroy the monsters who are ravaging the country first.


Nope.


@8:06Yep. That’s the only thing that can work. But if you think that allowing the monsters who are running the country to continue without resistance will solve things, be my guest.


Revolution will open the gates of hell.


It can hardly become more hellish than now, where the country is run by psychopaths. To change things, to build a corruption free state, either a revolution or a fascist coup d’etat is needed.  Period.


The fat black spider is the government, it is full of greed, and will sqeeze all the money,it can while in power. It also needs the criminal Cartels, which helps it, in strength. Anything you do yo the spider, won't kill it.


Holy crap. Anonymous. Couldve wrote his own article


Cartels are responsible for more than 50% of the Mexican economy. If you get rid of them the entire country will collapse. 


Not sure your numbers stack up, Mexico's legal exports are worth 290 billion dollars worth of goods annually, Pemex put 66 billion into the economy annually, drug trafficking is 30 billion dollars. Legal exports put 10 times more into the economy, and not all the drug traffickers money is laundered and paid tax on. 


4:48 popular revolutions get creamed a balazos or by economic blockades when nobody can get their hands on foods or toilet paper, ask Cuba or Venezuela and Chile how their popular revolutions are going...


Otis B Fly-Wheel, this is according to official figures. Real income is 4-6 times more.The Sinaloa cartel laundered 378 billion dollars in the bank of Wachovia from 2004 to 2007 year.The bank HSBC processed at least $881m in cash for Mexico's Sinaloa cartel.  Western Union suspected of laundering $ 250 billion mexican cartels!who knows how much they earn...


Otis B Fly-Wheel, In addition the helping the banks, these gangs help certain industries and local businesses. The gangs have helped businesses selling luxury goods, such as cars, thrive because they use their money to buy such goods. As another example, a strip of very fancy boutiques in Zaponan has been thriving because of the drug cartels. Gang members have and continue to help many individuals and groups with their businesses in Mexico. Global Envision reported that “the loss of the drug business would shrink Mexico’s economy by 63 percent.” Others say that as much as 20% of Mexico’s GDP is a result of the drug cartels (in 2010-2011 years).


US Customs and Border Protection Americans spent $109 billion on illegal drugs according to a new study prepared by the RAND. Mexican cartels earn $ 30 billion out of $ 109 billion.This estimate could be low. According to a report in the International Business Times:An analysis of recent surveys and research studies places the size of the illegal U.S. drug market at $200 billion to $750 billion per year, with most estimates coming in between $400 billion and $500 billion (in 2013 year).The analysis was done by ConvergE Group, a global brokerage based in New York90% of the wholesale drug market in the US is controlled by Mexican cartels. 25-30% of the total income of drugs belongs to Mexican cartelsDo the math and stop believing in this shit.


@3:28PM  What is the point of your comment?  What "shit" is that we are to quit believing?  What does any of that have to do with this article?  I made clear that the proposed solution was for cartel related homicides and had nothing to do with trafficking or using drugs.  


@2:27PM  Maybe Mexico needs to direct their economic growth plans to attract legal economic growth.  I don't think a higher GDP and helping the banks and luxury car dealers is worth the price of the 200,000 murdered in the drug war.  


3:28That is NO WHERE near 50% of Mexico's economy.


@7:57 AMIf you think that forcing the good guys to not do anything and endure what the cartels are king without retaliations is a good idea, i have to disagree. As long as those who are running the country aren’t replaced (and they won’t be replaced without violence), it will continue to be a shithole, where a solution to the problem of the drug cartel is impossibile because the government is in cahoots with them. A government run by the marina would be much better, they aren’t as corrupt as the rest. But they need help to do that, if the population starts a revolution then maybe the marina can make a coupe d’etat.Democracy is not going to solve shit in the current situation of Mexico. On the other hand, a revolution of the good guys can solve things. Look at what the autodefensas have done in many places, where they have built many “cartel free” zones. 


3:28 pm quote from you...US Costoms and Border Protection spent $109 billion on illegal drugs. Looks like your smoking a prohibited pipe.


There is never "good guys" in revolutions - that would cause more harm.


@ DD word@2:27 I would agree that 20% figure


@2:17 over what time period, we are talking about billions per year for GDP


3:28 In spite of all that trillion dollars Mexican drug traffickers made, No gigantic Mexican bank has ever been fined for any money laundering, not at the top ten. Believe me...--RAND Corp is only inflating their usual BS to earn themselves one more Contract of another poor broke ass country from their country's government behind the backs of the American people they lord it over...


“ There is never "good guys" in revolutions - that would cause more harm.”Leaving things as they are is better, i suppose. And yes, there are the good guys, the autodefensas are good guys for example. A revolution would just be them having more power and men to rely on.


No one said leave things as they are. Autodefensas don't know jack about governing or politcs. They would soon get intoxicated with power.


How can the criminals who are running the country (both in the cartels and in the government) be overthrown if not with force? I say that a popular revolution is needed, and then the marines should take control of the government. They are the most trusted in the country and the less subjected to corruption. But as soon as the current psychopaths and criminals who are running the country aren’t overthrown, things won’t change.


People that join cartels as sicarios have no fucking respect for themselves their life or family neither their boss give fuck about them he has already other 10 poor young souls that are going to die for him only for 100$ a weekNo one from the drug lords respect their sicarios it doesn't matter if it's viceroy or chapo, t


People that join cartels as gunmen have zero respect toward their life or family even their boss sees them as cannon fodders and gives zero fuck about him as he still has +200 young poor people taking their lives for 80$ week. It doesn't matter how strong drug lord is, all the drug lords see their sicarios as cannon fodders take an example of OG Zeta Raul Alberto trejo benavide aka El Alvin he got injured during capturing of El Chacho dinosio (old nuevo laredo plaza owner) when Los Zetas stormed his residence in Monterrey 2002 May Osiel Cardenas Guillen didn't cared about him and left him dead in downtown hotel in matamoros abandoned by his men he died due to lack of medicine attention


Due to unstabity In Mexico, the end of this year, it may surpass, the 29,000 homicides of 2017. Running for president Obrador, wants Amesty for cartel members, that are in prison. Meaning he wants to set them free.


Meaning more deaths added to the current count. Advertising / welcoming its country’s destruction inevitably.As if there’s profit to be claimed from some sort of insurance claim among its citizens. Huge mistake!E42


Guliani drastically cut crime at the street level by targeting the common criminals there.  I believe the strategy of targeting just the top guys is a failure and has actually made things worse by splintering the criminal groups and causing the sicarios to be supervised less.  I would target the sicarios and shoot on site any who are armed, arrest the rest, hang the murderers and put the rest in prison camps at hard labor.


8:25Guliani did not do shit. It was the cheif of police, William Bratton, who put in the work yet Guliani is falsely given credit.


The answer is simple and staring you in the face when you cross the imaginary line between Mexico and Texas called a border.  The common people are armed on one side, and not on the other.  One side has peace and justice, the other, not.  A well armed citizenry will slowly over time eliminate the criminal element and bring about spontaneous order.  Those that live by the gun will die by the gun.  The people like peace, law, and order, and that will become the new norm when every man is armed.  Simply repeal the gun laws in Mexico and watch the place improve.


Public hanging showed on tv but with out the bags over the head. So all the dumbass kids can see what will happen to them if they become criminals. Or you could do it cartel style and cut the heads off with a small knife so it is really messy and brutal. Burn them alive like on the witch hunt days. Could do a lowering in to an acid bath feet first. Any other way is to mercyful


So you propose to let a government trusted by less than 10% of the population ‘to do the right thing’, exercise power of life and death over its people. Genius. I’m sure it will all be 100% guilty Narcos who are hung at these fabulous open carnivals of death. Instead of plunging a country further into barbarism and unjust murder how about legalizing drugs, regulating, and so removing the huge incentive for these cartels to exist.More murder will not solve Mexico’s problems.


If the Cartels and criminals have guns, then by golly let the innocent citizens carry weapons, for self defense. 






Comments are moderated, refer to policy for more information.Envía fotos, vídeos, notas, enlaces o información Todo 100% Anónimo;borderlandbeat@gmail.com

 

 




General Mail Box (Buggs-Founder):




borderlandbeat@gmail.com 




Mainboard/Forum Administrators:




Inquiries and Communications send to Chivis or Buggs


chivis.martinez@  hushmail.com       


DD:


allend4bb@gmail.com


Otis:


spike.borderlandbeat@ gmail.com
