Mostly sunny early then increasing clouds with some scattered thunderstorms this afternoon. High 91F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low around 70F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:54 am

Echoing Hanover County’s current budget, the county’s new spending plan for fiscal 2019 would add more public safety positions and maintain the property tax rate.

County Administrator Cecil “Rhu” Harris revealed the $493.1 million budget Wednesday. The proposal, which represents an increase of $22.5 million over the current budget, or 5.1 percent, would invest 41.7 percent in education and 14 percent in public safety.

“The proposed budget continues our fiscally conservative approach to local government spending,” Harris told Hanover’s Board of Supervisors. “However, the strength of our plan could be undermined if the state continues to reduce its funding support.”

Harris said crafting the budget was challenging because of what he called negative trends in state funding that affect education, constitutional officers, community services boards and social services.

“While state funding for education has increased 14.5 percent over the past four years, only 3.3 percent has been passed through to Hanover County schools,” Harris said. “Such small increases means that Hanover County is having to take on a constantly bigger share of the budget to maintain these services.”

Harris said revenue from general property taxes, mainly the real estate tax, has grown $7 million over the previous year, or 4.5 percent. He said the strength of local revenue has allowed Hanover to fund its priorities without raising taxes.

On Tuesday, the Hanover School Board approved a $202.9 million budget for fiscal 2019 that includes a $3 million increase in the district’s capital improvement fund, with $10 million planned for improvements.

Harris said the proposed general fund provides $6.5 million more in support for schools in fiscal 2019. That includes an increase of $3.9 million in operating funds, which covers school employee salaries and increases in health insurance costs for school employees.

The total increase to public safety operations is $1.9 million, and the same amount is proposed to be added to Hanover’s human services. Hanover’s proposed budget has five new patrol deputy positions and one in court services. There are five new firefighter/EMT positions to allow for 24/7 staffing for the Black Creek Fire Department in the county’s eastern end.

Funding for human services addresses more special education students being placed in private centers; an expanded drug recovery program at Pamunkey Regional Jail; and continued support for the adult drug treatment court pilot program.

Capital improvements represent 8.5 percent of the total fiscal 2019 budget, Harris said. Key projects included in this list are funding for:

Hanover employees are set to get a 2 percent merit pay increase, totaling $1.5 million.

The Department of Public Utilities’ budget of $34.3 million includes an operating budget of $21.6 million and a capital budget of $12.7 million, Harris said. He said the budget includes user fee increases of 2.5 percent for water and sewer, which equates to an increase of $3.12 to a typical customer’s bimonthly bill.

A public hearing on the budget will be held in early April.

moconnor@timesdispatch.com


(804) 649-6254


                                    
                                        Whenever Michael O'Connor posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




