New Hanover County Jail

Trisha Anderson Rogers, a 47-year-old former student teacher at a North Carolina middle school was sentenced to eight months in prison after pleading guilty to soliciting a young student for sex.

Rogers, who was a student teacher at Murray Middle School in North Carolina, was arrested in July 2016 for using her cell phone to try to meet with a 13-year-old boy student for an “unlawful sex act”.

She pled guilty to three counts of indecent liberties and was sentenced to eight months in prison, with 20 to 33 months in prison suspended, in addition to 60 months of supervised probation.

via WNCN:

According to arrest warrants, the alleged offenses took place between Feb. 29 and May 5 while Rogers was a student teacher at Murray Middle School and the 13-year-old was a student at the same school. Warrants allege that Rogers used a cell phone to try and meet up with the student for the purpose of sex.

Officials with New Hanover County Schools said Rogers was a student teacher at Murray Middle for one semester last spring. She also previously served as a substitute teacher for the school system.

School officials said when they were made aware of the issue they notified law enforcement immediately, terminated her internship and removed her from the substitute teacher list on May 5.

Rogers must also register as a sex offender and was ordered to pay at least $600 in court fees.

This is the latest in a string of teacher/student sex scandals over the last couple of years. In November, Tennessee teacher Janet Smothers was arrested. Former nutrition teacher LaToya Parker was also arrested for a relationship with a student. Florida teacher Caroline Lawson was charged with sexual assault. 26-year-old Allyson Moran was also arrested for similar crimes. The 23-year-old high school teacher Katherine Ross Ridenhour was also arrested for an inappropriate relationship.

Furthermore, Hunter Day, 22, was also arrested after a sting operation. Megan Kotarski was also arrested on similar charges. Michelle Schiffer, a 23-year-old history teacher in Texas, was also charged and arrested for allegedly having sex with a teenage student. 29-year-old Alyssia Marie Reddy was arrested in Maryland for her crimes in New Jersey. Samantha Fitzgerland, a 28-year-old, was most recently arrested and charged. Jordan Ondish was arrested for her inappropriate relationship with a 19-year-old, while 28-year-old Samantha Fitzpatrick was arrested on similar charges.

Nicole Marie Andrews was arrested as well. 32-year-old Jessica Langford was arrested and charged with sexual assault-related crimes as well. A teacher from Oregon, Andrea Baber, was accused of having a sexual relationship with a student.  Robin Dunlap, a teacher in Florida, was arrested for sending illicit photos to a 15-year-old boy in Texas. Teacher and tennis coach Jennifer Olajire-Aro was also charged. 42-year-old Heather Butts of California was arrested on a second-degree felony charge. Nancy Leigh Ann Brann, a former Christian school teacher, was arrested for having sex with a student. Coine Audiat pleaded no contest to having sex with a minor in 2016. 23-year-old Darci Lake was arrested for an inappropriate relationship.

Valeria Costadoni was also arrested due to a relationship with her student. 40-year-old Kisha Nuckols was arrested for having sex with a student, too. Hilary Dattilo, a 30-year-old Ohio high school teacher, has been accused of having a sexual relationship with a female student. 30-year-old Missouri teacher Elizabeth Morgan was also arrested on similar charges.


						© 						COED MEDIA Group LLC.
						 All Rights Reserved.


						Powered By 						Wordpress.com VIP
					