Click on the button below to set up your account or log in if you already have one.

Purchase a digital-only subscription now for unlimited online access to local news and information.


                                                                Digital-only access only $9.99/mo
                                                            

Current Subscriber?

Set up your account


    Log In

Current Subscriber?

Set up Account

© 2018 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy

A few passing clouds. Low 64F. Winds E at 5 to 10 mph..

A few passing clouds. Low 64F. Winds E at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:55 pm

The entrance sign to Lake Central High School in St. John is shown.

The western exterior of Lake Central High School in St. John is shown.

Samantha Cox

Education reporter

The entrance sign to Lake Central High School in St. John is shown.

The western exterior of Lake Central High School in St. John is shown.

ST. JOHN — A Lake Central High School teacher, who was arrested last week after a video of her allegedly doing drugs in an empty classroom went viral, has been formally charged with possession of a controlled substance, a level 6 felony, and possession of drug paraphernalia, a Class C misdemeanor.

Samantha Cox, 24, of Cedar Lake, was removed from the classroom Nov. 22 and held at the Lake County Jail until she posted a $10,000 bond later that same day.

She has been placed on paid administrative leave from Lake Central, school officials said.

The teacher allegedly told police after her arrest she purchased $160 worth of cocaine that morning before coming to school, according to court records released Monday by the Lake County Prosecutor's Office. 

Cox told police she usually purchased "dope" after school, but was feeling sick that morning, records state. She said she had used cocaine for four years, since her freshman year at college. 

Cox said she snorted the cocaine at 10:20 a.m. while alone in her classroom, records state. She said the door was locked, but students must have seen her through the door window. 

Samantha Cox

Authorities learned about the drug use after someone took video of Cox in an empty classroom and posted that video online. The footage spread quickly on the internet.

The information was brought to the attention of school administration by student witnesses, and school administrators notified the St. John Police Department. 

A detective was dispatched to the school at noon and requested help from a drug-sniffing dog, records state. 

The dog alerted to the teacher's desk, where police located a plastic cigarette wrapper filled with rolled up pieces of tin foil, records state. Police also found a piece of paper wrapped up like a straw.

Cox allowed police to search her vehicle, where they found a glass pipe and multiple small pieces of tin foil, torn plastic baggies and two rolled up pieces of paper, according to records.

The records state Cox was polite and cooperative throughout the incident. 

Lake Central schools Superintendent Larry Veracco said Monday that Cox was in her second year as a teacher at the high school. She taught English 10 and 11. She was hired in 2016, soon after graduating from Purdue University Northwest in May.

"She was popular with the students," Veracco said. "She did her student teaching at Lake Central High School, then we hired her.

"It's a sad situation. We are happy that we got her removed from the classroom very quickly after being tipped off by a student. But we are also concerned about her welfare, too. She seemed to be a very good teacher," Veracco said.

Cox graduated from Hanover Central High School in 2012 and was the salutatorian. She attended Purdue University Calumet, now known as Purdue University Northwest, graduating in May 2016. She earned a Bachelor of Arts degree with a major in English and concentration in English teaching.

Times staff writer Sarah Reese contributed to this report.



ST. JOHN — A Lake Central High School teacher was taken into custody Wednesday after being c…

It's hard to find positive takeaways from a Region public school teacher, entrusted with the…

MERRILLVILLE — A man hid in a cooler before emerging after an Aldi closed Friday night, holding the employees at gunpoint and robbing the stor…

Here are the top 5 trending stories today.  

A roundup of crime stories from throughout the Region during the past 24 hours. 

Here are the top 5 trending stories today.  

GARY — Police said Tuesday a black vehicle was seen speeding away after a 20-year-old man's shooting death Nov. 22 in the city's Glen Park section. 

GARY — Some drivers on the Borman Expressway faced long delays early Tuesday for the second time in 24 hours after a semi hit a guardrail and …

Here are the top 5 trending stories today.  

Here are the top 5 trending stories today.  

Here are the top 5 trending stories today.  

The most-read stories on NWI.com during the past week. 

CROWN POINT — Not guilty pleas were entered Monday morning on behalf of the 24-year-old teacher accused of snorting cocaine at Lake Central Hi…

ST. JOHN — Town police are looking to increase their visibility by way of off-duty officers with squad cars. 

CROWN POINT — The discovery process is ongoing in the criminal case against a former Lake Central High School teacher accused of snorting coca…

Education reporter

Carmen is an award-winning journalist who has worked at The Times newspaper for 20 years. Before that she also had stints at The Clarion-Ledger in Jackson, Miss., The Post-Tribune and The News Dispatch in Michigan City.


                                    
                                        Whenever Carmen McCollum posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.