Oldham County Jail

An Oldham County High School teacher was arrested Thursday and charged with rape, sodomy and unlawful transaction with a minor after having sex with a student.

Haley Reed, 35, was booked into Oldham County Jail in Oldham County, Kentucky on Thursday 6/7, after admitting that she had sex with a minor. She is the high school’s choir director. Reed said she had sex with the student eight times between April and June after school hours on school property. According to multiple media outlets, Reed is married.

Oldham County School district release the below statement regarding Reed’s arrest, via WDRB.

“District administrators are aware of the charges against a teacher at Oldham County High School. We are cooperating with police during this investigation and the teacher will have no further contact with students for the remainder of the year.

Further questions on the investigation should be directed to the Oldham County Police Department.”

Oldham County High School is located in Buckner, Kentucky and has approximately 1,600 students, grades 9th through 12th. Haley Reed’s bond was set at $25,000.

Over the course of just a few months, educators across the country have been arrested for engaging in inappropriate relationship with their students. Virginia teacher Miranda Pauley, Tennessee teacher Janet Smothers, LaToya Parker, Florida teacher Caroline Lawson, 26-year-old Allyson Moran and Katherine Ross Ridenhour were all arrested on similar charges.

The list goes on to include 22-year-old Oklahoma science teacher Hunter Day, 28-year-old teacher Megan Kotarski, 23-year-old history teacher Michelle Schiffer, 29-year-old Alyssia Marie Reddy, special education teacher Jordan Ondish and 28-year-old Samantha Fitzpatrick have all been allegedly carrying on inappropriate relationships with their students.

In addition, 31-year-old Nicole Marie Andrews, 32-year-old Jessica Langford, 29-year-old Andrea Baber, 27-year-old Robin Dunlap, 27-year-old Jennifer Olajire-Aro have also been charged with these charges.

42-year-old Heather Butts of California was arrested on a second-degree felony charge, Nancy Leigh Ann Brann, a former Christian school teacher, was arrested for having sex with a student, Coine Audiat pleaded no contest to having sex with a minor in 2016 and 23-year-old Darci Lake was arrested for an inappropriate relationship. 27-year-old Brittany Zamora from Arizona was arrested on similar charges. Keri Hoffman, 35, was also arrested for an alleged relationship with a student. More recently, 29-year-old Tiffany Ranweiler-Oblander and 33-year-old Maren Oates were arrested on similar charges.


						© 						COED MEDIA Group LLC.
						 All Rights Reserved.


						Powered By 						Wordpress.com VIP
					