


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

William H. Jenkins, the brother of New York Giants player Janoris Jenkins, was charged Wednesday in the death of a man found in a Fair Lawn home.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Law Enforcement officers conduct an investigation at the home of Janoris Jenkins where a body was discovered this morning. June 26, 2018.
    Mitsu Yasukawa/Northjersey.com

Members of B.C.P.D. Major Crimes Unit, provide cover in preparation for the body to be brought out at the home of Janoris Jenkins where a body was discovered there this morning. Photographed at the corner of Van Saun Place and Newton Place in Fair Lawn on 06/26/18. 
(Photo: Mitsu Yasukawa/Northjersey.com)

William H. Jenkins Jr., the brother of New York Giants player Janoris Jenkins, was charged Wednesday in the death of Roosevelt Rene, who was found in a Fair Lawn home, according to the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office. 


William Jenkins, 34, of Fair Lawn, was charged with aggravated manslaughter. He was in custody in Ontario County, New York, the prosecutor's office stated. 


#BCPONJ &amp; @FairLawnPD announce William H. JENKINS, Jr. of Fair Lawn, charged: Agg. Manslaughter for death of Roosevelt Rene. JENKINS in custody in Ontario Co., NY.  Investigation ongoing, unable to release further info. Charges merely accusations. Defendant presumed innocent.

Rene, 25, was found in the basement of the Van Saun Place home Tuesday. Rene had been living at the house recently and appeared to work with Janoris Jenkins on music ventures, according to several Instagram posts. William Jenkins lived at the same home where Rene was found, according to the prosecutor's office. 


Rene was a music producer who went by the name Trypps Beatz.


VICTIM: Roosevelt Rene remembered for his music, 'positive vibes'


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

The cause of death was not released as of Wednesday. 


A message left for Ontario County Sheriff Phil Povero was not returned. 


William Jenkins has a criminal record that includes violence. He was convicted of aggravated battery with a deadly weapon in 2003, according to Florida prison records.


Then 19, Jenkins was arrested and charged with stabbing another man during a brawl that erupted at a high school football game in Belle Glade, Fla., according to reports published then in the Florida Sun-Sentinel and the Palm Beach Post.


He served two years and six months in prison for multiple convictions, which included his involvement in a burglary or attempted buglary and grand theft of $100 to $300, according to Florida prison records.


He also spent five years in custody on drug sale and possession charges from 2011 to 2016, according to New York prison records.


Jenkins was arrested on a parole warrant, according to Ontario County District Attorney James B. Ritts. No court date had been set as of Wednesday night, Ritts said. 


The Giants organization said they believe Jenkins has been at his off-season home in Florida since the team’s minicamp ended June 14.A man who identified himself as a party planner told USA Today that Jenkins was in Florida to host a series of parties.


The next party is scheduled for Saturday at an unidentified location in Orlando. Jenkins’ nickname is JackRabbit and the party has been billed online as “JackRabbit Mansion Pool Party.’’


Jenkins has played two seasons with the Giants after being selected by the Rams out of North Alabama in in the second round of the 2012 NFL Draft.


Acting Bergen County Prosecutor Dennis Calo said in a statement that the Prosecutor’s Office Major Crimes Unit and the Fair Lawn Police Department were investigating.


Janoris Jenkins' home remained mostly quiet Wednesday. It was fenced off by yellow police tape but nobody was seen coming in or out of the house. A Lexus that was previously parked in front of the garage on Tuesday was no longer there.


Staff Writer Keldy Ortiz and USA Today reporter Josh Peter contributed to this report. 


Roosevelt Rene: Who was Roosevelt Rene? A look at the man found dead at home of NY Giants' Janoris Jenkins


Janoris Jenkins: Janoris Jenkins, key piece to Giants defense, has had issues in the past


Email: jongsma@northjersey.com


 Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. iPhone app | iPad app | Android app | Sign up for our newsletter | Subscribe| Find us on social media: Twitter | Sports Twitter  | Facebook | Instagram | Food Instagram

 
