This copy is for your personal non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies of Toronto Star content for distribution to colleagues, clients or customers, or inquire about permissions/licensing, please go to: www.TorontoStarReprints.com


Emily Nield was driving down the I-75 on her way to Knoxville, Tenn., where she had recently finished graduate school, when she was pulled over.


She was caught driving 87 miles per hour in a 70 zone through the small town of Adel, Georgia. The Vaughan resident doesn’t dispute that.

What is in dispute is why she ended up handcuffed, in the back of a police car, with a mug shot taken of her before she was forced to wear an orange jumpsuit for five hours on her 27th birthday. 


She says it was because she was driving with a Canadian licence.


“She took a look at my licence and claimed it wasn’t valid,” Nield said. “She said she could not prove that my licence was legal.” 

The officer asked Nield for other identification, but she did not accept photos of her passport or Nexus card on her phone, or any other cards in her wallet.


“She kept saying that I could have been a Mexican trying to get across the border,” Nield said. 


She was handcuffed and put into the back of a police car by Claire McLellan, an officer for the Cook County Sheriff’s Office. While in the car, Nield recorded a video on Snapchat alerting a friend that she had been arrested for driving without a licence.


“I’ve never been arrested, I’ve never been in cuffs. This is really tough to work my Snapchat,” Nield said in the video.


Nield was brought to a jail where she was told that she needed to post an $880 bail bond that could only be paid in cash. Eventually, she was allowed to pay with a debit card. 

While in the waiting room, Nield’s friend found a lawyer to represent her.


“(A sergeant) Googled it, and found out I was in the right, I never should have been arrested,” Nield said.

After posting the bail, she was released. Nield said it was about five hours between the initial arrest and her arrival at the impound lot, where she was able to retrieve her car. 


She said her bail money will be reimbursed, and she has had her record expunged. Now, she is staying with her parents in Vaughan.


“This could have stopped if (the officer) let me contact the consulate, or even did a Google search on her own phone, or contacted dispatch for clarification,” Nield said. “But none of this occurred. Instead, it was straight to jail.”


Nobody from the Cook County Sheriff’s Office would speak to the Star, but it did release a statement regarding Nield’s arrest on April 2.


“Baesd on Ms. Nield’s own words, she produced a valid driver’s licence from Ontario but only had photos on her phone of her Nexus card and passport,” the statement read. “Ms. Nield also stated that she was living in the state of Tennessee and did not have a Tennessee licence, which prompted the deputy sheriff to arrest Ms. Nield.”


The statement said Interstate 75 brings about a million travellers through Cook County each month.


“Law enforcement regularly encounters individuals who are engaged in crimes such as identity theft,” Capt. Brent Exum of the Cook County Sheriff’s Office said in the statement.


“That is why we follow (guidelines) and request a passport or visa to verify their identity.”


So are you allowed to drive in the U.S. with a valid Ontario’s licence? The Canadian Automobile Association says you can.


“Make sure you have supporting documentation when you’re in the States,” said Jessica Piche, a CAA employee who works in travel services.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copyright owned or licensed by Toronto Star Newspapers Limited. All rights reserved. Republication or distribution of this content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Toronto Star Newspapers Limited and/or its licensors. To order copies of Toronto Star articles, please go to: www.TorontoStarReprints.com
