Gallery: Man gets 20 years for shooting at Clackamas County sergeant


    
        
            By Jim Ryan

jryan@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

A 31-year-old man was sentenced Thursday to 20 years in prison for shooting at a Clackamas County sheriff's sergeant at a shopping center earlier this year.

James Randall Paquin pleaded guilty last month to attempted aggravated murder, unauthorized use of a vehicle and felon in possession of a firearm. Twenty years is the maximum sentence for attempted aggravated murder.

Paquin didn't address the court during Thursday's hearing. He wore striped jail apparel, orange socks and tennis shoes. No spectators were in attendance.

The circumstances leading to Paquin's arrest unfolded in January, when he stole a car in Canby and stopped near a Shari's Cafe &amp; Pies restaurant at the Oregon City Shopping Center, said Chris Owen, the chief deputy district attorney for Clackamas County.

Paquin already had one stolen gun with him, Owen said in court, and he was going to look for another hidden in the area. Owen said the stolen car's owner called authorities, and Oregon City police contacted Paquin's girlfriend, who was in the car while he started looking for the gun.

Paquin saw police and started to run.

Sgt. Tony Killinger of the Clackamas County Sheriff's Office decided to offer backup, and he saw Paquin running as he pulled up to the shopping center, which is on McLoughlin Boulevard.

Killinger got out of his car, and Paquin fired at him three times, the prosecutor said. None of the bullets hit him, Owen said, but fragments from one bullet grazed his shin.

Paquin then tripped, fell and lost control of the gun, Owen said. He put his hands up, and Killinger took him into custody. Killinger didn't fire his weapon.

Paquin's attorney said in court that Paquin has taken responsibility for his actions and has battled with substance abuse problems. He has a lengthy criminal history in Oregon.

Additional charges of unlawful use of a weapon and first-degree theft were dismissed.

-- Jim Ryan jryan@oregonian.com 503-221-8005; @Jimryan015    


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        