

By Stephen Cohen, SeattlePI and Michael-Shawn Dugar

Caption


Close

Seattle Seahawks' Jeremy Lane walks off the field after being ejected from the game during the first half of an NFL football game Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Green Bay, Wis. (AP Photo/Jeffrey Phelps)

Seattle Seahawks' Jeremy Lane walks off the field after being ejected from the game during the first half of an NFL football game Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Green Bay, Wis. (AP Photo/Jeffrey Phelps)

Seattle Seahawks' Jeremy Lane walks off the field after being ejected from the game during the first half of an NFL football game Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Green Bay, Wis. (AP Photo/Jeffrey Phelps)

Seattle Seahawks' Jeremy Lane walks off the field after being ejected from the game during the first half of an NFL football game Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Green Bay, Wis. (AP Photo/Jeffrey Phelps)

Los Angeles Rams wide receiver Tavon Austin (11) throws out an arm to block Seattle Seahawks cornerback Jeremy Lane (20) during a football game at CenturyLink Field on Thursday, Dec. 15, 2016. (SPENSER HEAPS, seattlepi.com)


Los Angeles Rams wide receiver Tavon Austin (11) throws out an arm to block Seattle Seahawks cornerback Jeremy Lane (20) during a football game at CenturyLink Field on Thursday, Dec. 15, 2016. (SPENSER HEAPS,


Seahawks cornerback Jeremy Lane was arrested on suspicion of driving under the influence on Sunday.

According to King County Jail records, the 27-year-old Lane was booked into jail at 5:30 a.m. Sunday before being released on his own recognizance less than four hours later after posting the $1,000 bail.

A Seahawks spokesperson confirmed to the PI on Monday that the team is aware of Lane's arrest. They have issued no additional comment.

According to a report from TMZ on Tuesday, Lane admitted to being high on marijuana at the time of his arrest. "I was more high than anything," Lane reportedly told the police after he was pulled over for driving 20 miles over the 60 mph speed limit in a Dodge Charger. The police reportedly smelled weed when they stopped Lane and he later admitted to having smoked three hours prior.

Lane reportedly had blood alcohol concentration of 0.039, which matches the BAC he tweeted about Monday when reports of his arrest surfaced.

"I'll leave it at that," Lane wrote, adding that he was unsure why he was arrested since a 0.03 BAC is below the legal limit of 0.08. However, drivers can be arrested for and convicted of DUI with a BAC below that limit, per state law.

Lane also tweeted out the following message to his followers on social media Monday morning: "Why (people) judge you by what they hear but not what they know!!"

Jeremy Lane, commenting on his arrest pic.twitter.com/7AWLfa5ZUR

He has since deleted the tweets he posted Monday.

Lane was a sixth-round pick out of Northwestern (Louisiana) State in 2012. After working his way into the defensive rotation thanks in large part to his play on special teams and in the nickel cornerback position, he signed a four-year, $23 million deal to rejoin Seattle as an unrestricted free agent in 2016.

He was expected to challenge for a full-time starting job at outside cornerback in each of the last two seasons, but was beaten out by DeShawn Shead in 2016 and rookie Shaq Griffin this year. Lane was active for 13 regular season games in 2017, but finished fifth among Seahawks cornerbacks in defensive snaps behind Griffin, nickel Justin Coleman, Richard Sherman and Byron Maxwell. He finished the season with 28 total tackles.

In October, he vented his displeasure at being demoted, tweeting "How I get bench on a day off!! (Expletive) ridiculous," then posting the same comments on Instagram, adding, "Because they like the flow. #bs"

It is widely expected that Lane will be released this offseason, as it would save the cash-strapped Seahawks $4.75 million against the salary cap in 2018.

Lane is perhaps best remembered for the gruesome injuries he suffered in Super Bowl XLIX, when after intercepting New England quarterback Tom Brady in the end zone, he tore his ACL and broke his arm while being tackled on the sideline.