Baseball great says some of his teammates “covered for me. They were pretty cool”

Getty Images

Batter up?

New York Mets veteran Darryl Strawberry opened up about the depths of his sex addiction on Thursday’s episode of “The Dr. Oz Show,” saying that he was so hooked on sex — along with other things — during his baseball career that he used to have sex between innings during his games.

“There are all kinds of very honest revelations that you share. One of them which really caught me off-guard was an admission that you actually, in the middle of games, were so addicted to sex that you would actually go out and have sex in between innings,” series host Mehmet Oz said during his interview with the baseball legend.

Also Read: Ozzy Osbourne Reveals Struggle With Sex Addiction: 'I'm Mortified'

“Yeah. It was pretty crazy. You know, I was, I was…” Strawberry affirmed. “And, and in the middle of games, yeah, I would go between innings, and stuff like that, and, and, and run back, and, you know, have a little party going on. And, you know, I thought it was pretty cool. I mean, that’s just the addiction, the drive.”


Strawberry went on to divulge that his colleagues would cover for him between his between-inning dalliances.

“Well, your, your teammates, the coaches, did they not know?” Oz asked.


Also Read: Can You Really Get Treatment for Sex Addiction? Experts Have Doubts

“Well, some of them covered for me. They were pretty cool,” Strawberry replied.

Agreeing with Oz that the cover-ups constituted “enabling” behavior, Strawberry said, “Well, yeah. It’s, it definitely is. It, it’s a behavior that’s not good for anyone. But I think when you have, when you have an addictive personality, like addicts, and alcoholics, and, and sex addiction, it’s an addictive personality. And we know how to, we turn it on, and we turn it off. It’s not until we get to a place that we, uh, get well. See, we look well on the outside.”

Watch Strawberry talk about his addiction-plagued past in the video:





Michael PhelpsThe Olympic swimmer got DUIs in 2004 and again in 2014, resulting in a suspension from U.S/ Swimming. Kellogs also dropped Phelps as a spokesperson in 2009 when photos leaked of him apparently smoking marijuana from a bong.

Darryl StrawberryThe former Mets, Dodgers and Yankees slugger was suspended three times by the MLB for substance abuse, which resulted in a number of arrests and visits to rehab.

Diego MaradonaThe Argentinian soccer legend battled cocaine addiction from the mid-80s to 2004. After being rushed to the hospital in 2000 with heart problems, he was treated for alcohol-related hepatitis. 

Josh HamiltonTexas Rangers outfielder started experimenting with drugs in 2001. He then got clean after being confronted by his grandmother, but relapsed in 2009, 2012 and most recently, in Feb. 2015.

Ricky WilliamsThe New Orleans Saints and Miami Dolphins player began taking marijuana to ease social anxiety disorder, prompting a surprise retirement from the NFL in 2004. He later returned but failed at least two subsequent drug tests after being reinstated.

Lawrence TaylorNew York Giants linebacker tested positive for cocaine in 1987. He quit shortly after but relapsed upon retirement.

Donte StallworthThe Cleveland Browns wide receiver was charged with DUI manslaughter after he struck and killed a pedestrian while driving his car in March 2009. Following a plea deal, he received a sentence of 30 days in the county jail and 8 years probation.

Charles BarkleyThe NBA star turned TNT analyst was arrested in Phoenix, Arizona, in 2008 for DUI after running a stop sign. According to the police report, Barkley was in a hurry to receive oral sex from his female passenger. He spent three days in jail and entered an alcohol treatment program.

Michael IrvinIn March 1996, the Dallas Cowboys wide receiver was arrested on charges of cocaine possession when police found him lying on the floor covered in cocaine with multiple strippers. Irvin pled no contest to the charges and the NFL suspended him for five games.

Nate NewtonNate Newton made six Pro Bowls in the NFL before being busted for marijuana, earning him two-and-a-half years in a federal prison.

Todd MarinovichThe quarterback was busted for cocaine at USC before being drafted by the NFL. While playing for the Oakland Raiders, he began taking LSD during games. After numerous NFL suspensions, he ended up at the Canadian Football League, where he started with heroin. At one point Marinovich severely cut his hand with a crack pipe during halftime.

Len BiasBias, an All-American college basketball forward at the University of Maryland, was selected by the Boston Celtics as the second overall pick in the 1986 NBA Draft. He died two days later from cardiac arrhythmia induced by a cocaine overdose at age 22.

Dock EllisPittsburgh Pirates pitcher Ellis threw a no-hitter on June 12, 1970, claiming to have done it under the influence of LSD. He also had a substance abuse problem, and acknowledged after his retirement that he never pitched without the use of drugs. 

After the former NBA player was found unconscious in a Nevada brothel, TheWrap looks at other athletes whose careers were damaged by drink or drugs