Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

What were the biggest events or trends in East Tennessee business this year?

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Blackberry Mountain to open in Walland in late 2018. It is a sister property of Blackberry Farm
    Wochit

People take a look at Olli, Local Motors' self-driving bus that will be brought to Knoxville, during an announcement event in Market Square on Thursday, April 20, 2017.
(Photo: Brianna Paciorka / News Sentinel)Buy Photo

It has been a big year for Knoxville’s business community, with major deals, historic redevelopments and expansion announcements.


Following are the 10 most significant business stories the Knoxville News Sentinel covered in 2017.


Knoxville-based Local Motors announced in April that the city will be a test site for its self-driving vehicles, specifically its electric trolley, Olli.


Visit Knoxville will own two Ollis — one for use on downtown streets, one as a backup. Olli is expected to be on the road in 2018. At least at first, it will have an on-board operator.


More: Local Motors to produce Olli self-driving vehicle in Knoxville


The trolley will probably run between fixed points for conventions or tourism events, but may eventually have a fixed route, according to Kim Bumpas of Visit Knoxville.


Olli seats about a dozen; according to Local Motors, it can carry up to 2,200 pounds, has a range of 32.4 miles and a maximum speed of 25 mph.


Parts of the trolley are 3D-printed. As autonomous vehicle use becomes more widespread, Olli users may eventually use the Modally app to book rides.


Blackberry Farm announced in August it will open a new resort called Blackberry Mountain, built on 2,800 acres of a 5,200-acre tract on Chilhowee Mountain.


The Relais &amp; Chateau property will include two restaurants, the Firetower and Three Sisters, held to the same standards as Blackberry Farm itself. The resort will have six cabins, 13 cottages and multi-bedroom homes.


More: Blackberry Farm: New Blackberry Mountain resort to be built in Walland


Guests will be able to participate in tree climbing, mountain biking, hiking, rock climbing, foraging, fly fishing, paddle sports, sporting clays and horseback riding. They will have access to a spa, a yoga studio, a spin studio, a fitness room and fitness classes, a gymnasium and a basketball court. An infinity edge pool will overlook the mountain range.


The former Kern’s Bakery, just south of the Henley Street Bridge, has been a Knoxville landmark since its 1931 construction. It shut down in 2012, but a local investor and partners from Asheville, North Carolina, bought the building in October with plans to redevelop it as a restaurant and entertainment center.


More: New owner, flavor for Kern's Bakery building


Oliver Smith, president of Oliver Smith Realty and Auction Company Inc., and partners bought it from Knoxville developer David Dewhirst and partners for $3.1 million. Dewhirst had bought it in 2015 for $312,500; the 70,000-square-foot building was added to the National Register of Historic Places earlier this year.


A rendering of the planned development at the Kern's Bakery building (Photo: Submitted)

Smith and his partners plan for the building to hold a restaurant, four or five vendors, a brewery and an entertainment space. The 15-acre property may also see a freestanding restaurant, as well as apartments on the hillside above Chapman Highway. Plans call for the Kern’s building renovation to be done by the end of 2018.


Cover of Knoxville Top Workplaces print section (Photo: News Sentinel)

For the first time Knoxville businesses joined in a national survey to rate the Top Workplaces in town. Early in the year Philadelphia-based Workplace Dynamics offered to survey employees at 767 local firms. Forty-two companies agreed to participate, and 30 scored high enough to land on the Top Workplaces list. The participants employ more than 10,000 locally, and more than 7,000 of those workers answered the two dozen survey questions.


Winners were announced in June. Among companies employing 500 or more, First Tennessee bank took top honors. The midsized winner was Pinnacle Financial Partners; while employees of Kramer Rayson law firm deemed it the best among firms employing 35 to 99.


More: How we found Knoxville's Top Workplaces


Special awards also went for management, leadership, ethics, communication and training. Pay and benefits are important, but treatment in the workplace is more so in attracting and keeping good employees, according to Bob Helbig, Workplace Dynamics media partnerships director.


Workplace Dynamics — renamed Energage in October — has assessed more than 40,000 organizations with more than 14 million employees since 2006. Helbig said he hopes 2017’s survey is the first of many in Knoxville. The annual tally is an institution in many major cities nationwide.


It’s been a tumultuous year for Pilot Flying J and its founders, the Haslam family.


The company announced in January it would spend nearly $500 million over five years to renovate existing locations, while continuing to open 20 to 30 new stores annually. Its core business is still truck drivers, and Pilot Flying J aims to provide them with a full range of services; but the company also seeks increasingly to appeal to car drivers.


In July, Pilot Flying J announced a four-year, multimillion-dollar deal to become the “Official Travel Center of the SEC.” The sponsorship agreement lets the travel center chain use the SEC logo, and gives it a presence at major SEC events and on the SEC Network.


The Haslam family and company continued a string of big donations, including an August bequest of $100,000 to each of Knox County’s 13 public high schools, to be split between marching bands and academics. Half the money came from the Haslam Family Foundation and the other half from Pilot Flying J itself.



    The latest plea deals in the Pilot Flying J fraud case mean the defense table should be a little less crowded at the October trial in Chattanooga.
    USA TODAY NETWORK-Tennessee

But looming behind all that is the ongoing Chattanooga trial of four former Pilot Flying J executives accused in a $92 million scheme to defraud trucking companies of promised fuel discounts. Fourteen sales executives have pleaded guilty after an FBI investigation.


The latest and most explosive testimony is a tape of former Pilot Flying J President Mark Hazelwood making racist and sexist comments to company sales officials. The company issued a statement denouncing Hazelwood’s statements. Pilot Flying J CEO Jimmy Haslam is not charged in the fraud conspiracy and has denied knowledge of it. The trial is recessed until Jan. 10.


More: 'The professional driver is the lifeblood of Pilot Flying J,' ex-president says in video


Communities in or near a 70-mile-wide swath of Tennessee, from Clarksville to Cleveland, cashed in on the Aug. 21 solar eclipse. The path of totality passed just south of Knoxville. Towns along Interstate 75, including Athens and Sweetwater, were touted as prime viewing locations, and hotels there sold out months in advance. Knoxville and Sevier County sought some of the overflow business. Room-rental service Airbnb expected to serve more than 13,000 travelers statewide, and people came from across the country and around the world for the sight, though totality lasted less than three minutes.


The 2017 solar eclipse is photographed in Maryville, Tenn., on Monday, Aug. 21, 2017. (Photo: Submitted by Fred Heaton)

Many places held civic festivals, set up public viewing areas, sold or gave away eclipse-viewing dark glasses, rented parking spaces — $50 in Sweetwater, for example — and sold souvenirs for the first total solar eclipse visible in Tennessee since 1869. Several towns and tourist agencies saw the eclipse as a chance to show off their other attractions, in hopes eclipse watchers would return to vacation here when the sun was shining.


More: East Tennesseans share their eclipse photos


Statewide growth in higher-end hotels is concentrated in Nashville, but is affecting Knoxville, too — especially repurposed historic buildings.


In the springtime Nick Cazana, president of Commercial &amp; Investment Properties, opened The Tennessean Personal Luxury Hotel next to World’s Fair Park in Knoxville. A former state office building underwent a $28 million conversion to that 82-room upper-upscale hotel, with a dozen condos on the top two floors.


The drawing room at The Tennessean hotel (Photo: Saul Young / News Sentinel)

Knox County government picked Nashville-based BNA Associates LLC to redevelop the historic Andrew Johnson Building at 912 S. Gay St. into a boutique hotel and other uses. The building has housed Knox County Schools administrative offices since 1992, but the county has sought to sell the building, which appraised for $7.5 million to $8 million.


BNA proposed a $43 million investment to create a 94-room boutique hotel with apartment units and a rooftop bar. The 140,000-square-foot building has been a hotel before. Built in 1929, it was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.


Knoxville developer Oliver Smith, president of Oliver Smith Realty and Auction Company Inc., bought the William F. Conley building for $8 million, and will turn it into a 160-room Embassy Suites with a restaurant on the ground floor.


More: Wood works: Tennessean Hotel shows off custom furniture


Renovation of the 13-story condo and office building on the corner of Union Avenue and Gay Street is expected to cost $40 million. The city has approved a 15-year, $2.88 million payment in lieu of taxes agreement to aid the renovation.


The historic Farragut Hotel building at 530 S. Gay St., built in 1919 but empty for a decade, opened in late December as the 165-room Hyatt Place Knoxville Downtown. Local developer Rick Dover bought it in September 2014 and gave it a $25 million makeover. His agreement with the city included a property tax freeze worth $7.7 million over 25 years and a $2.9 million HUD Section 108 loan.


In partnership with Bristol Development, Dover also plans to renovate the former state Supreme Court building on Henley Street as a 170-room upscale hotel. The building has been empty since 2003, but Dover bought it from the city for $2.6 million. Plans call for an $82.8 million investment to create the hotel, 230 apartment units, a PetSafe store, a Burleson brand restaurant inside the former Supreme Court chambers, 8,000 feet of meeting space and 490 parking spots. The building would likely require tax increment financing or payment in lieu of taxes from the city, according to the company’s proposal.


Several big announcements promise to bring 1,750 new jobs to Knox and surrounding counties over the next few years, in return for hefty incentive packages.


In April, handgun-maker SCCY Industries announced it would move its headquarters and factory from Florida to Big Springs Industrial Park in Maryville. The company announced it would invest $22.5 million to build a factory, starting production by late 2018, and hire about 200 at the start. An incentive agreement with Alcoa, Maryville and the Industrial Development Board of Blount County includes a pledge to hire at least 250 new employees, paying at least $17 per hour, including benefits, within five years.


In return, the company would be reimbursed $1.7 million for its land cost and get either a two-year property tax abatement on land, buildings and equipment or a training grant of up to $400,000. Further unspecified incentives may come from the state and TVA.


In August, Lifetime Products opened the largest factory in Knox County, an enlarged former GE building in Eastbridge Business Park, where the company will make plastic kayaks. It was expected to employ 125 to start with, and add 375 more jobs over five years.


Lifetime bought the building for $6.2 million and doubled its size. The $115.6 million project received more than $2.67 million in state and county incentives.



    DENSO announces it will spend $1 billion in expanding its Maryville plant as well as hire 1,000 workers during an announcement event on Friday.
    Brianna Paciorka/News Sentinel

Then in early October, Japanese auto-parts maker DENSO opened a $400 million expansion, which employs more than 500, on its Maryville campus — and took the occasion to announce a further $1 billion expansion, expected to bring 1,000 more jobs over four years.


Construction on the latest expansion is expected to finish by September 2018. Local authorities are providing DENSO with a tax abatement for about $14 million and a $2.2 million training grant. More incentives likely came from TVA.


More: DENSO expansion comes with ceremony, incentives


Several local flagship firms announced this year they would sell out to buyers elsewhere. In July, Clayton HC Inc. received the OK to sell Clayton Bank and Trust and American City Bank to FB Financial Corp., a holding company for Nashville’s FirstBank.


The $284.2 million deal merged FirstBank and the two local firms, with FirstBank as the surviving entity. Clayton HC, more than 98 percent owned by Clayton Homes founder Jim Clayton, is the sole shareholder of Clayton Bank and Trust and American City Bank.


At the end of August, Scripps Networks Interactive and Maryland-based Discovery Communications announced that Discovery would buy Scripps in a cash and stock deal worth $14.6 billion. The deal includes Discovery’s assumption of Scripps’ $2.7 billion debt, but it remains unclear whether Scripps operations in Knoxville will remain here. Scripps employs about 1,000 in the area. The merger is expected to close in early 2018. Discovery announced it hopes to save $350 million over two years by merging and streamlining operations.


At the end of August, Scripps Networks Interactive and Maryland-based Discovery Communications announced that Discovery would buy Scripps in a cash and stock deal worth $14.6 billion. (Photo: Submitted)

Maryville-based Ruby Tuesday Inc. announced in mid-October it would sell out to NRD Capital, an Atlanta private equity firm. But, in November, at least eight shareholders filed class-action suits to stop the sale, arguing the company failed to pursue better offers from other buyers.


NRD offered to buy all of the struggling restaurant chain’s common stock for $2.40 per share in cash, 21 percent above Ruby Tuesday’s closing share price on Oct. 13. The $335 million deal included assumption of Ruby Tuesday’s debt, making it worth $146.3 million to shareholders; it was expected to close Dec. 21.


More: Regal Entertainment Group agrees to deal with Cineworld


Finally, Regal Entertainment Group announced in early December it would sell out to European theater chain Cineworld Group, a $5.9 billion deal including assumption of Regal’s debt. Cineworld, which owns 232 theaters in nine European countries and Israel, agreed to pay $23 per share of Regal stock, with Barclays Bank and HSBC Bank lending $4 billion for the purpose. The purchase is expected to close in the first quarter of 2018.


Regal is to survive as a wholly owned indirect subsidiary of Cineworld. Regal has 561 theaters in 43 states, Guam, Saipan, American Samoa and the District of Columbia, including 13 in Tennessee.


The sale is not expected to affect Regal’s agreement with Knoxville to move its headquarters into a nine-story building at 101 E. Blount Ave. on Knoxville’s redeveloping South Waterfront. That deal includes a $12.5 million incentive package.


In the year after a devastating wildfire, Sevier County sought to rebuild not just its structures but its business and reputation as a prime tourist destination.


The Nov. 28, 2016, forest fire damaged or destroyed more than 2,500 structures, many of them rental cabins in the wooded hills. Some hotels and attractions also were damaged or destroyed, but Gatlinburg’s central business district survived while Pigeon Forge and Sevierville were largely unscathed.


An aerial view shows Gatlinburg the day after a wildfire hit the city on Tuesday, Nov. 29, 2016, in Sevier County. (Photo: Paul Efird / News Sentinel)

For months afterward local governments and the state poured extra money into advertising to convince people in surrounding states their favorite Smoky Mountains attractions weren’t gone. Damaged or destroyed businesses were rebuilt, such as Westgate Smoky Mountain Resort &amp; Spa and the Gatlinburg location of Alamo Steakhouse. And new features went up, including Pigeon Forge’s Black Fox Lodge, Gatlinburg’s Margaritaville Resort in the Smokies and the 70-acre mountaintop Anakeesta project.


The commercial rebuilding means there are plenty of jobs available in Sevier County, but business owners have had a hard time hiring due to a lack of workers, resulting in large part from a shortage of rental housing.


More: Year of Recovery: New school year, new homes represent hope for Gatlinburg families 9 months after wildfire


 
