PHOENIX (AP) — The Latest on a special election to replace Arizona Rep. Trent Franks (all times local):

3:30 p.m.

The Arizona attorney general's office is reviewing whether the state's resign-to-run law means sitting lawmakers must step down if they decide to run for former U.S. Rep. Trent Franks' seat.

Office spokesman Ryan Anderson says attorneys are looking at state law, the state Constitution and previous cases to see if the Jan. 10 filing deadline for the Franks special election triggers the law. Resign-to-run bars sitting officeholders from running unless they are in their last year of office.

The filing deadline comes more than a year before lawmakers' current terms officially expire next January. Election lawyer Tim La Sota says it's clear the law requires resignation.

At least three current Republican lawmakers are either running or considering running for Franks' seat representing the northwest Phoenix suburbs.

Franks resigned last week amid sexual misconduct allegations.


___

1 p.m.

Former state Rep. Phil Lovas has resigned from a job with the Trump Administration as his name is being mentioned as a possible replacement for U.S. Rep. Trent Franks.

Political consultant and Lovas friend Brian Seitchik said Monday that Lovas will have more to say about his future later in the week. He had been the regional advocate for the Small Business Administration

Lovas ran President Donald Trump's Arizona campaign operations last year and has been urged to run by state Treasurer Jeff DeWit, who was COO of the national Trump campaign.

Franks resigned last week amid sexual misconduct allegations. Gov. Doug Ducey on Monday set the date for a special primary election for Feb. 27 and the special general election for April 24.

Republicans Steve Montenegro and Bob Stump announced they were running Monday and more are likely.

___

10:40 a.m.

State Sen. Steve Montenegro says he's joining the race to replace Rep. Trent Franks, who resigned from Congress amid sexual misconduct allegations.

Montenegro worked as Franks' district director and said Monday he had told Franks he would run to replace him in the upcoming special election. He had been seeking the Republican nomination for secretary of state.

Montenegro campaign consultant Constantin Querard says he will resign his Senate seat.

Former Corporation Commissioner Bob Stump also announced his run for the Republican nomination in Franks' 8th Congressional District Monday.

Several other Republicans are also considered possible contenders for the district covering the northwest Phoenix suburbs.

Gov. Doug Ducey on Monday set the date for the primary election for Feb. 27 and the general election for April 24.


___

9:20 a.m.

Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey has set the dates for special elections to fill the congressional seat vacated when Rep. Trent Franks resigned amid sexual misconduct allegations.

Ducey on Monday set the primary election for Feb. 27 and the general election will be on April 24.

The district covering much of the northwest Phoenix suburbs is heavily Republican and several potential GOP candidates have already said they may run. Former Corporation Commissioner Bob Stump formally announced his candidacy within an hour of Ducey's announcement.

Candidates have until Jan. 10 to file nominating papers.

Franks initially said he would leave office on Jan. 31 but resigned Friday under pressure from House Speaker Paul Ryan.

A former Franks aide had told The Associated Press the congressman pressured her to carry his child and once offered her $5 million to be a surrogate mother.

___

8 a.m.

Gov. Doug Ducey faces a deadline Monday for scheduling a special primary election and a special general election to fill the vacancy created when U.S. Rep. Trent Franks resigned after revealing that he discussed surrogacy with two female staffers.

Several Republicans have said they shown an interest in seeking the vacancy in the 8th Congressional District, an area of northern and western Phoenix suburbs.

Franks initially said he would leave office on Jan. 31. But after getting an ultimatum from House Speaker Paul Ryan, he announced Friday he would step aside immediately.

A former Franks aide had told The Associated Press that the congressman pressured her to carry his child and once offered her $5 million to be a surrogate mother.

Franks served eight terms in office.