Photo provided by the candidate

Photo provided by the candidate

Photo provided by the candidate's campaign 

Photo provided by the candidate

Photo provided by the candidate

Photo provided by the candidate's campaign 

All four candidates in the race for the District 93 state House seat are vying for their first elected office, but all say they've got the chops to move the New Orleans district forward.


The candidates — Eldon Anderson, Kenny Bordes, Royce Duplessis and Danil Faust — are all Democrats.


Duplessis, a lawyer, has served on the City Planning Commission for five years and worked as chief of staff for former City Councilman James Carter, while Bordes boasts of a background in labor law that he says would help him deal with equal pay issues at the state level. 



                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Stay in the know about New Orleans' biggest news headlines. Sign up today for our newsletter!

Meanwhile, Anderson and Faust, a music promoter and an actuary-turned-bartender, tout deep connections to their communities and claim a unique understanding of local issues.


All hope to succeed Helena Moreno, who last fall won an at-large seat on the New Orleans City Council.


The 93rd District covers the Central Business District and the French Quarter, as well as parts of the Warehouse District, Central City, Treme, the Lower Garden District and the 7th Ward.


The primary is March 24. Early voting is underway through Saturday. A runoff, if needed, would be held April 28.


Anderson, 43, a music industry promoter and activist, said he would work with local leaders to fix the city's problems with crime, affordable housing and public schools.


Local politicians seem blind to those and other issues, he said. “Have they succeeded or failed? Really, I don’t know, because I haven’t seen them, unless it’s time for an election,” he said.


Anderson sees his candidacy as an extension of work he’s done his entire life, such as donating instruments to public school bands and being involved in various civic organizations.


He’s self-financed his campaign with a few hundred dollars so far and survived a court challenge to his candidacy earlier this year.


Anderson said he hasn’t tried to raise money and keeps getting challenged in court — he was removed from the at-large City Council race against Moreno last year for not filing tax returns — because he refuses to be beholden to anyone if elected.


“I didn’t ask anyone’s permission to do this,” he said. “And I have not been groomed by anyone to be a politician.”


Bordes, 35, said his work as a labor and civil rights lawyer for his own practice in New Orleans and New York gives him an understanding of fair-pay issues that others don’t have. So does the decade he spent busing tables to pay his tuition at Jesuit High School and later Catholic University in Washington, D.C. 


“If we want better wages … who better to do that than someone who has actually had to address these laws in court?” he said.


If elected, he said, he’ll be an “outsider, not an insider” and will use “unique, outside-the-box thinking” to reduce the pay gap between men and women, help create more affordable housing and increase job opportunities.


He’d also work to solve the state’s fiscal challenges, help the district’s small businesses and raise teacher pay in public schools.


Bordes has amassed $56,000 in contributions and tossed another $10,000 of his own money into the race, a sizable war chest that is second only to that of Duplessis.


He said he wants to increase transparency and access to his office by holding monthly meetings in different neighborhoods if elected.


“I put people over politics ... and we want to be a voice for the people,” he said.


Duplessis, 35, sees himself as the statesman in the race, highlighting his work as chief of staff for former Councilman James Carter, his role as a special counsel to the Louisiana Supreme Court and his five-year tenure on the City Planning Commission. He now has his own law firm.


“I’ve been a policymaker, I’ve been an advocate and an attorney, and I think that unique experience makes me qualified to go to Baton Rouge and get things done,” he said.


If elected, he would work to make New Orleans housing more affordable, join Democrats’ fight to raise the minimum wage statewide and push for more investment in early childhood education.


Duplessis has raised roughly $69,000 since November and added $25,000 of his own money. He’s nabbed endorsements from Moreno, the Alliance for Good Government and other groups.


That support, however, has made him a target. He was accused, in anonymous packets sent to media outlets, of missing more than one-third of votes during his five years on the Planning Commission. The message: If Duplessis can’t show up to do his job in New Orleans, he shouldn’t be elected to go to Baton Rouge.


Publicly available vote summaries show that Duplessis missed votes about 40 percent of the time in 2012 and 2015, and about 33 percent of the time in 2013 and 2014. The data indicated his attendance record was not significantly out of line with that of other commission members.


“If my attendance record was an issue ... my colleagues on the commission would have never voted me to become chairman,” he said.


Before this race, Faust, 43, unsuccessfully challenged U.S. Rep. Steve Scalise in 2016 and was disqualified from the Criminal District Court clerk’s race in 2017 because he qualified as a Green Party candidate but was registered as a Democrat.  


He said he’s learned a lot about politics since then. Moreover, he said, his background as an actuary would be an asset, as some state lawmakers must depend on lobbyists for information on how certain bills would affect the state’s finances. However, the state’s fiscal office does provide calculations of how proposed laws would affect state revenue and spending.


Faust was an actuarial analyst — someone who calculates the probability of, and costs associated with, accidents and injuries — for Oxford Life Insurance in Phoenix. He also worked as a data and operations analyst for PacWest Financial, also in Phoenix.


At present, he works as a bartender and cook at 3 Legged Dog on Burgundy Street.  


If elected, he said, he would closely examine corporations that receive state tax benefits to ensure they are providing new jobs for residents. He also would work to stop the proliferation of short-term rentals, improve public transit and boost protections for hospitality workers.


He’s put about $1,000 of own money into his campaign and has not asked for any donations, he said.


He’s running because he wants to see real changes, he said.


“I’m the one who has gone out to all of the marches,” he said. “I am still out there with the people, on the issue of the Entergy power plant. … I have been involved with everything in the community, because I just care.”


Follow Jessica Williams on Twitter, @jwilliamsNOLA​.

ELDON ANDERSON


AGE: 43.


Born in New Orleans.


FAMILY: Married, three children.


EDUCATION: currently studying business management at Delgado Community College. 


OCCUPATION: music promoter, entrepreneur, activist.


POLITICAL AFFILIATION: Democrat. 


PREVIOUS POLITICAL ACTIVITY: qualified for Orleans Parish School Board in 2016 but withdrew. Filed to run for at-large City Council seat in 2017 but was disqualified for failure to file state tax returns. Has worked on various political campaigns since 1997. 


KENNETH 'KENNY' BORDES


AGE: 35.


Born in New Orleans.


FAMILY: married, one child. 


EDUCATION: bachelor's degree in theater from Catholic University in Washington, D.C.; law degree from Loyola law school. 


OCCUPATION: lawyer in private practice; owns New Orleans Film and Entertainment Group. 


POLITICAL AFFILIATION: Democrat.  


PREVIOUS POLITICAL ACTIVITY: worked for Joe Giarrusso III's City Council campaign last year. 


WEBSITE: kennybordes.com. 


ROYCE DUPLESSIS


AGE: 35.


Born in New Orleans. 


FAMILY: married, expecting first child. 


EDUCATION: bachelor's degree in mass communications and media studies from Xavier University; law degree from Howard University School of Law. 


OCCUPATION: lawyer with his own firm, Duplessis Law Group. 


POLITICAL AFFILIATION: Democrat. 


PREVIOUS POLITICAL ACTIVITY: member of City Planning Commission since 2012; served on Orleans Parish Democratic Executive Committee, 2012-14; chief of staff for former City Councilman James Carter, 2006-07. Worked on the campaigns of Carter and Traffic Court Judge Steven Jupiter. 


WEBSITE: royceduplessis.com/


DANIL FAUST


AGE: 43.


Born in San Juan, Puerto Rico.


FAMILY: single. 


EDUCATION: bachelor's degree in mathematics from Arizona State University; served in U.S. Army. 


OCCUPATION: bartender at 3 Legged Dog; activist. Previously worked as an actuary, hedge fund manager and Army medic.


POLITICAL AFFILIATION: registered Democrat but qualified for office in 2017 as a Green Party member.


PREVIOUS POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Lost race for U.S. House in 2016. Filed to run for clerk of Criminal District Court in 2017 but was disqualified. 

Lawyer Royce Duplessis continues to have the financial edge in the House District 93 race, having swooped up more than $24,000 in the past mon…


                                    
                                        Whenever Jessica Williams posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.


                Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.
            


                Error! There was an error processing your request.
            

Stay in the know about New Orleans' biggest news headlines. Sign up today for our newsletter!

New Orleans news updates are sent each weekday morning. Stay informed. Signup today! 

News Tips:newstips@theadvocate.com

Other questions:subscriberservices@theadvocate.com