By

Gareth Davies For Mailonline






  Published:
  05:12 EDT, 27 March 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  05:12 EDT, 27 March 2018









View  comments



A convicted Scottish pedophile has been extradited to the US to face charges of sexually abusing four other children in Arizona. 


Jordan Kemlo, 21, was booked into the Pima County jail on February 23 accused of the continuous abuse of the minor, sexual conduct with a child under 15, two counts of child molestation and solicitation to commit sexual conduct with a minor in 2014. 


He was jailed for four years in the UK back in 2015 for a prolonged period of sexual assaults he committed between 2011 and 2014 on the same young boy who was just six when his torment started. 


Kemlo will now be tried on the charges against different children who he is said to have attacked while living in Tucson in 2014.


Kemlo emigrated to the US between the abuse and his arrest in Scotland.


He was flown to Arizona to face fresh charges and a source told The Press and Journal: 'He was arrested in connection with a 2014 case involving child molestation and is charged with one count of continuous sex abuse of a child and one count of sexual contact with a minor under the age of 15.'


The convicted child molester could be in jail for weeks before a judge hears the case at Pima County Superior Court, and the Home Office has handed over his file to the US authorities.  


The convicted child molester could be in jail for weeks before a judge hears the case at Pima County Superior Court (pictured), and the Home Office has handed over his file to the US authorities

In his original case, Glasgow Crown Court (pictured) heard how Kemlo's young victim described him as 'the bad boy'

In his original case, Glasgow Crown Court heard how Kemlo's young victim described him as 'the bad boy'. 


At the time, he told police: 'I never thought of the consequences. I was shocked, confused why it happened.'


Having carried out a campaign of sexual abuse, including attacking the boy both at his own house and his victim's house, Kemlo decided not to hand himself in because he was 'ashamed', according to The Press Journal. 


  

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group