By

Dailymail.com Reporter






  Published:
  01:43 EDT, 29 December 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  12:43 EDT, 29 December 2017







          61

View  comments

A man who posed as a police officer was arrested after motorists in Arizona say he pulled them over in a mimicked traffic stop.


The Tucson Police Department obtained bizarre dash cam footage from the unnamed individual's vehicle that shows him arresting three people and handcuffing one during the December 19 incident.


The department shared further details about the matter to their Facebook page this week.


'The suspect identified himself as an undercover law enforcement officer and had a red and blue flashing visor light on a white 4-door sedan that he was driving,' the post read.


Also found on the dash cam footage were numerous other stops that occurred earlier that day. 


A man who posed as a police officer was arrested after motorists in Arizona say he pulled them over in a mimicked traffic stop last week

The Tucson Police Department obtained bizarre dash cam footage from the December 19 incident

He stopped three people and handcuffed one of them in the mimicked traffic stop




After the drivers reported the suspicious incident, police were later able to track him down in Oro Valley. 


Police believe he may have committed other offenses prior and are investigating further.


'If you do not believe that you are being stopped by a legitimate police officer, you can call 911.


'All officers carry a badge and police identification with them. You can ask for their name, badge number, and department identification. 911 can verify the name and badge number of the officer.'


The man was booked to the Pima County Jail on charges of kidnapping and impersonating a law enforcement officer. 


Anyone with further information is asked to report to the department.


Officers believe he may have committed other offenses prior and are investigating further

'All officers carry a badge and police identification with them. You can ask for their name, badge number, and department identification,' Tucson police said

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group