    

  

SAN FRANCISCO &amp; LAUSANNE, Switzerland–(BUSINESS WIRE)–June 21, 2018–

      Bestmile,       the leading mobility services platform that enables transportation       service providers to manage, operate and optimize autonomous and       human-driven vehicle fleets, was selected among hundreds of candidates       as one of the World Economic Forum’s “Technology Pioneers.” Bestmile was       founded with the mission to make transportation safe, efficient, and       affordable for all, and has developed a first-of-its kind platform that       enables mobility service providers to easily add new services to       existing operations.    

      The World Economic Forum’s Technology Pioneers community are early-stage       companies from around the world that are involved in the design,       development and deployment of new technologies and innovations, and are       poised to have a significant impact on business and society.    

      This year’s cohort is the most diverse ever, both geographically and in       terms of gender. 25% are female-led, and a majority (54%) come from       regions outside the United States and Silicon Valley, with each       continent represented, barring Antarctica. There is also a wide variety       in the technologies the pioneers focus on: the focus technologies       include artificial intelligence, big data and internet of things (IoT),       biotechnology, blockchain, autonomous vehicles, cyber security, vertical       farming and other agricultural advances, decentralised microgrids and       robotics. The full list of technology pioneers can be found at http://wef.ch/techpioneers18.    

      Following its selection as Technology Pioneer, CEO and Co-founder       Raphael Gindrat will be participating in the World Economic Forum Annual       Meeting of the New Champions. This meeting, also dubbed “Summer Davos,”       will be held in Tianjin, China, September 18-20. Many Pioneers will also       attend the Annual Meeting in Davos, in January 2019, and continue to       contribute to Forum initiatives in the course of the next two years.    

      “We welcome Bestmile in this diverse group of Technology Pioneers,” says       Fulvia Montresor, Head of Technology Pioneers at the World Economic       Forum. “Bestmile and its fellow pioneers are front and centre in shaping       the ongoing Fourth Industrial Revolution and we believe they will be       transforming society and industry in a positive way in the years to       come.”    

      “For shared, emission-free mobility services to deliver on their promise       to improve traffic, air quality and overall quality of life in the       world’s cities, vehicles of any brand and type will need to be able to       work together as optimized fleets that move more people with fewer       vehicles,” said Gindrat. “Bestmile’s technology enables intelligent       fleet management, and we are excited about working with the WEF       Technology Pioneers program to contribute to a more sustainable future       for all.”    

      In addition to being selected for the Technology Pioneers program,       Bestmile is also a member of the World Economic Forum’s Centre       for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. “Mobility is one of the       industries that will be greatly impacted by advancements in the Fourth       Industrial Revolution,” said Murat Sönmez, Head of the Centre for the       Fourth Industrial Revolution. “We are pleased Bestmile has joined the       Centre to work with us to drive meaningful impact and help us tackle the       next big challenges in a human-centered way.”    

      The Technology Pioneers were selected by a selection       committee of more than 60 academics, entrepreneurs, venture       capitalists and corporate executives. The committee based its decisions       on criteria including innovation, potential impact and leadership. Past       recipients include Airbnb, Google, Kickstarter, Mozilla, Palantir       Technologies, Spotify, TransferWise, Twitter and Wikimedia.    

      All info on this year’s Technology Pioneers can be found here: http://wef.ch/techpioneers18    

      More information on past winners can be found here.    

      About Bestmile:    

      Bestmile empowers mobility providers to deploy, manage and optimize       autonomous and human-driven vehicle fleets, supporting fixed-route and       on-demand services, regardless of the vehicle brand or type. Bestmile’s       mobility platform allows operators to support multi-modal, multi-service       offerings in a safe and efficient manner by integrating autonomous       vehicles in the existing transportation ecosystem. Bestmile’s autonomous       mobility service platform is being used daily in shared electric       autonomous vehicles in pedestrian areas and public roads. Incorporated       in 2014, Bestmile has global offices in San Francisco (USA) and Lausanne       (Switzerland). For more information, visit bestmile.com.    

      About World Economic Forum:    

      The World Economic Forum, committed to improving the state of the world,       is the International Organization for Public-Private Cooperation. The       Forum engages the foremost political, business and other leaders of       society to shape global, regional and industry agendas. (www.weforum.org).    



View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180620006332/en/

      BestmileMediaUSAlison Flood, +1 415-317-4089press.us@bestmile.comorEuropeJelena       Alfonso, +41 21 508 70 01press.europe@bestmile.com    