Welcome! 

News Feed Item




Global alternative legal services provider Integreon today announced it
has acquired Allegory, the litigation management software business
founded by legal tech pioneer Alma Asay. The acquisition brings the
addition of Asay – and the entire Allegory team – to Integreon’s deep
bench of industry experts in the litigation management and discovery
spaces. Allegory’s technology, combined with Integreon’s preeminent
human capital, makes legal departments and outside counsel greater than
they were before – a combination that provides the industry with an
unprecedented, new resource to help manage complex litigation.




“Technology is evolving to the point where it needs to be integrated
into all alternative legal services. The addition of Allegory allows
Integreon to extend its growing lead in the discovery space and, for the
first time, provide a true end-to-end solution for legal departments and
outside counsel – for managing the entire case and all of discovery, not
just the document discovery piece,” said Bob Rowe, CEO of Integreon.
“Witness statements, depositions, written discovery, pleadings, hearing
transcripts, court rulings and, of course, documents, are all managed
and analyzed in context, in a single, collaborative platform accessible
by law firms and corporate counsel. By adding Allegory’s cutting-edge
technology to our services, we now provide a truly integrated, unmatched
litigation management and discovery solution to the global legal market.”




For litigators and in-house counsel, Allegory’s technology offers a
greater level of transparency and efficiency, providing real-time access
to all litigation information in context. “That context is critical,”
Rowe explained. “It’s abundantly clear that in-house counsel want more
control than ever before. This collaborative environment puts everything
in front of you at once – giving our clients a deep edge over the
opposing side in complex litigation matters.”




In her new role as Chief Innovation Officer, Legal Solutions at
Integreon, Asay will focus on working with clients to adopt the right
technologies to achieve their business goals.




“I’m excited to spend more time focused on what I’ve loved most about
building Allegory – helping law firms and in-house counsel embrace
innovation and deploy new technology to their advantage,” Asay said.
“Integreon’s leadership team, vision and breadth of services
particularly impressed me. Integrating Allegory into the Integreon suite
made perfect sense and expands the ways their clients can maintain and
grow a competitive edge.”




Allegory was founded by Asay in 2012, following work as an attorney at
Gibson Dunn under the tutelage of Partner Orin Snyder, where she started
compiling extensive spreadsheets to manage and develop their cases to
help win some of Snyder’s most complex cases, according to the ABA
Journal’s recent profile on Asay after she was awarded the ABA’s
prestigious “Legal Rebel” title.




Asay said she developed Allegory so that lawyers could manage litigation
with tools built for them, connecting everything they need to be great
litigators today, versus the Excel spreadsheets and shared folders that
dominate traditional litigation management. The software will continue
to evolve at Integreon to meet clients’ most pressing needs, continuing
a user-centric tradition most recently evidenced by Allegory’s widely
praised release of a suite
of advanced transcripts features.



“Allegory is an invaluable tool for us and our clients. It provides deep
insights and unprecedented context and amazing information access in
high-stakes litigation matters,” said Andrea Neuman, Partner at Gibson
Dunn. “I’m excited to see Allegory grow as a result of this acquisition
– and as part of an ongoing success story being written by cutting-edge
female entrepreneurship.”




Integreon’s bold move to acquire Allegory is the latest in a series of
recent announcements for the global alternative legal services giant.
The company is aggressively integrating market-leading solutions along
with its elite processing capabilities to offer a powerful combination
in which human capital meets technology to deliver higher value to
customers and clients that is greater than yesterday’s service models.




In October, Integreon announced
its technology partnership with Kira, a deal hailed by Artificial Lawyer
as “doubly significant and perhaps marks a watershed moment for the LPO
industry globally.” The combination of providing clients with the most
advanced technologies and the highest level of industry expertise helps
organizations realize greater efficiency and profitability than what
they can achieve on their own, Rowe explained.




Looking ahead, Rowe said Integreon is on a path “that will allow us to
shape our offerings around industries and technologies to solve some of
the most complex problems in the regulatory and litigation sectors
through innovation and deep institutional knowledge. We couldn’t be more
excited about what the future holds for Integreon clients and the entire
legal industry.”




About Integreon




Integreon is a trusted, global provider of award-winning legal,
document, business and research support solutions to leading law firms,
legal departments, financial institutions and professional services
firms. We apply a highly trained, experienced staff of 2,400 associates
globally to a wide range of problems that require scale and expertise,
enabling clients to become more operationally efficient by streamlining
operations, maximizing investment and improving the quality of work they
provide their end clients. With delivery centers on four continents,
Integreon offers multi-lingual, around-the-clock support, as well as,
onshore, offshore and onsite delivery of our award-winning services. For
more information about Integreon’s extensive range of services, visit www.Integreon.com and
follow Integreon at LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook and Weibo.










View source version on businesswire.com: http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20171128005360/en/


Published November 28, 2017 
Copyright © 2017 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





