Welcome! 

News Feed Item




Cloud-based customer experience (CX) intelligence pioneer InMoment
announced today a free CustomerThink Technology Innovation
Webinar titled “Building the AI-Powered Customer Experience Center of
the Future.” CustomerThink is the world’s largest online community
dedicated to customer-centric business strategy.




The free, live event will take place on Thursday, June 21 at 10 a.m.
PT/1 p.m. ET. Click here
to register.




InMoment Senior Director of Engineering Services Eli Fillmore, whose
experience also includes 20+ years in contact center leadership roles,
joins experts from Genesys and Calabrio to discuss how data and advanced
data science are changing the landscape of contact centers and customer
relationships.



Fillmore’s address, titled “Harness AI to Grow High-Value Human
Relationships,” delves into the intersection of human and machine. While
AI and other technologies promise to streamline and reduce friction
through automation, the real promise may lie in using these innovations
to help human beings have more satisfying and meaningful interactions.
Fillmore will discuss real-world examples of how brands are harnessing
intelligent technologies to create and grow high-value relationships
with both employees and customers.




About InMoment




InMoment™
is the leading cloud-based customer experience (CX) intelligence
platform, arming brands with compelling customer insights to drive
high-value business decisions and relationships with both customers and
employees. InMoment’s industry-leading
analytics power a full suite of Voice
of Customer (VoC), Voice of Employee (VoE), Employee
Engagement, and Social Reviews &amp; Advocacy solutions. InMoment also
provides strategic guidance, support, and related services to more than
500 brands across 95 countries. For more information, visit http://www.inmoment.com.






View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180613005875/en/


Published June 13, 2018 
Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





