
Wednesday 11 July 2018






March 1 2018 2:30 AM



Waymo yesterday showed off a 360-degree video to help people envision what it is like to ride inside an autonomous vehicle.


The company, which is on the cusp of launching self-driving journeys with real people, hopes to win over potential passengers.

Waymo, which is owned by Google parent Alphabet, said in a blog post that it had driven more than five million miles (8.05 million km) on public roads, doubling its miles since January 2017, when it unveiled its improved self-driving system installed in Chrysler Pacifica minivans at the Detroit auto show.

It comes ahead of what will be Waymo's first foray into ride hailing with no human behind the steering wheel in Phoenix, Arizona, in coming months.

Convincing a potentially wary public of the merits - and safety - of self-driving is a key goal of Waymo, considered a pioneer in the global race to deploy autonomous vehicles.

A Gallup poll published last week found that 54pc of the 3,297 US respondents said they were "unlikely" to use self-driving cars, with 59pc saying they would feel uncomfortable riding in one. The survey was conducted in September and October.

Large tech companies, big automakers and well-funded startups have been testing such cars, but for the most part real passengers have not yet been added to the mix. 

Experts believe self-driving cars used in fleets for cab-hailing services are among the most economically viable ways to deploy such technology broadly.

The US state of Arizona has no restrictions on self-driving cars, which has made it a key testing ground for the technology.

Waymo said in November that members of the public using am ride-hailing app would be able to travel in its fleet of minivans in ensuing months. 

At first, a Waymo employee would accompany the passengers in the back seat, but eventually they would travel alone. 

The company has been testing its cars in Arizona with an employee in the back seat and no one at the wheel since October.

The passenger service is expected to roll out in more geographical areas in the United States, at a later, unannounced date. 

REUTERS


Indo Business


Ralph Riegel Data protection rather than aviation regulations now offer Irish householders a route for tackling suspected invasions of privacy from unwanted drone operations.

Adrian Weckler Apple iPhones struggle compared to most other smartphones when it comes to making phone calls, a report from the telecoms regulator claims.

Adrian Weckler This week, Adrian gets a behind-the-scenes tour of Microsoft’s campus headquarters in Redmond, Seattle.





Read the leading stories from the world of Business.



Sign Up



Data protection rather than aviation regulations now... 


Apple iPhones struggle compared to most other... 


This week, Adrian gets a behind-the-scenes tour of... 


A software company doubling its workforce to 500... 


I started this company, Voxgig, as a single founder. 


Here's a thought: why can't the EU just leave alone the one... 


Google allows employees at software companies to read millions of Gmail... 


The head of the National Broadband Plan consortium has distanced himself from... 


It's becoming standard practice for US tech giants to follow... 


This week, Adrian Weckler talks to two women directing crucial operations in two of the... 


New undercover footage from Polish farm... 


Its that time of year again.... 


Traders complain of issues processing Visa card payments as the company's... 


Stand on the terrace of Summerhill in Killiney on a clear summer's day and you... 


'Buoyant' was the word that mart managers of both in Tullow and Carnew... 


Stunning pictures taken last week Newgrange Farm, Slane Co Meath show silage being... 

© Independent.ie 