
			OUR PICKS:		

Amaris Homes, a Maplewood-based home builder specializing in green home design, received Grand Winner recognition at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Housing Innovation Awards. … Kraus-Anderson Construction Co. has hired Joseph Baumann as senior project manager.  He will work in the company’s Minneapolis office.

Timberland Partners, a privately-owned real estate investment, development and management firm, announced that it has appointed Mary Kahl as senior vice president of property management, Dan Hoiby as chief financial officer and Andrea Brown as controller. They will be based in the firm’s Minneapolis office. …  Minneapolis-based health care real estate development firm Davis has won the national HREI Insights Award from Healthcare Real Estate Insights for the HealthEast Clinic &amp; Specialty Center in Maplewood. Davis won the award for “Best New Medical Office Building or Other Outpatient Facility (100,000 square feet or more).” … Dominium, a Plymouth-based apartment owner, developer and manager, announced that it has hired Dan O’Mara as director of architecture, Emily D’Urso as senior yardi applications manager (yardi is a property-management technology system); and Gino Bianchi-Rossi as accounting coordinator.Related Articles




			
	
				
			Despite being told to leave, electric scooter company Bird sails back into St. Paul for a second day		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota officials seek cropland for new federal conservation program		

			
	




			
	
				
			Minnesota farm must stop interstate sales of medicated meat		

			
	




			
	
				
			Starbucks, citing ocean threat, is ditching plastic straws		

			
	




			
	
				
			After talks, NKorea accuses US of ‘gangster-like’ demands		

			
	



The University of St. Thomas hosted its ninth annual Fowler Business Concept Challenge (a competition similar to Shark Tank), awarding $62,000 in scholarships to the following students: Business Concept Track: $15,000: Safe in Sound, Savannah Hufendick; Runner-up, $7,500: StudyGroup, Jalen Betsinger; Second Runner-up, $5,000, and Most Effective Presenter, $1,000: STEAM Montessori Kids Care, Grace Gathaara; Third Runner-up, $2,500: Isern Biotechnology, Evan M. Kalb; Social Venture Concept Track: Winner, $15,000, and Most Effective Presenter, $1,000: Seraph 7 Studios, Jules Porter; Runner-up, $7,500: Language of Learning, Julia Zappa; Second Runner-up, $5,000: Sun Light, Rose Whitney-Eliason; Third Runner-up, $2,500: Esperanza Fellowship, Georgina Chinchilla Gonzalez. The University of St. Thomas has campuses in St. Paul and Minneapolis.

Olson Energy Corp., a Minneapolis company involved in the promotion of clean/renewable energy, announced that Thomas M. Reiter has accepted the position of executive director.

Tim Wolter, owner of Preferred Legal, a White Bear Lake legal services company, announced he recently acquired Frank Murphy Fashions, a historic St. Paul business now located in White Bear Lake. His daughter Alexandra, a personal stylist, is managing the business venture.

Old National Bank has named Jeff Hawkins, president/chief operating officer for Anchor Bank in the Twin Cities, to its Executive Leadership Group. Anchor Bank is a division of Old National Bank. … National accounting firm Moore Stephens North America has announced the addition of Minneapolis-based Lurie LLP to the association. …  TopLine Federal Credit Union welcomed Desmond Foy as branch manager for the Plymouth location at Rockford Road Plaza, 4190 Vinewood Lane. … Gateway Bank, Mendota Heights, announced five promotions: Kelly Gibbons, credit analyst I; Felicia Le, universal banking officer; Carol Lund, senior operations associate II/operations lead; Elisa Dabruzzi, assistant vice-president commercial lending; Becky Durand, assistant vice-president business banking.

The Minneapolis Foundation announced plans to award nearly $5 million to 92 nonprofit organizations, which will receive anywhere between $11,000 and $250,000 to support work that will help advance racial, social and economic equity in 2018.

Allina Health, Minneapolis, has approved construction of the Richard M. Schulze Family Foundation’s Center for Excellence in Neurological Care at Abbott Northwestern Hospital. The Richard M. Schulze Family Foundation contributed a $2 million lead gift to the Abbott Northwestern Hospital Foundation’s $15 million Critical Care Campaign to help pay for the new center.

The Dakota County Regional Chamber of Commerce awarded its Ambassador of the Year Award to Derek Boeve, Minnwest Bank commercial banker in Eagan. … Anna Garcia, Anchor Bank‘s Burnsville bank manager, was named Volunteer of the Year by the Burnsville Chamber of Commerce.


The law firm of Gray Plant Mooty, Minneapolis, announced that Julia Colarusso, Andy Daly, Maisa Frank and Carl Zwisler have been elected shareholders of the firm, effective Jan. 1. … Maslon, Minneapolis, announced that attorneys Shauro Bagchi, Ana Chilingarishvili, Katie Maechler and Steve Schleicher have been elected to the law firm’s partnership, effective Jan. 1. … Fafinski Mark &amp; Johnson, Eden Prairie, announced that litigator Tyler Brimmer has been named a shareholder at the firm. Brimmer was named to the list of 2017 Minnesota Rising Stars by Super Lawyers.

AWT Labels &amp; Packaging has welcomed Jennifer Watana as the new purchasing clerk/buyer at its Minneapolis narrow web, labeling and packaging conversion facility. … Altec Inc., which makes specialized aerial lift trucks, will invest $8.45 million and create 100 jobs in an expansion of its manufacturing facilities in Duluth. … Uponor, Apple Valley, was recently tapped to install a radiant heating turf conditioning system with Radiant Rollout Mats in the Minnesota Vikings’ new 168,000-square-foot practice field in Eagan to keep snow and frost off the outdoor field. … Custom Bagfitters, a Maple Lake custom handbag manufacturer, will expand after receiving $20,000 from the City of Maple Lake Economic Development Authority’s Revolving Loan Fund program.

Minneapolis-based PetVivo Holdings, an emerging biomedical device company focused on the commercialization of medical therapeutics for pets and people has added Randy Wenthold as chief science officer.

Patrice O’Leary has been named associate vice president of Family Services for St. Paul-based Lutheran Social Service of Minnesota. … AccessAbility, A Minneapolis-based organization that assists challenged individuals with self-sufficiency opportunities, welcomed the following new board members: Annemarie Klimek, Medtronic; Julie R. Jost, C.H. Robinson; Mark Young, myHRcounsel, and Jennifer Zuchowski, Metropolitan Council.

The Minnesota Craft Brewers Guild has named Lauren Bennett McGinty executive director. The guild also announced additions to its board of directors: President: Laura Mullen, Bent Paddle Brewing; Vice President: Evan Sallee, Fair State Brewing Cooperative; Treasurer: Matt Schwandt, Bauhaus Brew Labs; Secretary: Jim Watkins, Sociable Cider Werks; board member Zac Carpenter, Bad Weather Brewing; returning board members Scott Krebsbach, Town Hall Brewery and Jace Marti, August Shell Brewing. … The Woodbury Area Chamber of Commerce announced its 2018 Executive Committee: Gina Kazmerski, Image 306, chair; Tim Lawrence, City &amp; County Credit Union, first vice chair; Eric Rislove, Edward Jones, second vice chair; Robin Giguere, Gebhard &amp; Giguere Ltd., treasurer; Clint Jamison, Comcast Spotlight, immediate past board chair.

Aaron Barnard, a senior director in Cushman &amp; Wakefield’s Minneapolis-St. Paul office, was honored this month with the Society of Industrial and Office Realtors Robert P. Boblett Award. Barnard has also been named the 2018 president of the SIOR Foundation. Sydney Johnson, a senior director Cushman &amp; Wakefield, attained her SIOR designation this quarter. … Coldwell Banker Burnet has announced the following agent affiliations: Andrea Goodlund, Lakeville/Burnsville; Scott Rehovsky, Crocus Hill; Jesse Penman, Woodbury; Khalid Ishaque, Highland Park and Kristy Bican, Edina Regional.

Simple Energy Testing, an Eagan-based third party energy efficiency testing company that works with builders and homeowners, has agreed to be acquired by Houston-based DPIS Builder Services.

Outsell, a Minneapolis-based provider of technology services to auto dealerships, announced that Vice President of Marketing Valerie Vallancourt has been named one of MarTechExec’s “50 Women You Need to Know in Martech 2018.” MarTechExec is an online community where marketing professionals rate and review vendors. … Ceridian, a Bloomington-based human capital management technology company, announced its flagship platform, Dayforce HCM, has received a gold medal from Software Reviews, a division of research and advisory firm Info-Tech Research Group Inc. … Renodis, a St. Paul-based provider of telecommunication services, announced the acquisition of US ACOMM Inc., a network solutions provider headquartered in Brooklyn Center.

Otter Tail Corp., Fergus Falls, announced that Jennifer O. Smestad has assumed the roles of vice president, general counsel, and corporate secretary.

EMAIL ITEMS to businessnews@pioneerpress.com.

 

As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here.
