Clear skies. Low 73F. Winds light and variable..

Clear skies. Low 73F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 10, 2018 @ 8:52 pm

Douglas County Jail inmate Denny Mena said that the phone call charges at the jail aren't "that bad" and that they're worth it if they fund re-entry programs.

Douglas County Jail inmate Denny Mena said that the phone call charges at the jail aren't "that bad" and that they're worth it if they fund re-entry programs.

LINCOLN — Nebraska lawmakers gave first-round approval Monday to a bill that could reduce fees for inmates’ phone calls from county jails.

After the proposal met resistance when it was first debated in February, State Sen. John McCollister of Omaha said he met with an opponent to work out a compromise. As a result, senators adopted an amendment Monday and advanced the bill to the second of three rounds of debate on a 28-2 vote.

The bill came about in response to a study last summer by the American Civil Liberties Union of Nebraska that found county jails charging inmates between $7 and $19 for a 15-minute call. In comparison, the state’s prison system charges $1.50 for 15 minutes.

As amended, Legislative Bill 776 requires oversight by the 11-member State Jail Standards Board to ensure that jails charge “reasonable” rates for inmate phone calls or video-conferencing services. It also would prohibit jail officials from receiving “excessive” commissions or bonus payments from service providers.

Another key provision of McCollister’s priority bill spells out that jail personnel are not to record calls between inmates and their lawyers.

In one case, the Hall County Jail had given a prosecutor recordings of what were supposed to be 59 private phone conversations between a public defender and his client.

Officials in Douglas and Lancaster Counties testified against the bill at a public hearing, saying revenue generated by the calls pays for rehabilitative services that help inmates upon their release. Sen. Mike Groene of North Platte also opposed the bill, arguing that it could lead to higher costs for taxpayers while discouraging private companies from providing phone services to small-population counties.

McCollister, Groene and representatives from the ACLU worked out the compromise amendment, and Groene was one of the senators who voted to advance the bill.

In a related matter, McCollister said he will not seek to override a veto of one of his bills last week by Gov. Pete Ricketts. LB 350 would have allowed people convicted of felony crimes to ask a judge to set aside their convictions.




Douglas and Lancaster County officials say they need the phone call revenue for programs designed to help inmates successfully re-enter society when they get out of jail. Douglas County Board Chair Chris Rodgers said losing the phone call revenue would mean the county might have to cut programs.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Joe Duggan works in The World-Herald's Lincoln bureau, where he helps cover state government, the Legislature, the state Supreme Court, southeast Nebraska and Lincoln. Follow him on Twitter @JoeDugganOWH. Phone: 402-473-9587


                                    
                                        Whenever Joe Duggan posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

This is a good thing. My daughter was in jail for a short time, which was horrible in and of itself, but to talk to her to take care of her day-to-day financials was like $12 for every 15 minutes and you had to pay online with a minimum of $40. I am not a wealthy person and I can only imagine the financial strain it must put other families in who are in worse circumstances than myself. The jail only allows 2 visits per week, so if someone else uses that visiting time, a person is denied any additional time, so the phone is all you have.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


