Sign in using your wftv profile

Need a profile? Register now.

Welcome back. Please sign in

By submitting your registration information, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

We have sent a confirmation email to {* data_emailAddress *}. Please check your email and click on the link to activate your account.

We look forward to seeing you on [website] frequently. Visit us and sign in to update your profile, receive the latest news and keep up to date with mobile alerts.

Click here to return to the page you were visiting.

We have sent you an email with a link to change your password.

Edit your profile

Sorry we could not verify that email address. Enter your email below and we'll send you another email.

Click submit to receive another verification email

Check your email for a verification link

By: 
            			                                                                    WFTV Web Staff 
                                    			            

SEMINOLE COUNTY, Fla. - A Seminole County teacher who is accused of having a sexual relationship with a 15-year-old girl was arrested Thursday, the Seminole County Sheriff's Office said.

Jaclyn Truman, 30, is accused of having sexual contact last year with the Paul J. Hagerty High School student multiple times at school, Sheriff's Office spokesman Bob Kealing said.

"In the classroom, that's where you would expect to be a zone for this child and instead that trust was violated," Kealing said.

Read: Florida teacher accused of molesting 13-year-old girl

Seminole County investigators arrested, charged 30 year old high school teacher Jaclyn Truman w/two counts of lewd acts on minor student. pic.twitter.com/zwh7uvimO9

Read: District to pay $3.6M for blaming 3rd graders after teacher molested them

The victim told investigators that the two had sexual encounters five to 10 times from March to May 2016, an arrest report said.

Seminole County Public Schools spokesman Michael Lawrence said Truman worked at the school as a long-term substitute teacher at the time of the alleged relations.

Truman most recently worked at Lake Howell High School, but she was placed on paid administrative leave on Oct. 4 after the alleged incident was reported to the Florida Department of Children and Families, Lawrence said.

Truman also previously worked for the Seminole County School District at Lyman High School and Lake Howell High School. She also worked at Asbury Theological Seminary as coordinator for mentored and pastoral counseling, the school district said.

Read: Police: Mount Dora High School counselor molested teen at school

#Update: Truman turned in her resignation which was effective yesterday. This happened while she was a long-term sub at Hagerty High.#WFTV pic.twitter.com/7kTKbpY1H5

Read: Brevard County teacher accused of 2-year sexual relationship with student

Lawrence said Truman had a clean record and no reports of prior incidents. He said the school district performed background checks on her before hiring her as a full-time teacher.

"During that time frame the teacher had already turned in (her) resignation to the district, which actually was effective and final yesterday," Lawrence said. "Therefore, this individual is no longer an employee of SCPS."

Deputies said Truman surrendered Thursday at the Sheriff's Office. She was booked into the John E. Polk Correctional Facility on two counts of lewd acts on a minor. A judge set her bond at $40,000, which she has since posted.

Read: Volleyball coach accused of performing sexual act on boy, 14, at school

Deputies said they're looking into the possibility that Truman has other victims.

Hagerty High School senior Santiago Villamizar was shocked to hear the accusations that Truman had a sexual relationship with a student.

"That's crazy. That's wild," he said. "I don't even know how that happened. She's 15."

Truman declined to comment as she walked out of the Seminole County Jail Friday.

Truman is the fifth Hagerty High School staff member to be arrested in the past three years.

In 2014, an assistant foodball coach was arrested on charges of having sexual contact with a student and a teacher's aid was arrested for unlawful sexual contact with a minor.

In 2015, a dean was arrested for soliciting prostitution and a social studies teacher was arrested for sending nude photos to a teen online.

Anyone with information about other possible incidents involving Truman is asked to call the Sheriff's Office at 407-665-6650.

Read: Ex-Palm Bay therapeutic school teacher’s aide charged with having sex with student

 

© 2018 Cox Media Group.




© 2018 Cox Media Group.


By using this website, you accept the terms of our Visitor Agreement and Privacy Policy, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.


This station is part of Cox Media Group Television.


Learn about careers at Cox Media Group.

