Sunny skies. High 96F. Winds S at 10 to 15 mph..

A mostly clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:52 am

Thanks for subscribing to the Omaha World-Herald and supporting local journalism. As a subscriber, you have exclusive access to articles that carry the Subscriber Plus logo (left). 

Douglas County is having a hard time hiring and keeping enough correctional officers to manage a growing number of inmates in its jail.

The Douglas County Jail was 42 correctional officers short of its authorized strength on Tuesday, when County Corrections Director Mark Foxall raised the issue during his report to the County Board. The jail is authorized to have 374 officers, but instead had 332.

At the same time, the number of people locked up in the jail is hovering at near-record highs, and a growing number of them have serious mental illnesses, Foxall told the board. The combination of a large, complicated inmate population and a shortage of staff is leading to a lot of mandatory overtime and difficult working conditions for correctional officers. Those factors, among others, are making it harder to keep employees, which is making the shortage of officers worse, Foxall said.

And an improving economy in recent years has been shrinking the pool of applicants for the difficult work, Foxall said. Like Nebraska state prisons, jails all over the nation are facing similar problems.

“We are struggling with our staffing,” Foxall told the County Board.

He said he and other managers are working on the problem with the correctional officers’ union and people from other parts of the criminal justice system.

Some County Board members signaled that they would consider increasing pay to help attract and retain more workers. Board member Marc Kraft found the situation so concerning that he uttered words rarely heard in Omaha government: “If it means we have to raise taxes, then we have to raise taxes,” Kraft said.

The shortage of officers could lead to major, expensive problems in the jail, he said.

“One or two lawsuits could cost us millions of dollars,” Kraft said.

Board member Mike Boyle said the county’s pay for correctional officers is not competitive. Douglas County pays a beginning correctional officer $17.35 an hour. In neighboring Pottawattamie County, the starting pay for a detention officer is $20.94 an hour, and it will go up to $21.53 in July.

Boyle said he, Foxall, union leaders and several other stakeholders met at length Monday to discuss the issue. Boyle said more meetings will be forthcoming and that he would like to include more County Board members for public discussions.

In addition to pay, which is a matter of negotiation between the county and the union, he said the group is discussing such matters as how to reduce the number of people in the jail.

Board Chairman Chris Rodgers said the county needs to find reasons and solutions for the rising numbers of people who are in jail while awaiting trial and people with mental health issues who don’t belong in jail.

The Douglas County Jail’s average daily population was 1,245 in January. That number had been running much lower for several years, especially in the dead of winter, until last year.

Foxall at first thought it was an anomaly. But the trend has continued, with numbers going up because of increasing felony prosecutions and other factors. All of the jail’s housing units are now in use, whereas several years ago many of them were closed.

“If my population trend does not reverse, I’m going to run out of room,” Foxall said.

He said he is taking a number of steps to try to reduce the jail population. Recently, for example, he began providing an office in the jail for two probation officers to work with inmates.

That should help in two ways, Foxall said. One is to process presentence investigations quickly, so inmates can be sentenced and leave the jail for probation, prison, freedom or whatever the judge orders. The other is to have more inmates who are headed for probation meet with probation officers before leaving jail. That should help the inmates understand what they must do to successfully complete their probation. That way, they’ll be less likely to be arrested and jailed for violating probation.

Ironically, Foxall’s report to the board occurred the day after 11 new correctional officers started work in the jail. He hopes to start another class of officers soon. But even that glimmer came with clouds. Boyle said more than 1,000 people had shown interest in joining the last class, but 11 made it all the way through the checks and stuck with training.

The new officers barely made up for the previous month’s attrition. In January, according to Foxall’s report, 11 correctional officers left the county’s employ.




The Quasar drive-in theater would show show first-run movies on weekends from Memorial Day to Labor Day.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.

Chris Burbach covers the Douglas County Board, Planning Board and other local government bodies, as well as local neighborhood issues. Follow him on Twitter @chrisburbach. Phone: 402-444-1057.


                                    
                                        Whenever Chris Burbach posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Maybe if the County Board would stop approving their pay increases and stop paying for things like the $50,000 dinner party this would help with pay increases for the officers. Of course people in Douglas County would help by stop acting like sheep and start voting most of the County Board out of office

Words of wisdom!

$50K is a drop in the bucket.  Yes, it will take increased taxes but that isn't going to fix it either.  This trend has been growing for decades and the fixes are going to include a lot more spending on everything from mental health care that we've abandoned and programs to keep kids out of trouble before they get to the criminal justice system.  As Ben Franklin said, "An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure".  None of that is going to happen when you have right wing Republicans controlling the agenda.  


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


