Sunny. High 94F. Winds S at 10 to 20 mph..

A clear sky. Low 77F. Winds SSE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:52 pm

Robert Reynolds is accused of killing his wife’s friend at his home in Oakland after a night of drinking on April 8, 2014.

Robert Reynolds is accused of killing his wife’s friend at his home in Oakland after a night of drinking on April 8, 2014.

AVOCA, Iowa — Robert Reynolds was found guilty of second-degree murder Friday in the April 8, 2014, shooting death of Patricia Kinkade-Dorsey.

He faces up to 50 years in prison and must complete 70 percent of his sentence before he is eligible for parole.

Friday’s conviction marks the second time he has been convicted of her death. His previous conviction for first-degree murder following a jury trial in Council Bluffs was overturned by the Iowa Court of Appeals based on an 1884 law that called for the trial to be held in Avoca instead of Council Bluffs.

The law once divided Pottawattamie County into two for judicial purposes. Reynolds’ retrial was ordered to take place in Avoca, but the East Pottawattamie County Courthouse was deemed incapable of hosting the trial. The Fire Hall on Main Street was used instead.

Judge Susan Christensen handed down the verdict after a bench trial that included a 911 audio recording after the shooting.

Reynolds testified that he had hallucinated while intoxicated and thought Kinkade-Dorsey, a guest who was staying overnight at the home, was a demon threatening him and his family.

While being booked at the Sheriff’s Office, Reynolds told law enforcement that you don’t kill someone unless it’s a righteous kill. Seven hours after the shooting, Reynolds tried to call his mother from jail.

“I killed a woman last night,” the audio recording from the jail said, the voice identified as Reynolds’.

Reynolds had several opportunities before the shooting to make another choice, Christensen said.

Instead, he went to the bedroom after arguing with Kinkade-Dorsey in the kitchen, grabbed a pistol, returned to the kitchen and pushed his wife out of the way before shooting Kinkade-Dorsey three times at close range.

“It is beyond a reasonable doubt that Reynolds shot Patricia, she died as a result of his actions and that he acted with malice,” Christensen said.

Robert Reynolds is accused of killing his wife’s friend at his home in Oakland after a night of drinking on April 8, 2014.




Robert Reynolds, who was convicted of first-degree murder in 2014, has had his conviction reversed by the Court of Appeals of Iowa.

Sign up for a digital subscription to The World-Herald now and get your first month for just 99 cents.


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. And share with us - we
love to hear eyewitness accounts.


