By

Jennifer Smith For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  11:40 EDT, 15 May 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  17:57 EDT, 15 May 2018







           3

View  comments

The ex-wife of a slain sheriff's deputy who was killed in the line of duty has accused his new partner of duping their children out of money that was raised on their behalf after his death to keep it all for herself. 


Deputy Mark Burbridge was shot dead by an inmate trying to escape in Council Bluffs, Iowa, in May 2017. 


He and a colleague had just transported inmate Wesley Williams Correa-Carmenaty back to county jail from court, where he had been sentenced to 45 years behind bars, when he shot them with a stolen gun that he got off another deputy.  


Kelsey, 23, Kaleb, 15, and Karely, 14, at the funeral of their father, slain Iowa sheriff's deputy Mark Burbridge, last May. The children's mother say they have been denied access to $160,000 raised by well-wishers after their father's death by their stepmother 

Mark Burbridge, 43, was shot dead by an escaped inmate last May 

Correa-Carmenaty then hijacked a prison van and later stole a Nissan before he was caught. 


In the wake of the cop's death, his colleagues set up The Mark Burbridge Memorial Fund to benefit his  children, Kelsey, 23, Kaleb, 15, and Karley, 14, his  and his second wife Jessica, 40.


But a year after his death, the children's mother, Burbridge's first wife Sarah, has claimed that Jessica is withholding the $160,000 that was raised. 


She is suing Jessica and Pottawattamie County claiming it gave the cop's second wife control of the account which she has now closed. 


When police announced it last year, they said it was designed to 'assist fallen Pottawattamie County Sheriff’s Deputy Mark Burbridge’s wife and three children.' 


They asked for donations through PayPal or at a bank in Council Bluffs. 


Jessica did not deny refusing the children the money from the fund when she responded to the lawsuit. 


Instead, she claimed that they are the beneficiaries of a $400,000 life insurance policy, $171,000 from the Department of Justice and $8,000 from the Homicide Survivors Group.


Burbridge's second wife Jessica (left) closed the account without giving his children any of the money, according to his first wife, Sarah (right) 

Burbridge is pictured with his second wife Jessica. She claims she has done enough to help the children by arranging for them to receive payouts from her late husband's life insurance policies which they are the beneficiaries of 

Another life insurance policy, worth $25,000, is being fought over by the man's first and second wives and his mother. 


Burbridge had worked for the sheriff's department for 12 years when he was killed. 


It is not clear when he and his first wife divorced, but he and Jessica were together for at least two years before his death. His first wife is also remarried. 


Kelsey, Kaleb and Karley all spoke at his 2017 funeral and gave heartwarming tributes to him. 


Burbridge with Kelsey when she was a child. She is not his biological daughter but he raised her

Kelsey is pictured speaking at her late stepfather's funeral with half-siblings Kaleb and Karley behind her

'The man you know as Deputy Mark Burbridge, a hero and a friend, was our dad. 


'Though he wasn't my dad by blood, he walked into my life when I was four. He stepped up to be the man I needed.


'We love you so, so much Dad,' Kelsey said. 


His two younger children gave shorter speeches during which they both told how much they loved him. 


Burbridge was laid to rest at a well-attended funeral in Council Bluffs, Iowa, in May 2017

Bubridge was shot dead by Wesley Williams Correa-Carmenaty as he tried to escape jail after being sentenced to 45 years behind bars

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group