Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Mostly sunny early then increasing clouds with some scattered thunderstorms this afternoon. High 91F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 7:54 am

Sherman David Reeves

Sherman David Reeves

PULASKI — Sherman David Reeves pleaded guilty Wednesday to the sexual assault of a child and a teen while on probation for earlier sexual offenses against minors.

Reeves, 30, of Dublin was convicted in Pulaski County Circuit Court of two counts of aggravated sexual battery, two probation violations and a strangulation assault of his spouse during an argument. Judge Brad Finch imposed a sentence of 30 years behind bars, including re-imposing five years that had been suspended for earlier convictions.

Wearing red jail clothing and shackled at wrists and ankles, Reeves loudly said “Guilty” five times, but told Finch he had nothing else to say.

Commonwealth’s Attorney Mike Fleenor summarized the evidence he would have presented if the case had gone to trial, saying the strangulation charge resulted from an October 2016 confrontation between Reeves and his husband, who fled to the magistrate’s office with bruises on his neck.

The sex assaults occurred in April 2017 when a woman left her 4-year-old son with Reeves while she went to work. When she returned, the boy told her that Reeves had assaulted him. Questioned by police, Reeves admitted sexual acts with both the boy and a 16-year-old male who also had been present, Fleenor said.

Reeves and his attorneys, Robert Canard of Radford and Kathleen Shell of the public defenders office in Pulaski, agreed that the prosecution had enough evidence to convict Reeves.

The assaults came as Reeves was on probation for other sex convictions from 2010. He was found guilty then of two counts of sodomy of a child younger than 13 years old and was sentenced to serve eight years in prison, with another 22 years suspended.

A plea agreement Monday changed two sodomy charges to counts of aggravated sexual battery, a switch that Fleenor said better suited the details of the 2017 offenses. Two other sodomy charges from 2017 were dropped in the agreement.

Besides imposing 30 years to serve, Finch suspended another 20 years of prison time on the new convictions and re-suspended 17 years from the 2010 cases.

Sherman David Reeves

Mike Gangloff covers crime, breaking news and courts in the New River Valley. 



                                    
                                        Whenever Mike Gangloff posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
