Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on all your devices.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Hi ,


Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Construction is expected to start in early 2018.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


A Holiday Inn Express &amp; Suites is slated to open in Florence in early 2019.
(Photo: Provided/Devesh Patel)

FLORENCE –  A Holiday Inn Express &amp; Suites will be coming to Florence in 2019.


Last month, City Council voted unanimously in favor of a zone change that will allow construction of the 90-room hotel at a 2.15-acre site on the southeast corner and intersection of Vandercar Way and Seligman Drive.


The next step is for Athena Hospitality Group, hotel owner, to submit a master plan to the Boone County Planning Commission.


The hotel is expected to be four stories and 56,000 square feet.


Athena Hospitality Group principal partner Devesh Patel said the hotel will boast an indoor pool and meeting room. 


"We hope to start construction sometime approximately the end of the first quarter of 2018," Patel said. "The hotel will create more than 40 jobs."


RELATED: Florence hotel boom serves creationist tourism and CVG flights


Patel, who has lived in Florence all of his life, also operates the Best Western built in 1996. "We see the strong demand in this market," he said.


This will become the second Holiday Inn hotel to stand in Florence; the first is near Florence Freedom's UC Health Stadium. The two are in no way affiliated.


The new Holiday Inn will be located at 1045 Vandercar Way, Florence, near Wal-Mart off Houston Road.


Florence Mayor Diane Whalen said the city is happy to "see a new quality business come to town."


"In this area, hotels fall in line with the long-range comprehensive plan, so it fits well with the surrounding area," Whalen said. "We have seen a great deal of interest by hotel franchises in the past year. Being centrally located allows the visitors to our area easy access to businesses and attractions on both sides of the river. We are happy to play host to those who come to town."
