The new Suites will feature:



The new suite has Mercedes Benz design features. Emirates collaborated with Mercedes on the leather seating, control panels, and mood lighting. Additionally, First Class passengers will be chauffeured to/from their flights with a new fleet of Mercedes-Benz S-Class cars.

Emirates CEO Sir Tim Clark remarked:

Emirates pioneered the First Class private suite concept back in 2003, and today it’s the industry benchmark when it comes to first class travel. Over the years we have continually improved on our private suites, adding thoughtful refinements and features. We are very excited about our new fully-enclosed suite which is a real game-changer in terms of privacy, comfort, and thoughtful luxury. This is the first time an Emirates product has been so influenced by another luxury brand, but it is a natural fit as both Emirates and Mercedes-Benz have the same unwavering commitment to fine detail, uncompromising quality, and a drive to push the boundaries.

The seats themselves remain a tease, since they will only be installed on nine 777 aircraft for now. The first routes that will see the new product will be Geneva and Brussels, both starting on December 01, 2017. While Emirates may expand the new first class product to its A380s, there is no timeline for doing so. We will see the new first class product (or some variation of it) on Emirates’ new 777-8s and 777-9s, but delivery will not start until 2020 for those aircraft. So actually, this will be a very elusive product for the time being.

It’s a bit disheartening that finding this aircraft will be like a needle in a haystack. Nevertheless, that doesn’t change the fact that this is a remarkable new product that offers a marked improvement from an already highly competitive first class product.



Matthew is an avid traveler who calls Los Angeles home. Each year he
travels more than 200,000 miles by air and has visited more than 120
countries over the last decade. Working both in the aviation industry
and as a travel consultant, Matthew has been featured in the New York
Times, Chicago Tribune, Wall Street Journal, USA Today, BBC, Fox News,
CNN, ABC, CBS, NBC, Al Jazeera, Toronto Star, and on NPR. Studying
international relations, American government, and later obtaining a
law degree, Matthew has a plethora of knowledge outside the travel
industry that leads to a unique writing perspective. He has served in
the United States Air Force, on Capitol Hill, and in the White House.
His Live and Let's Fly blog shares the latest news in the airline
industry, commentary on frequent flyer programs and promotions, and
detailed reports of his worldwide travel. His writings on
penandpassport.com offer more general musings on life from the eyes of a frequent traveler. He also founded awardexpert.com, a
highly-personalized consulting service that aids clients in the
effective use of their credit card points and frequent flyer miles.
Clients range from retirees seeking to carefully use their nest egg of
points to multinational corporations entrusting Matthew with the
direction and coordination of company travel.

Comments *


Name * 

Email * 

Website

 









