

Kinseth Hospitality Companies is pleased to announce the official ground breaking of the TowePlace Suites Marion, Iowa took place on October 25, 2017. The groundbreaking ceremony took place at the construction site of the TownePlace Suites by Marriott located at 2823 7th Avenue. Speakers including: Nick Glew – President of MEDCO (Marion Economic Development Corp), Marion Mayor Nick AbouAssaly, · Julie Stow – Director of Meetings &amp; Conventions for Go Cedar Rapids, and Ben Kinseth Vice President of Kinseth Hospitality shared their excitement about the new hotel.

"This is an important groundbreaking for many, many reasons" shared Nick Glew. "First of all it is really our first significant redevelopment here within Marion's central corridor. The first project is always one of, if not the most, important projects as we talk about the grand vision of our central corridor project. Seeing the first pieces of this come to fruition is really exciting."

Mayor AbouAssaly told guest in attendance, "The first project out of the gate had to be something that was significant and substantial, something that would set the standard and drive the redevelopment of the entire area. This {TownePlace Suites Marion} is what we were hoping for, a really wonderful hotel, a quality hotel in our central business district which will be a catalyst and game changer!

Ben Kinseth told guests more about the coming hotel, "88 rooms that we're building in this TownePlace Suites by Marriott, there will be a kitchenette in every room. If you want to stay 30 nights, this hotel will be perfect for you, if you want to stay 1 night it's just as perfect for you. Really all business segments will love this hotel, and that's really what we love about TownePlace Suites."

Guests in attendance were able to learn more about the project, see floorplans and exterior renderings, take home information about the hotel as well as enjoys some desserts.

When completed, this all suite extended stay hotel will provide guests with a fully stocked kitchen and separate areas to work and sleep giving guests the space they need to spread out and settle in. Guests will also receive complimentary hot breakfast, free wifi, and access to our business center, fitness center, and indoor pool! Guests will easily be able to make reservations through Marriott's Global reservation system and earn Marriott Rewards points for every stay.

Kinseth Hospitality is a leading hotel management, development and ownership company. KHC has a proven track record of developing and operating award-winning hotels, restaurant and meeting facilities. Kinseth Hospitality is based in North Liberty, Iowa, and currently operates over 65 hotels and 5 branded restaurants in 12 states.

For more information regarding KHC please contact our Corporate Sales and Marketing Team at 319-626-5600 or visit www.kinseth.com.

View Source

ContactJeff SchraderPhone: 847-202-7954Send Email

Subscribe to our daily newsletter