Partly cloudy with afternoon showers or thunderstorms. High 84F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low around 65F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 11:55 am

Randall Neece

Lakeesa Neece

Randall Neece

Lakeesa Neece

BLOUNTVILLE, Tenn. — A Sullivan County woman was strangled to death Thursday in the Rock Springs community, and her husband has been charged with murder in her death, Sheriff Wayne Anderson said Friday.


Randall Neece, 30, has been charged with first-degree murder in the death of 27-year-old Lakeesha Neece, according to Anderson, who said Neece called 911 to report his wife’s death.


At 4:30 p.m., officers responded to the couple’s mobile home on West Valley Drive, where the body was found. Anderson said Neece confessed at the scene.


“In a written statement, Randall Neece admitted that he killed Lakeesha by strangling her with an electrical cord,” Anderson said. “Neece admitted he initially tried to smother her with a shower curtain and when unsuccessful, wrapped the cord from a straightening iron around her neck until she was unconscious.”


The couple worked at Agero, a call center in Blountville, according to investigators. They also had a 3-year-old child who was not at the home, the sheriff said.


“Mr. Neece had taken the child to a relative prior to the murder,” Anderson said. “There were no prior calls to the residence and no history of domestic violence from what we can tell.”


However, Anderson said the investigation is far from over.


“We want to look back on their history, family history and try to find anything that will help us understand this better,” Anderson said. “There is still a lot of work to do going forward.”


Anderson described the homicide, the first in the county this year, as one of the most bizarre in his 25-year career with the Sheriff’s Office.


“It’s really rare that he would pick up the phone and call to admit what he did,” Anderson said. “This is a little different than what we would normally see. Usually, someone will commit a murder and take off. However, he probably knew that he was going to get caught anyway.”


Neece is being held at the Sullivan County jail on $250,000 bail. He is set to appear in court Thursday.


zirby@bristolnews.com | 276-645-2567 | Facebook.com/ZachBHC | Twitter: @ZachBHC

Randall Neece

Lakeesa Neece

Sign up for a digital subscription to The Bristol Herald Courier now and get your first month for just $2.95. 


Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
