
    
        
            By Alex Napoliello

anapoliello@njadvancemedia.com,


NJ Advance Media for NJ.com

ASBURY PARK -- A 27-year-old city man who was found slain in a sport utility vehicle on Wednesday night has a criminal record that includes charges of kidnapping in Virginia and was just released from prison in July, according to court records and news reports.

Denzel Morgan-Hicks was found dead late Wednesday in the driver's seat of a 2017 Ford Expedition in the 100 block of Prospect Avenue, according to authorities. Law enforcement sources say he was found shot to death. 

As authorities continue to search for Morgan-Hicks' killer, court records and previous media reports provide a clearer picture of his criminal past, which started at the age of 20.

Morgan-Hicks was charged in August 2011 with two other men for holding a man, woman and a young child hostage at gunpoint at residences in Smyth County, Virginia, which is roughly 100 miles south of Roanoke near the border of North Carolina.

According to a report in the Bristol Herald Courier, Morgan-Hicks and another Asbury Park man, Tyshawn Byrd, took a man at gunpoint from one home to another in search of money to steal. Another man stayed at the home with a woman and an 18-month-old child, the report said.

The woman and child were able to escape from the back window of the mobile home and flee to a neighbor's home, according to the report.

Authorities were able to locate the Chevrolet Impala Morgan was driving and he was arrested and charged with malicious wounding, three counts of kidnapping and one count of breaking and entering.

Morgan-Hicks, then 22, was indicted in September 2011. A spokesman for the Virginia Department of Corrections said he entered prison in Virginia on March 14, 2012.

While locked up in Virginia, he was sentenced on Nov. 8, 2012, to five years for weapons charges he received in New Jersey on Oct. 31, 2010. No details of that incident were immediately available. 

Morgan-Hicks was released from prison in Virginia on May 11, 2015, and was transferred to South Woods State Prison in Bridgeton to serve the remainder of his sentence for the weapons charges. He was released on July 30.

Court records in New Jersey also show that Morgan-Hicks pleaded guilty on March 14, 2011, to resisting arrest in Ocean County, a fourth-degree crime. 

Morgan-Hicks, then 20, was arrested on Oct. 10, 2010 -- just days before his gun charges in Monmouth County -- after he was involved in a fight in Jackson Township in front of a Veterans of Foreign Wars hall, the Asbury Park Press reported at the time.

The report said police arrived to find 300 people gathered in the parking lot and several fights happening. A police officer was injured as a result of one of the brawls, the report said.

Morgan-Hicks was sentenced on Aug. 2, 2013, again while serving time in Virginia and did not receive any additional jail time for the resisting arrest offense.

Authorities in Monmouth County are continuing to look for leads in Morgan-Hicks' death. 

Anyone with information is urged to call prosecutor's office Detective John Leibfried at 1-800-533-7443 or Detective Dillan Gourley, of the Asbury Park Police Department at 732-775-2936.

Anonymous tips can also be provided to Monmouth County Crime Stoppers at 1-800-671-4400,  or by texting "MONMOUTH" plus their tip to 274637, or, email via the website at www.monmouthcountycrimestoppers.com.

Alex Napoliello may be reached at anapoliello@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @alexnapoNJ. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        