Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Mostly sunny early then increasing clouds with some scattered thunderstorms this afternoon. High 89F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 67F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 5:54 am

Gordon Soderberg, aboard the Veterans Green Bus — aka “Large Marge” — before a fire destroyed it on Saturday in Detroit. Soderberg brought the runs-on-cooking-oil vehicle to Roanoke in 2013 and was stuck here for over a month after an electrical fire.

The Veterans Green Bus after a fire destroyed it Saturday night in Detroit.

The Veterans Green Bus after a mysterious fire destroyed it in Detroit Saturday night.

The Veterans Green Bus after a mysterious fire destroyed it in Detroit Saturday night.

The Veterans Green Bus after a mysterious fire destroyed it in Detroit Saturday night.

Gordon Soderberg, aboard the Veterans Green Bus — aka “Large Marge” — before a fire destroyed it on Saturday in Detroit. Soderberg brought the runs-on-cooking-oil vehicle to Roanoke in 2013 and was stuck here for over a month after an electrical fire.

The Veterans Green Bus after a fire destroyed it Saturday night in Detroit.

The Veterans Green Bus after a mysterious fire destroyed it in Detroit Saturday night.

The Veterans Green Bus after a mysterious fire destroyed it in Detroit Saturday night.

The Veterans Green Bus after a mysterious fire destroyed it in Detroit Saturday night.

Gordon Soderberg blew into Roanoke back in 2013 in a reconditioned and repurposed old school bus. But rather than putting around town with sooty diesel exhaust in its wake, it left the aroma of popped popcorn.

The Veterans Green Bus, aka “Large Marge,” came here for a fundraiser-concert organized by folk musician Bill Hudson. Rigged to run on used cooking oil donated by friendly restaurateurs, the bus had already achieved no small measure of fame.

Over the previous eight years, Soderberg, a Navy veteran and peace activist, had hopscotched around the country to natural disasters. He used the bus as a staging headquarters for military veterans like himself who were moved to volunteer in relief and recovery efforts after events such as Hurricane Katrina, Superstorm Sandy and others.

The night of that March 2013 concert, and just off the Blue Ridge Parkway, an electrical short caused a small fire that burned up much of the bus’s electrical system. The damage stranded Soderberg in Roanoke for more than a month. When readers learned of his plight, they donated more than $5,000 in goods and services to get the bus fixed, and to put Soderberg up. He went on his way early that May.

Most recently, it’s been parked in a squalid corner of Detroit, Michigan, where Soderberg was staging another veterans-jobs project. But alas, Large Marge is no more. In a series of events this past weekend, vandals busted out its windows.

Less than two days later, the bus was destroyed in a mysterious fire. Soderberg believes it was arson. In between the happenings, he ended up in jail on a bogus charge that was later dropped. The bus is a total loss, and now Soderberg, 56, is reaching out for help once again.



Polly Branch, a Roanoke artist/activist/philanthropist, tipped me to this unfolding tragedy Tuesday night. She was one of the folks who back in 2013 helped Soderberg forage for used restaurant grease after the bus arrived here.

“I was impressed by his [relief/recovery/veterans] mission, and the fact that he was trying to curb his carbon footprint by using cooking oil as fuel,” she told me.

I also spoke with Hudson, who’s frankly worried for his old friend.

“Gordon has put his butt on the line in helping people, including, as you know, with The Feel Good Tour,” the 2013 Roanoke fundraiser. “It is heartbreaking and I hope he gets the support,” Hudson said.

Wednesday morning, I got Soderberg on the phone. For the past four years, save a stint in Houston for Hurricane Harvey relief, he’s been living in Detroit, aiding in demolitions across that rotting city. He described Detroit as “like Dresden, but nobody showed up to clean it up after the war.”

Over a three-year period, he and other veteran-volunteers working with Detroit Blight Busters tore down and removed 400 dangerous, decaying buildings, Soderberg said.

Most recently Soderberg’s been working on a project with Interactive America, a nonprofit funded by Fortune 500 corporations, to create a jobs training and housing center called Veterans Village Detroit, or “Vetsville.” That’s where Large Marge was parked Friday evening.

Soderberg said he was returning from a tree-clearing project after strong winds struck Detroit last week. When he arrived back at Vetsville, he found eight kids in the act of vandalizing the bus, kicking out its windows.

“Their feet were literally through the windows,” he told me. When he confronted them, “they scattered like rats; I chased three of them to a house that was three doors down the street.”

He exchanged strong words with a woman there — he’s unsure if she was the kids’ actual mother or a foster parent. That night, four police descended upon Vetsville as a police helicopter hovered overhead.

“They told me I was under arrest. They handcuffed me and took me to jail,” Soderberg said. “They charged me with brandishing a weapon to a woman and children.”

Soderberg said he actually started laughing when the cops asked for his gun — he’s a peace activist who owns no weapons. The police, he added, seemed surprised when they couldn’t find one at Vetsville. They still arrested him, though.

Police released Soderberg after the complainant refused to sign an affidavit certifying her complaint was true, he said.

By Saturday night he was back in Vetsville and was asleep. The bus was parked about 30 yards away on an adjoining property in the complex. That’s when it caught fire. He slept through firefighters’ efforts to douse the flames. Nobody woke Soderberg; he said he found the bus’s burned out hulk Sunday morning.

“The cops came out; I made the [arson] report,” he told me Wednesday morning. “They’re bringing dogs out today to sniff for an accelerant.”

It doesn’t appear anything from the bus is salvageable. That includes its satellite internet linkup and the elaborate fuel system that allowed Large Marge to run on used cooking grease. But Soderberg isn’t giving up. He’s trying raise money to buy another decommissioned school bus. Large Marge was a 1990 Crown Coach.

He’s hoping he can get one wholesale for around $3,000, he said. Of course, there’ll be thousands more in conversion costs down the road.

“There’s no amount of good will or donation or work that could bring Large Marge running again. My hope is that I’ll be able to raise enough money to clean up the mess and replace her with an identical bus. This is not out of the question as there are many buses owned by collectors in the Crown Coach Historical Society and a few still in service . . . that can be purchased rather cheap. Getting the next bus will become another training opportunity to teach how these diesel engines can run on used cooking oil,” Soderberg said.

The old bus became an icon that would typically roll up to a disaster scene full of $50,000 worth of tools and generators donated by companies such as Home Depot. Former President Bill Clinton held a televised meeting on it in the wake of Superstorm Sandy.

Soderberg’s idea for a replacement is a bit different. Right now he envisions outfitting it as a giant rolling kitchen that can feed thousands at disaster scenes. He’s raising money through Facebook.

I’m in for $50. Anyone else?

• What: Saturday night, the Veterans Green Bus aka "Large Marge," which visited Roanoke in March 2013, was destroyed in a mysterious fire in Detroit. It had been heavily vandalized one day earlier.


• Who: Navy veteran Gordon Soderberg, the owner, is raising money to replace it with a Veterans Green Bus 2.0.


• Contribute: On Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/gsoderberg

Dan Casey knows a little bit about a lot of things but not a heck of a lot about most things. That doesn't keep him from writing about them, however. So keep him honest!


                                    
                                        Whenever Dan Casey posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Find your new home in the Roanoke, New River Valley, or Smith Mountain Lake area.

Protect the skin you're in...nine providers at three great locations! Call or stop by today! 

Let a local expert help you sell your home! Why? Because she is a.... 

Now’s the time for that new addition, renovation or deck to add value to your home and create a space for memories – with family and friends. 

Call JSS Remodeling for all of your home repairs. Serving Roanoke, Salem and Vinton. Quality work guaranteed.  

New River Community College’s Office of Workforce Development fosters economic growth and development by helping provide an appropriately trained workforce for the New River Valley and the Commonwealth. Services include credentialing, a wide range of training opportunities, skills upgrading …

Don’t leave it up to fate. Investing just a minimum of $5,000 puts you on track toward higher earnings, guaranteed. And with a rate like 1.55% APY for an 11-month term, in less than a year you’ll be thanking your future self for making such a wise investment. 