Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Some clouds. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph..

Some clouds. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:54 pm

The Roanoke City Council approved a new $291.7 million budget Monday — a spending plan $8.9 million larger than the current year’s.

The budget includes no tax increases, and one medical services fee increase.

The council began the budget process last fall with warnings from staff that weak local revenues could compel cuts. But when local taxes shook out, the opposite proved true — albeit moderately so.

That adds up to a less troubling long-term outlook for city finances.

According to projections shown to the council last fall, the city was on a path toward a $16.5 million budget gap in 2022. Under revised projections, the variance is expected to be a more manageable $4 million in 2022, and $5.9 million in 2023.

City Finance Director Amelia Merchant told the council last week that those projections are based on conservative estimates and represent something close to a worst case scenario.

Councilman Ray Ferris responded that while the long-term picture is looking better, the city still needs to be disciplined. “Until you see the growth, you can’t spend more money,” he said.

Local tax revenues instead grew beyond projections — led mostly by real estate tax assessments that improved by 3 percent. Sales taxes rebounded after two years of soft performance as well.

The 2018-19 spending plan is also the first full year of collecting the $8 per month solid waste fee from city households.

The result is a bump of $1.65 million in schools funding compared to the current budget, sending a total of $81.2 million to Roanoke City Public Schools under the city’s funding formula that gives 40 percent of all local revenues to the schools.

In addition, the city is funding four more school resource officers, as requested by Superintendent Rita Bishop. The city’s library system also gets a funding boost for its early literacy effort, among other needs.

In the public safety category, the city is also funding the new mental health unit in the city jail and an additional medic unit in the Fire-EMS department — at Station No. 13 on the north end of Peters Creek Road.

Finally, city employees will receive a 2 percent raise.

Tax rates will remain the same at $1.22 per $100 of assessed value for real estate and $3.45 per $100 of assessed value for personal property. Roanoke’s real estate tax rate is the highest among localities in the Roanoke and New River valleys in the 2018 fiscal year, according to data compiled by the Weldon Cooper Center at the University of Virginia.

The only fee increase in the budget is in the emergency medical service area. The cost of an ambulance ride will rise by $55 to $98, depending on the level of life support service required by the patient. The city’s fees will still be between those of Salem and Roanoke County, and within limits paid by insurers and Medicaid. That means residents won’t pay more out of pocket for an emergency medical transport.

The new budget takes effect on July 1.

Matt Chittum covers Roanoke City. A Roanoke native, he’s been at the Roanoke Times for more than two decades, having overcome an inauspicious start with a part-time clerical job. 




                                    
                                        Whenever Matt Chittum posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Find your new home in the Roanoke, New River Valley, or Smith Mountain Lake area.

Need a one-stop shop for your Home Improvement needs?  Crockett Home Improvement is the answer!  From Roofing and Siding, to Decking and Bathrooms, we do it all! 

Now’s the time for that new addition, renovation or deck to add value to your home and create a space for memories – with family and friends. 

Angelle’s Diner is an outstanding family diner serving the most delicious and authentic diner food for breakfast, lunch, and dinner seven days a week from 7:00am to 10:00pm in Troutville, Virginia. 

The Treasure Trove, a nonprofit thrift store, now has a second location. 

New River Community College’s Office of Workforce Development fosters economic growth and development by helping provide an appropriately trained workforce for the New River Valley and the Commonwealth. Services include credentialing, a wide range of training opportunities, skills upgrading …

Franklin Glass Products provides expert glass replacement and installation, while maintaining outstanding hometown customer service. If you need glass or mirrors for your auto, business, or home — no matter how customized — you’ve come to the right place. 