Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy with isolated thunderstorms developing this afternoon. High 91F. Winds WNW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 5:54 am

Six candidates are running for Salem’s sheriff post.

Tuesday, Oct. 3, 2017, 10:45 a.m.: One of the candidates running for Salem sheriff works for Roanoke County sheriff. Another works for the Roanoke sheriff. The originally published version of this column was incorrect on those points and has been updated.

Here’s a local politics pop-quiz: What’s the hottest political race in the Roanoke Valley this election season?

I’ll give you some hints.

It’s not in the state House’s 11th District, where incumbent Democrat Sam Rasoul is unchallenged. That might be the coldest race.

Nor is it the contest for the 17th District House seat, currently held by Del. Chris Head, R-Roanoke County. At least he has an opponent, Democrat Djuna Osborne. She helped organize the women’s March on Roanoke, which drew thousands of people to Elmwood Park shortly after the inauguration of President Donald Trump.

Remember her memorable speech? It began: “My goodness. Y’all are frickin’ amazing!”

It’s not Democrat Steve McBride’s challenge to incumbent Republican Del. Greg Habeeb in the 8th District. The Democrats got into a minor tiff during their primary, when McBride offered challenger Bryan Keele a $1,500 campaign donation if he withdrew from that race and ran for something else.

Instead, the honor belongs to the sizzling contest for the low-key office of Salem sheriff.

Ric Atkins, who started in 1984 as an $11,000-a-year deputy, has held the top job for 10 years. In March, citing pension considerations, Atkins announced he wasn’t running. He leaves office in December. Basically, his accountant advised him he’d net almost as much in retirement as he would by continuing to work.

At that time, there was one announced challenger. Since then, five more candidates have jumped into the race. That means six people — five men and a woman — are vying for the post. It’s a four-year term and the last contested election took place in 2001.

I’m not going to list all their names and credentials. That would take a whole column. One works in the Salem sheriff’s office now. One works for the Roanoke County sheriff, and one works for the Roanoke sheriff. Three are former police officers. The Salem Kiwanis club is holding a sheriff’s candidates forum at noon Oct. 10 at the Salem Civic Center.

The wide field has not gone unnoticed by the public. Valarie Robinson, who lives in Catawba, doesn’t have a dog in this hunt. But she’s in Salem almost every day, and the copious campaign signage has been difficult to ignore. She and her adult daughter, Lindsay Ailstock, treat it as a game.

“[We] try to remember the names on all of the political signs we see which urge Salemites to vote for XYZ for sheriff,” Robinson told me. “It’s a running joke for us as we drive through Salem. We wonder if everyone in the sheriff’s department is running?”

The answer to Robinson’s question is no. The Salem Sheriff’s Office employs 12 people. Ten are full-time, including Atkins.

What does the Salem sheriff do?

It’s easier to grasp what the office doesn’t do. For example, its deputies don’t respond to bank robberies or shoplifting complaints or domestic-abuse calls. They don’t write traffic tickets. Salem has its own police department for all that.

Nor does the Salem sheriff manage a jail. Running one of those, or a police department, can make for major headaches.

The Salem Sheriff’s Office serves civil court papers. Deputies transport inmates for appearances in Salem Circuit Court or the city’s General District Court. Sometimes that involves traveling far and wide.

“We work under dangerous conditions, and I’m also responsible for 11 deputies who work 40 hours during [the] week as well as being called out on nights and weekends and transport[ing] mentally ill subjects all over Virginia,” Atkins said.

The office also provides courthouse security. But not at the Roanoke County Courthouse, which (somewhat confusingly) is also in Salem. That’s the big one across from Mac &amp; Bob’s on Main Street. Everybody knows that one. The Roanoke County Sheriff’s Office handles security there (and manages the jail next door).

The Salem Courthouse is four blocks away, tucked on a side street. Few people outside Salem are even aware of it. Not much happens there. I visited once a few years ago to look up something. In 33 years of newspaper work, I’ve never been in a quieter courthouse. The average morgue is more rambunctious.

“It’s a small department, but there are a lot of responsibilities,” Atkins told me. “We’ve got a lot of moving parts.”

No offense to Atkins, who’s a genial guy. But why would six people fight over such a humdrum job? For which the duties are limited to delivering papers, driving prisoners and guarding perhaps the calmest courthouse in the commonwealth?

Could it be the salary? Hmmm.

I checked on that. It’s $91,478 a year, including 5 percent the city kicks in to the Virginia Retirement System. That’s a pretty penny. According to the U.S. Census, it’s nearly double Salem’s median annual household income.

Salem spokesman Mike Stevens noted the sheriff is a state constitutional officer. Because of that, the city doesn’t set the salary. The State Compensation Board does, according to a schedule published annually.

It varies according the size of the jurisdiction (Salem, with roughly 25,000 residents, the falls in the 20,000 – 39,999 population range), and the duties of the sheriff. And the state reimburses the city for the sheriff’s pay.

The city covers the sheriff’s uniforms, weapons and equipment, Atkins told me. That includes a city vehicle. The one Atkins drives is no great prize — a 2008 Ford Explorer. Still, it’s taxpayer-funded wheels. The city also covers the vehicle’s fuel, maintenance, repairs and insurance. All of that adds up to a tidy taxpayer-financed benefit.

In Roanoke County, Police Chief Howard Hall is paid $124,477 annually. He manages 158 people, said county spokeswoman Amy Whittaker. Stevens said Salem Police Chief Mike Crawley pulls down $106,787 a year. He manages 103. Atkins manages 12.

Considering everything, his job seems like a low-pressure, high-paying gig. No wonder so many people are vying for it.

As of last week, there were slightly fewer than 17,000 registered voters in Salem. In the 2013 election, 7,238 people voted, according to Salem Registrar Dana Oliver, and 6,190 voted in the sheriff’s race. In 2001, 7,750 people voted in that race. Roger Surber handily defeated P. Chris Nielsen, 69 percent to 31 percent.

With six people running a few votes could determine the outcome.

Does Oliver believe turnout will be higher than in 2013?

“I hope so, with six sheriffs [candidates] going door to door,” Oliver said.

She’s probably right. Each one has 91,478 reasons to campaign vigorously.

Dan Casey knows a little bit about a lot of things but not a heck of a lot about most things. That doesn't keep him from writing about them, however. So keep him honest!


                                    
                                        Whenever Dan Casey posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Find your new home in the Roanoke, New River Valley, or Smith Mountain Lake area.

Angie McGhee and her Franklin County Home Team are ready to help you move! Visit our website today to find your next home.  

Need a one-stop shop for your Home Improvement needs?  Crockett Home Improvement is the answer!  From Roofing and Siding, to Decking and Bathrooms, we do it all! 

Call today for special pricing! Live the life you deserve at Honeywood Apartments. 

Angelle’s Diner is an outstanding family diner serving the most delicious and authentic diner food for breakfast, lunch, and dinner seven days a week from 7:00am to 10:00pm in Troutville, Virginia. 

Call JSS Remodeling for all of your home repairs. Serving Roanoke, Salem and Vinton. Quality work guaranteed.  

The Treasure Trove, a nonprofit thrift store, now has a second location. 