Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly to mostly cloudy with isolated thunderstorms developing this afternoon. High near 90F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 11:54 am

David Johnson

David Johnson

A Christiansburg man is facing several charges after a hit-and-run led to a police-involved chase that ended in a wreck on Interstate 581, according to a Roanoke police official.

David Tyrone Johnson, 46, has been charged with driving while intoxicated, obstruction of justice, failure to stop for police and hit-and-run.

Police spokesman Scott Leamon said the incident began at 9:10 p.m. when a green 2000 Lincoln Navigator hit a black 2010 Ford F-150 near the intersection of Pilot Street Northwest and Edgelawn Avenue Northwest.

The Lincoln did not stop after the wreck. The person driving the Ford was not injured, Leamon said.

At 9:26 p.m., an officer attempted to stop the Lincoln after encountering the vehicle on Layfayette Boulevard, but the driver did not stop. About three minutes later, the Lincoln crashed at the Valley View exit ramp on I-581.

Johnson was taken into custody after a short foot pursuit and was taken to Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital for evaluation. He was later taken to Roanoke City Jail, where he remains without bond.

David Johnson

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
