Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Mainly cloudy. A few peeks of sunshine possible. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 89F. Winds NW at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 2:36 pm

The cannon, displayed on a traffic island in Salem, was damaged but repositioned shortly after the crash.

The cannon, displayed on a traffic island in Salem, was damaged but repositioned shortly after the crash.

The driver who barreled into a World War I memorial exhibit in Salem was sentenced Friday to serve 20 days in jail.

Skylan Miller Chambers, 26, pleaded no contest in Salem General District Court to driving under the influence.

Chambers was arrested in September after crashing his car into the World War I artillery piece that stands at the corner of College Avenue and Roanoke Boulevard.

The cannon, a captured German 77 mm field gun, has been displayed in Salem as a war memorial since 1926. September’s collision marked the second time in three years that it had been struck by an errant vehicle.

Parts of the cannon were bent or torn in the latest crash. As part of his sentence, Chambers must pay restitution to the city for the needed repairs.

Per the terms of an agreement Friday, he was sentenced to 90 days in jail, with all but 20 days suspended.

His license will be restricted and an ignition interlock will be installed in his car, according to online court records.

He’ll also pay a total of $626 in fines and court costs on the dual convictions of driving under the influence and failing to stop at the scene of an accident.

Alicia Petska covers what's happening in Roanoke County and the City of Salem.


                                    
                                        Whenever A Petska posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
