Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low 69F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%..

Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low 69F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 50%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 5:54 pm

Christopher Dominique Banks

Christopher Dominique Banks

A man arrested on drug charges in 2016 managed to sneak a pistol past a search and into the Roanoke City Jail — keeping it hidden under the flesh of his belly — but officials discovered the weapon before his booking was complete.

That information came out in Roanoke Circuit Court at a plea hearing last week for Christopher Dominique Banks, 25, who was charged with cocaine distribution, with having a gun as a non-violent felon, and with being a prisoner in possession of a firearm.

Assistant Commonwealth’s Attorney Sheri Mason said in court that Banks was taken into custody on the first two charges on July 28, 2016, and was searched. Some time later, as he was being processed, she said a subsequent examination revealed Banks had a palm-sized .25-caliber handgun hidden under the folds of skin around his stomach.

Mason said security footage of Banks as he was being booked also showed him moving the weapon from one place on his body to another, but she said that video ultimately wasn’t available to submit as evidence.

Sheriff’s office spokeswoman Kristen Borak said that administrative personnel weren’t available Tuesday to comment on the incident and, citing security concerns, she declined to give specific details on how and when Banks was searched.

Banks had the gun in his possession for approximately 30 minutes while he was in custody, she said.

On Thursday, Banks pleaded no contest to the drug charge and to being a felon with a gun, and the charge against him as a prisoner was dropped as part of his plea agreement. He received a two-year term to serve on the firearm offense and five years in suspended time for the drug charge. The handgun that was taken from him will be destroyed.

Banks’ arrest also came under unusual circumstances.

Shortly after 9:30 a.m. July 28, 2016, police found him asleep behind the wheel of an idling BMW coupe parked in the 4300 block of Holmes Street Northeast, about two blocks south of Monterey Elementary School on Oliver Road.

Mason said officers looked into the vehicle and saw bags of an off-white chunky substance on Banks’ lap and on the passenger seat of the car. When an investigator switched off the engine, she said, Banks awoke and started the car back up but failed to put the BMW in gear. He was taken into custody.

According to a forensic report, the powder seized proved to be about 7 grams of cocaine.

Banks’ lawyer, Chris Kowalczuk, said he could not comment on the case and declined to take questions about the evidence.

Banks’ previous felony in Roanoke came in 2014, after he pleaded no contest to one count of cocaine possession. He was also convicted on a drug charge early last year in Bedford County following an incident in 2015. It is not clear if last week’s conviction will violate his ongoing probation in Bedford.

neil.harvey@roanoke.com


981-3376

Christopher Dominique Banks


                            
    Log In
                        

Please keep it clean, turn off CAPS LOCK and don't threaten
anyone. Be truthful, nice and proactive. Comments cannot be edited
or deleted once posted. To flag a comment to the page
administrator, click “report” next to that comment.




Over the years, Richmond.com has published several data projects using public information. Here's a sampling of some of those projects. 

- Our annual database of state employee salaries was recently updated with 2016-17 data. - Our  salary database of local government employees was updated recently with the 2016-17 data.




