Please purchase a subscription to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click Sign Up to subscribe, or Login if you are already a member.


A subscription is required to continue reading.



Thank you for reading 10 free articles on Roanoke.com. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 10 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you are a current 7-day subscriber to the Roanoke Times newspaper you are granted an all-access pass to the website and digital newspaper replica. Please click below to Get Started.


Your current subscription does not provide access to this content.


Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy with a slight chance of thunderstorms. High 89F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 30%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low 68F. Winds N at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:54 pm

RADFORD — It was her word against his — but she couldn’t remember what happened.

A rape trial involving two former Radford University students who ended up in a dorm room bed after a night of partying ended abruptly Thursday in Radford Circuit Court. The victim testified that she had been too intoxicated to recall details of the sexual encounter in question, then tearfully ran from the courtroom when the judge called a recess.

When court resumed, prosecution and defense announced they had reached an agreement to drop a charge of rape, which carries a five-year minimum prison sentence in Virginia, and to reduce a felony charge of aggravated sexual battery to a misdemeanor count of sexual battery.

Then Teko Charles Folli, a freshman and honors student at Radford when he was accused — and now a 19-year-old honors student at Old Dominion University, according to defense attorney Jimmy Turk — pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor charge.

Judge Joey Showalter accepted a sentencing recommendation of a year in jail, but said it would be suspended after Folli serves four months. With the standard allowance for good behavior, Folli likely will be behind bars for half that time, or two months, Radford Commonwealth’s Attorney Chris Rehak said.

Both attorneys said after the hearing that it had been a difficult case from the beginning, with a victim that before reporting the alleged sexual assault had been arrested by Radford police for public intoxication and underage possession of alcohol.

Rehak wrote in an email that he thought Folli targeted the woman because she was drunk. But without her own memories to draw on, Rehak said he had to try to highlight all the factors that pointed to a lack of meaningful consent.

“This unusual mid-trial compromise reflects the delicate balance of evidence, testimony and the looming uncertainty of a conviction,” Rehak wrote.

In five hours of testimony Thursday, there was no argument that the woman, who is not being identified by The Roanoke Times, was very intoxicated on the night of Friday, Oct. 14, 2016. She used a fake ID to get drinks with friends at a restaurant, she testified, then went to student parties and had more drinks.

A friend testified he lost track of her at a party that night but said she had a beer in her hand when he last saw her.

There also was no dispute that soon after midnight, the woman and Folli had sexual intercourse in his dorm room in Radford University’s Pocahontas Hall.

Folli had been out that night and had seen a friend among a group of young men and women on the sidewalk. He joined them as they went to an apartment near campus, according to testimony.

On the way, the group found the woman stumbling and eventually lying down in the grass, several witnesses testified.

Radford University student Summer Stanford testified that the woman could not speak but hugged her when Stanford asked if she was all right. The group took the woman with them to the apartment.

“The group as a whole had the intention of helping,” Stanford said.

But the woman kept nodding off, falling asleep on the shoulder of Folli, who sat beside her on a couch, according to Stanford and Folli’s statement to investigators.

Awakened and asked where she wanted to go, the woman said “Zeta,” Stanford and other witnesses said. Folli, who was unfamiliar to most in the group, offered that he knew a sorority house known by that name and would take the woman there, Stanford and Radford student William Ball testified.

Radford police Det. Carla Cross testified that Folli said he took the woman not to a sorority but to his dorm room, which was private because his roommate had dropped out, and let her sleep.

According to Folli’s statement, after about 15 minutes, she awoke, said she felt better, and called him over to the bed . She began kissing him, Folli had said.

Folli told the detective that as he and the woman kissed and touched, he asked several times if she wanted to continue and if she wanted to have sex. He told Cross the woman said that she did want to have sex and had initiated their intercourse.

But on the witness stand, the woman testified that she had sent a text to a friend saying, “Help me.” Rehak showed a printout of texts that included the woman using her iPhone’s location-sharing function to tell her friend where she was.

Soon the friend was calling the woman’s phone and Folli agreed to walk her to a meeting spot.

On the way, the woman stumbled off a sidewalk and into the path of a police car driven by Radford officer Michael Mansdoerfer.

Mansdoerfer testified that after the woman misspelled her name, told him that she was 19 instead of 20, and could not give her address, he gave her a breathalyzer test which recorded a blood alcohol level of 0.22, or more than twice Virginia’s limit for driving.

The officer charged her with two alcohol offenses — later dropped — and took her to the city jail for the night.

On the next day, friends who drove her asked about bruises and marks on her neck and began to suspect an assault. They took her to Carilion New River Valley Medical Center, where the bruises were documented.

Cross-examined by Turk, the woman insisted that while she could remember nothing of what she said or did with Folli, she would not have willingly had sex with him.

“I wouldn’t have taken my clothes off. I wouldn’t have kissed him. I don’t know him. I was severely incapacitated. I would not have consented,” the woman testified.

Still, she said, her only memory was of being in a dorm room and looking in a mirror, and feeling uneasy.

Turk, of Radford, said its general outline mirrored too many cases he’d seen around local college campuses, with students putting themselves in “terribly vulnerable circumstances.”

“I wish they would take a lot more personal responsibility for themselves,” he said.

Sign up to receive our daily newsletters and get special offers delivered right to your inbox.

We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!
