Three former college football players were arrested Wednesday afternoon in Clemson, South Carolina, on charges of armed robbery and possession of a weapon during commission of a crime.


After exploring his options, Penn State backup quarterback Tommy Stevens has decided to stay with the Nittany Lions. In addition to backing up signal-caller Trace McSorley, Stevens also has been used as a halfback and a wide receiver.

Jalen Watts-Jackson, who scored the winning touchdown against Michigan on the game's final play in 2015, said on Twitter on Wednesday that he has requested his release from Michigan State. He intends to play elsewhere for his final season of eligibility.

In a game on Sept. 21 between Mater Dei in Santa Ana, California, and IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida, 20 ESPN Junior 300 prospects from the 2019 class will be featured, including seven ranked in the top 100.

C.J. Fuller and Jadar Johnson, who both played for Clemson, and former Duke defensive lineman Quaven Ferguson are accused of robbing someone at gunpoint after allegedly forcing their way into the person's apartment in downtown Clemson. According to a news release from Clemson police, the three men knocked on the person's door before forcing their way in, taking cash and a cellphone and then fleeing toward a parking garage.


Bond was set at $25,000 for all three players Thursday, and they will each be required to wear GPS monitoring devices on their ankles and will not be allowed to leave the state. They are next set to appear May 17.


Police responded to the scene at around 4 p.m., and the three men were arrested later in the day. Fuller, Johnson and Ferguson are being held in Clemson City Jail while awaiting a bond hearing.


Johnson started at safety for Clemson's national championship team in 2016, earning first-team All-ACC honors. He joined the New York Giants as an undrafted free agent but left the team for what he later called mental health reasons. Johnson participated in Clemson's pro day earlier this month, as he hoped to return to football. He was set to play in the inaugural Spring League, a showcase for NFL hopefuls, in Austin, Texas.


It was revealed Thursday that Johnson had been arrested Nov. 17 in the city of Clemson for malicious injury to real property of $2,000 or less.


Fuller started three games at running back last season but was leapfrogged by Travis Etienne and Tavien Feaster. Fuller announced in February that he had left the team to become a graduate transfer for the 2018 season. He had yet to select a new college team.


Ferguson, a native of Easley, South Carolina, had 22 tackles in 27 games over three seasons at Duke. He left the program in January.

To help make this website better, to improve and personalize your experience and for advertising purposes, are you happy to accept cookies and other technologies?