
    
        
            By Bill Gallo Jr.

bgallo@njadvancemedia.com

 For NJ.com

PENNS GROVE -- Two handguns were taken off the borough's streets by police during two separate arrests, authorities said.

Officers made a motor vehicle stop Oct. 13 around 9:50 p.m. and arrested two men, according to Penns Grove Chief of Police John T. Stranahan Sr.

Jonathan Dickey III, 26, of New Castle, Del., was charged with possession of a controlled dangerous substance, possession of a handgun, possession of a defaced firearm and possession of a firearm while committing a drug offense, according to the chief.

The handgun allegedly in Dickey's possession was a .380 caliber semi-automatic, Stranahan said.

He was taken to the Salem County Correctional Facility, Mannington Township, after being charged.

The driver of the vehicle Dickey was in was a Florida man who was charged with traffic violations and having an open container of alcohol in a motor vehicle, according to the chief, and later released.

Resident finds shot man at front door

The second handgun was confiscated when officers responded to a fight on Oct. 15 around 6 p.m., according to Stranahan.

Niyesha Griffin, 31, of Wilmington, Del., was charged with possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose, unlawful possession of a weapon, aggravated assault and making terroristic threats.

The handgun that police allegedly confiscated from Griffin was a .380 caliber semi-automatic weapon, Stranahan said.

Griffin was also taken to the county jail after being charged.

Bill Gallo Jr. may be reached at bgallo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow Bill Gallo Jr. on Twitter @bgallojr. Find NJ.com on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        