Gallery: Candidates file for 2018 Salem County Primary Election


    
        
            By Bill Gallo Jr.

bgallo@njadvancemedia.com

 For NJ.com

Salem County is gearing up for what could be another raucous election season.

Political control of the smaller freeholder board is at stake and its director, whose party switch allowed Democrats to take charge, faces her first re-election contest.

The longtime county sheriff will also have his first election challenger ever and it's a member of his own staff.

The candidates seeking the open seats were required to have nominating petitions submitted by Monday afternoon to qualify to be on the June 5 Primary Election ballot.

Vying for the two open three-year terms on the freeholder board are incumbent Democrat Melissa DeCastro, Democrat Jesse Stemberger, Republican incumbent Ben Laury and Republican Dr. Gordon "Mickey" Ostrum.

DeCastro of Carneys Point, an attorney, was narrowly elected as a Republican in November 2015. After court challenges, the contest for her seat was declared a tie and she had to leave the freeholder board. Another court ruling on the dispute allowed an additional single ballot to be counted and DeCastro won by a single vote.

In December she shocked her colleagues and announced she was changing parties. That move allowed Democrats to become the majority on the freeholder, a position the party had lost to the GOP in 2012. She serves as board director.

Since her party switch, DeCastro's residency has been challenged by the GOP, something which her colleagues never raised as an issue when she was a Republican.

Stemberger of Woodstown, DeCastro's running mate, is a teacher at the Mary S. Shoemaker School in Woodstown. He made an unsuccessful bid in 2017 for a seat on the freeholder board.

Laury of Elmer, owner of Ben's ProServ, has served as a freeholder for three terms. During some of that time he was deputy director when GOP had control of the then-seven member board.

A Pilesgrove resident, Ostrum is a doctor with an obstetrics and gynecology practice. He also farms in the county, raising cattle and grain.

With the two seats up, political control of the freeholder board is definitely in play this year. Democrats hold a 3 to 2 edge.

Freeholder board control flips

Since taking charge in January, Democrats have made sweeping changes, ousting many Republican-appointed staffers and replacing them with Democrats. All of that could change back if Republicans regain control.

Incumbent Salem County Sheriff Chuck Miller is facing his first election challenge sever since he first ran for office in 2007.

Republican Miller, of Elsinboro, will face off with Democrat Bob Gant, of Pennsville.

Miller, who has 39 years of experience in law enforcement, retired in 2004 from the prosecutor's office as county chief of detectives. He served as a domestic security planner with the Department of Homeland Security before being elected sheriff.

He's in charge of four divisions in the 300-plus member Sheriff's Office -- law enforcement, corrections, communications (911) and Emergency Management.

"I have strived to ensure that the Salem County Sheriff's Office has been recognized as a premier law enforcement agency," said Miller Tuesday, touting his efforts in consolidating operations "to provide quality services and at the same time reduce spending saving the taxpayers considerable cost."

He says he has worked to achieve accreditation for the office, advocated for senior citizens through the TRIAD program, fought a proposal to privatize the 911 center and has promoted shared services through having Salem County Correctional Facility inmates perform work details for both the county and municipalities.

Democrat Gant, a veteran of 23 years in law enforcement, he started as a corrections officer and now is a lieutenant in the Sheriff's Office which Miller is in charge of.

President of the Salem County Fraternal Order of Police for 15 years and president of the Salem County Superior Officers Association for 10 years Gant was the organizer of the effort which saw the county freeholder board reduced from seven to five members and freeholders cut their salaries 20 percent.

The grass-roots effort came as the cash-strapped freeholder board considered privatizing the county' 911 center and jail nurses as a way to save money.

"I will reduce the size of county government starting at the top of the law enforcement side," Gant said Tuesday. "We have too many double-dippers."

Gant is already saying he'll name Sgt. Rob Hans from the Sheriff's Office as undersheriff.

"We must shrink the size of county government for the sake of the taxpayers. That's what I intend to do," Gant said Tuesday.

The sheriff serves a three-year term.

Primary winners will go on to represent their respective parties in the Nov. 6 General Election.

Independent candidates can submit petitions to the county clerk up through Primary Election day for their names to appear on the fall ballot.

Bill Gallo Jr. may be reached at bgallo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow Bill Gallo Jr. on Twitter @bgallojr. Find NJ.com on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us. nj.com/tips


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        