
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com





WOODBURY -- A man charged in a fatal wreck in which he was allegedly under the influence of drugs has multiple DWIs on his record, prosecutors said.

Emilio Ortega III, 41, of Monroeville, was indicted on aggravated manslaughter and other charges earlier this month.

He allegedly struck a husband and wife as they bicycled on the shoulder of Delsea Drive on Franklin Township on Feb. 15.

Susan L. Kinnan, 57, later died of her injuries.

Ortega was under the influence of "a very high level of narcotics," when the accident occurred, Assistant Prosecutor Dana Anton stated during a Friday court appearance.

Ortega had Xanax in his possession when he was arrested, police said.

Anton went on to describe his prior history, which includes a drug conviction and a "significant motor vehicle history."

Man charged in fatal DWI rearrested after visiting liquor stores

Ortega has two DWI violations and two DWI suspensions on his record for incidents that occurred in August and October 2006, January 2007 and May 2008, according to the state Motor Vehicle Commission.

Based on this background, the prosecutor's office has offered a plea deal of 16 years in state prison on the new charges.

His attorney entered not guilty pleas on all charges Friday.

A grand jury indicted Ortega earlier this month on charges of first-degree aggravated manslaughter, second-degree vehicular homicide, third-degree assault by auto and third-degree possession of a controlled dangerous substance.

The aggravated manslaughter charge carries a sentence of up to 30 years in prison.

Ortega was jailed following the crash, but released March 2, according to Salem County Correctional Facility records.

His next hearing is slated for Nov. 3.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        