
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com





A Williamstown man is suing Woodbury and several of its police officers over a 2015 arrest in which he claims he was wrongfully charged with various offenses.

Ryan D. Harley was arrested following a motor vehicle stop in Aug. 27. Harley "was unlawfully placed under arrest based upon plaintiff having been wrongfully charged with violations of various offenses," according to the suit.

Charges included robbery, conspiracy and weapons offenses, all of which were administratively dismissed in December 2015.

Harley was detained for 21 days at Salem County Correctional Facility before his release, according to the suit.

The police "had no reasonable basis to believe that the plaintiff was the individual for whom they were looking," the suit states.

The department's actions deprived Harley of his rights under the state and federal constitutions, including freedom from use of excessive and unreasonable force, Harley alleges.

He suffered "severe injuries to his person," according to the suit, as well as embarrassment, humiliation, "fear for his life" and "paranoia of both a temporary and permanent nature."

The suit doesn't specify any physical injuries or how he may have received them.

The suit names the City of Woodbury, Detective Sgt. Kelli Marro, Detective Andrew DiGiambatista and Officer Nicholas E. Cacciola as defendants.

Harley seeks a judgement declaring that his constitutional rights were violated, as well as compensatory and punitive damages.

The case was originally filed in state Superior Court, but was transferred to federal court last week.

Attorneys for the defendants denied the allegations in court filings, saying that the officers acted at all times in good faith and with probable cause. 

"... Defendants performed each and every duty and obligation owed to plaintiff," attorney James R. Birchmeier wrote on behalf of the city and the officers.

Efforts to reach attorneys for the city and Harley were unsuccessful.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us: nj.com/tips.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        