
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

A grand jury has indicted a Clayton man on charges that he was driving drunk when he collided head-on with a medical transport vehicle, killing the patient.

Shawn C. Huntsinger, 46, told police he had been drinking prior to the Jan. 3 crash on Fries Mill Road in Franklin Township.

The passenger in the Stat Medical Transport vehicle, Joseph Sauro, 67, of Millville, was killed. The driver of that vehicle and a passenger in Huntsinger's car were injured.

Sauro was on his way home at the time of the crash. 

Officers said they found open alcohol containers in Huntsinger's car and on the ground around the vehicle. They also smelled alcohol on his breath.

A motorist traveling behind Huntsinger's Mercury Grand Marquis told police the defendant was driving recklessly just before he strayed into the oncoming lane and hit the transport.

Huntsinger was indicted last week on vehicular homicide and assault by auto charges.

He remains jailed at Salem County Correctional Facility following his September arrest for violating the terms of his pre-trial release in the fatal crash.

Prosecutors said in September that Huntsinger had recently visited several liquor stores and failed to show proof that he was looking for a job.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        