
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

Authorities have arrested a Pennsville Township man in connection with four recent robberies in Camden and Gloucester counties.

Howard W. Rambo Jr., 39, was arrested at the Wawa in Logan Township on Friday and has confessed to the four crimes, according to Bellmawr Police.

Rambo allegedly robbed a TD Bank branch in Bellmawr on Oct. 29 and a BB&amp;T Bank in West Deptford Township a day later. In both cases, the suspect displayed a note indicating that he had a gun, police said.

Police released security camera images from both robberies.

Rambo is also implicated in an Oct. 15 Citgo gas station robbery in Haddon Township. The masked robber in that case displayed a silver handgun and robbed two employees. A man matching that description also robbed a Bellmawr 7-11 on Oct. 22.

Officers from all three communities teamed up with the Camden County Prosecutor's Office to identify a suspect in the robberies.

Following his arrest on robbery and theft charges, Rambo was transported to West Deptford Police Department, where he provided a statement admitting that he bought a handgun and robbed the businesses, police said.

He was placed in Salem County Correctional Facility pending a detention hearing.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        