
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

A man who was allegedly lured to a vacant South Jersey home earlier this month was beaten and choking so severely that he nearly lost consciousness.

Albert J. McDowell, 39, of Williamstown, lured his prey to a house in Monroe Township with the help of two women, police said.

In addition to beating and choking the man, McDowell allegedly threatened to kill him during the March 14 assault.

The victim suffered a broken orbital bone, severe bruising and "extreme strangulation marks" around his neck, police said. He was taken to a hospital for treatment.

McDowell is also accused of using a baseball bat to smash the man's windshield.

He was charged this week with aggravated assault, luring, terroristic threats and criminal mischief, and remains lodged in Salem County Correctional Facility.

As for his co-defendants, Tiffany N. Davidson, 28, of Williamstown, was charged with conspiracy to commit aggravated assault, luring and criminal mischief, while  Ashley M. Miller, 29, also of Williamstown, was charged with conspiracy to commit criminal mischief, conspiracy to commit luring and conspiracy to commit aggravated assault.

While police have not revealed a motive for the attack, the complaint notes that McDowell had previously met the victim "a few times," while Davidson and Miller were described by police as acquaintances of the victim.

The defendants are accused of using Facebook to lure their victim.

Davidson and Miller admitted their involvement in the incident and provided statements implicating McDowell, police said. They were released pending future court dates.

A witness also provided a statement against the trio. 

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us: nj.com/tips.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        