
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

All Joseph Pirri wanted to do was get home.

It was snowing heavily on the afternoon of March 7 as the Blackwood man made his way through Deptford Township. He had done a lot of driving for work that day and even stopped to help a stranded motorist along the way, his wife said.

He would never make it home, though, and now the man accused of fatally ending his trip won't be going home either.

Alleged road rage killer Everett E. Moore Jr., 54, of Clayton, was ordered held Friday pending prosecution on a first-degree murder charge.

Moore slashed Pirri, 32, in the face as the victim sat in his car in Deptford Township, authorities charge. In a 911 recording after the incident, Pirri can be heard saying he had "flipped off" his assailant moments earlier.

Moore, driving a Ford F-150, illegally passed Pirri's Nissan Versa on Tanyard Road, then stopped in front of Pirri, got out and attacked the victim, prosecutors said.

Pirri suffered a 5 3/4-inch slash from his nose to his ear and left a trail of blood in the snow as he ran to nearby houses for help. He provided a description of his assailant and the vehicle he was driving. 

Pirri died of his injuries a week after the attack. 

Prosecutors obtained video from at least 20 cameras at businesses, schools and homes in an effort to chronicle the incident and track the alleged killer's movements. Those efforts led them to Moore's home in Clayton.

The actual assault was not captured on video.

In addition to the videos, investigators found that pings from Moore's cellphone corresponded with the scene of the crime and the path of the truck captured on video heading to Clayton. One video of the vehicle was from a security camera at a home on Moore's street, Assistant Prosecutor Jacqueline Caban said during Friday's detention hearing.

As he entered the courtroom Friday, Moore smiled when he saw his wife and other family members. Otherwise, Moore remained quiet and calm throughout the proceeding.

Members of Pirri's family sat on the other side of the courtroom.

Moore's defense attorney, Wayne Powell, initially sought a delay in Friday's hearing, saying that he had not been able to review all of the evidence provided by prosecutors. Judge John Eastlack denied that motion.

The hearing had already been postponed previously because Moore was on suicide watch at Salem County Correctional Facility, the judge noted.

As the hearing proceeded, Powell called the state's evidence inadequate.

He noted that the truck in the videos may look similar to Moore's, but none of the videos show a tag number. He also argued that the videos show two vehicles matching the description of Moore's truck traveling in opposite directions on Delsea Drive shortly after the crime.

"What it seems that the state has available to it is insufficient to conclude that this defendant is the person who should be charged with this offense," Powell said. "What the state has is a theory."

In addition to Pirri's own account, prosecutors said other witnesses reported seeing a truck matching Moore's traveling along the route prosecutors said he took home.

Combining that evidence with the video and cellphone data makes for a strong case, Eastlack said in determining the state had proven probable cause.

"As we're all taught even back in law school, circumstantial evidence can be just as powerful as actual eyewitness testimony," he said, "and here there is a combination of the two."

On the issue of detention, Powell argued that Moore should be released pending trial with electronic monitoring.

Moore is employed, has strong ties to his community and his family, including two adult children, could help assure that he makes his court appearances, Powell said. He also noted that Moore cooperated with the investigation prior to his arrest, and even turned over his truck for inspection. The vehicle was returned prior to his eventual arrest in April.

Caban pointed to the severity of the crime and the potential that Moore faces life in prison in arguing for his detention. She also noted four disorderly persons offenses in his history, including a pair of simple assault convictions.

Eastlack agreed with the prosecution.

"There is weighty circumstantial evidence that the state has presented here," he concluded. The allegation that Moore brutally attacked Pirri over a supposed rude gesture "gives this court an abundance of concern," he said, deciding that Moore's continued detention was warranted.

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us: nj.com/tips.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        