Chris Christie

With less than a week left in his term as governor, Republican Chris Christie announced a slew of over 80 appointments on Wednesday, ushering in changes for state psychiatric hospital boards and other local boards before he leaves office on Tuesday.


Four of New Jersey’s psychiatric hospitals will have new trustee boards, mostly made of Christie staffers, former cabinet members and other loyalists who have worked with the outgoing governor during his eight-year tenure.


For the Board of Trustees at Morris County’s Greystone Hospital—the largest publicly run mental health facility in the state—Christie appointed Morris County Sherriff Jim Gannon, a Republican; advisor Michele Brown; and Port Authority employee Peter Simon, as well as a slew of others.


The Ancora Psychiatric Hospital Board of Trustees will include Cathleen Bennett, the former New Jersey health commissioner and head of the New Jersey Hospital Association, and Dominick DiRocco, Christie’s former deputy chief of staff and current director of governmental affairs at Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield. Another deputy chief of staff, Amanda DePalma, was appointed to the Trenton Psychiatric Hospital Board of Trustees.


For the board at Trenton’s Ann Klein Forensic Center, a facility that treats clients with mental illness who are in the judicial system, Christie appointed former Assemblywoman Mary Pat Angelini. In 2015, Angelini, a Republican, unexpectedly lost her re-election bid in New Jersey’s 11th legislative district.


Christie’s appointments also extended beyond the state’s hospital system.


His current communications director, Brian Murray, was appointed to serve on the Youth Correctional Institution Complex Board of Trustees. Christie also appointed retired Republican Judge Roger Daley to the Middlesex County College Board of Trustees.


View the full list of appointments here:


Ancora Psychiatric Hospital Board of Trustees


Cathleen Bennett
Emily Baggett
Dominick DiRocco
Beth Schermerhorn


Ann Klein Forensic Center Board of Trustees


Mary Pat Angelini
Raymond Brandes
Allison Blake
Rosemary Iannacone
Louis Goetting
Bob Martin


Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital Board of Trustees


Sheriff James Gannon
Michele Brown
Peter Simon
Wayne Hasenbalg
Bruce Sisler
Louis A. Modugno
Jim DiGiulio


Trenton Psychiatric Hospital Board of Trustees


Melissa Orsen
Amanda DePalma
Ryan Goodwin
Jennifer Duffy
David Reiner
Susan Rubino


New Lisbon Developmental Center Board of Trustees


Shannon Michael McManus


Woodbine Developmental Center Board of Trustees


Ron Filan


Garden State Preservation Trust


Andrew McNally


New Jersey State Historical Records Advisory Board


Joseph Glover
Ray Brandes
Christina Lazzaruolo
Terri Adams
Susie Cho


New Jersey Council for Young Children


Beth Schermerhorn
Susan Scrivo


Asbury Park Housing Authority


Brian Thomas


HOBOKEN Housing Authority


Beth A. Mason


Youth Correctional Institution Complex Board of Trustees


Brian Toro
Ryan Windels
Brian Murray


New Jersey State Board of Dentistry


Kevin Reich
Nicole DeMuro


State Board of Examiners of Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning, and Refridgeration Contractors


Wells Winegar


State Board of Examiners of Master Plumbers


Matt Spadaccini


State Board of Mortuary Science of New Jersey


Matthew Moench
Robert Schwaneberg


State Board of Psychological Examiners


Peter Slocum


State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners


Megan Fielder


Brigadier General William C. Doyle Veterans’ Memorial Cemetary Advisory Council


Ryan Windels


Clean Air Council


Andrew McNally
Scott Ross
John Spinello


Clean Water Council


David Gruskos


New Jersey Council on Physical Fitness and Sports


Michael Sullivan


Middlesex County College Board of Trustees


Roger Daley


Salem Community College Board of Trustees


Ryan Padilla


Child Advocacy Center Multidisciplinary Team Advisory Board


John Esmerado
Javier M. Toro
Debbie Riverso
Maria Vinci-Savettiere


New Jersey Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Advisory Council


Thomas Jennings
Wayne Roorda
Margaret Englebert
James Seath, Sr.
Karen Alexander
Charles J. Dodge
William Freeman


New Jersey Israel Commission


Michael Celler


School Ethics Commission


Richard D. Tomko
Jude Tanella


Edgewater Housing Authority


Ann Carletta


Harrison Housing Authority


Richard A. Miller


New Brunswick Housing Authority


Ramon Alayon


Newark Redevelopment and Housing Authority


John C. Patino


Salem City Housing Authority


Jim Smith


Commission on Human Trafficking


Samantha Steinberg-Boyer


New Jersey State Board of Architects


Bibi Taylor
Edward O’Brien


New Jersey State Board of Optometrists


Bonnie Lavoie-Brady


New Jersey Building Authority


William T. Mullen


State Coordinator for the 1033 Program


Darin Patrick


New Jersey Transportation Trust Fund Authority


John J. Duthie


University Hospital Board of Directors


David Molowa, Ph.D.
Robert Johnson


Rowan County College at Burlington Board of Trustees


James Anderson

We get it: you like to have control of your own internet experience. But advertising revenue helps support our journalism. To read our full stories, please turn off your ad blocker. We'd really appreciate it.

Below are steps you can take in order to whitelist Observer.com on your browser:

Click the AdBlock button on your browser and select Don't run on pages on this domain.

Click the AdBlock Plus button on your browser and select Enabled on this site.

Click the AdBlock Plus button on your browser and select Disable on Observer.com.