
    
        
            By Matt Gray

mgray@njadvancemedia.com,


For NJ.com

Michelle Long's body was found in the swimming pool of the Woolwich Township home she shared with her husband, Norman, on June 17 of last year. 

Authorities believe Norman F. Long beat his wife to death and dumped her body in the pool. He was charged with her murder six weeks later and was indicted in October.

Michelle Long's mother, Susan Direso, was devastated, and wants to honor her daughter in a productive way by giving victims of domestic violence a small, but powerful, piece of technology.

Direso and her granddaughters, Brittany Maguire and Kerrie Engelhardt, have partnered with a Philadelphia-based tech company called ROAR for Good, which has created a wearable personal safety device that consists of a single button.

With a touch of that button, the device shares the user's location via text alerts to a preset list of contacts, letting the recipients know the user is in trouble. It can also be set to emit a high-frequency alarm to ward off attackers.

Working with ROAR, Michelle Long's family is selling customized versions of the buttons with her nickname, "Chel" on them as part of the "Guardian Angel Chel" program.

All users do is buy the device, download the compatible smartphone app and program contacts. if contacts get an alert, they call 911.Each Chel button costs $100, plus, $10 for shipping.

The device is round, about an inch in diameter and comes in three colors. It can clip onto clothing or a purse.

"We partnered with expert designers to create a wearable that is sleek, stylish and as discreet as you like," ROAR notes on its webpage.

In silent mode, users press the button three time to share their location with contacts. In alarm mode, pressing the button for 3 seconds activates a 95+ decibel alarm and contacts are notified.

The designers market this wearable to women concerned about their personal safety, either in public or domestic settings. On its website, the ROAR describes this device as "just the beginning" in a mission to address the root causes of violence against women.

The company donates a portion of proceeds from the sale of each device to educational programs "that have been shown to increase empathy and reduce violence."

Michelle Long's family created a website -- guardianangelchel.com -- to sell the devices, share Michelle's story, provide those facing similar challenges with resources for support, and allow visitors to share their stories.

"We wanted to direct our energy into something positive, meaningful and honor my daughter's life, and leave a lasting legacy for her," Direso said. "Chel was my joy, my little girl, and to lose her in such a brutal way broke my heart forever. This mission to help at-risk victims gives us a purpose to turn our tragedy into a meaningful project."

This is a charity effort, Maguire explained, with any money made from the sale of buttons going toward purchase of more for those who cannot afford them. 

We don't make a dime off of this," she said, adding that the family used its own money to launch the project.

They are talking with domestic violence shelters and a local church about distribution of the devices.

"We've gotten a lot of great feedback," Maguire said. "I can only expect this to get bigger."

A big part of the family's mission is helping others understand the warning signs of domestic violence. Mental and verbal abuse often lead to physical violence, Maguire said, and the experience can leave the sufferers feeling trapped.

"There is always going to be a way out," she said. "We want people to know that they are not alone."

In addition to helping others, it's important for her family that Michelle Long is remembered for who she was, rather than the reports about her death.

"She deserves to be remembered as the loving, sweet, amazing person she was, rather than the lady who was beaten and thrown in a pool," Maguire said.

"She was basically the greatest person in the world," Maguire said of her late mother. "She was funny, creative, driven, very classy and stylish. She was just a person you loved to be around. Most importantly, she loved her family."

Maguire and her sister are stepdaughters of Norman Long, who remains jailed at Salem County Correctional Facility.

Along with her parents and two daughters, Long left behind a grandson, Liam.

Maguire feels her mother would be thrilled with the Guardian Angel Chel project.

"I know she would say how proud she was of us," Maguire said. "I know that she would be really excited and happy that we are doing something to help others."

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook. Have a tip? Tell us: nj.com/tips.


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        