By

Snejana Farberov For Dailymail.com


and 
Associated Press






  Published:
  09:58 EDT, 12 January 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  17:21 EDT, 12 January 2018







           2

View  comments

A New Jersey doctor accused of orchestrating his wife's murder to protect an illegal opioiod ring he was allegedly running with a motorcycle gang has been moved to a different jail nearly 100 miles away after being threatened by a co-defendant.


Dr James Kauffman, 68, and one of his alleged accomplices, 61-year-old Ferdinand 'Miserable' Augello, are charged in the death of Kauffman's 47-year-old wife, April, a radio talk show host who was gunned down in her home in May 2012.


On Thursday, following brief initial court appearances via video links, prosecutors said Kauffman has been moved from the Atlantic County Jail in Mays Landing to the Hudson County Jail in Kearney, nearly 100 miles away, for his protection.


'We don't think it would be prudent for those two to be lodged together,' Atlantic County Prosecutor Damon Tyner said.


Scroll down for video 


Dr James Kauffman, 68 (left), charged in his wife's death, has been moved to a different jail after his co-defender Ferdinand Augello, 61 (right) allegedly threatened to kill him

Safe haven: Kauffman has been moved to Hudson County Jail in Kearney, New Jersey, for his protection

Until this week, Kauffman had been lodged at the Atlantic County Jail in Mays Landing, New Jersey, along with his co-conspirator Augello 

The prosecutor said Augello was caught on wiretap discussing a plan to have Kauffman killed in jail before he could come to trial.


Even before Kauffman was arrested, Augello had allegedly plotted to have a mobster relative of his to kill the doctor, but the scheme failed.  


'Augello advised that he wanted Kauffman killed because he was concerned that Kauffman could implicate him in criminal activity,' a court affidavit stated. 


Scott Sherwood, a public defender representing Augello, declined to comment Thursday.


 Kim Pack, daughter of murder victim April Kauffman, poses with a photo of her late mother, talk-show host April Kauffman

Kauffman has long maintained his innocence, a stance his attorney, Louis Barbone, repeated Thursday.


'We're saying what we've been saying for the past few years: He's not guilty,' Barbone said.


On a video link with the judge, an unshaven and careworn Kauffman did not speak other than to reply 'yes' several times when asked if he understood his legal rights.  


Worse for wear: An unshaven Kauffman made his initial court appearance via video link on Thursday

Augello also made his initial appearance; he is accused of plotting to kill Kauffman in jail

Kauffman and Augello, who is a member of the Pagan Outlaw Motorcycle Gang, are both charged with murder in April Kauffman's killing, in addition to racketeering related to the illegal distribution of narcotics through Kauffman’s former medical practice. 


The charges, including those relating to the wife's murder-for-hire and the alleged plot to kill James Kauffman, were announced Tuesday after more than five years of investigation. 


'He’s sort of a one-man crime spree,' Tyner said of Kauffman, who was arrested last summer following an armed standoff with police at his medical practice.





The others implicated in the case include Joseph Mulholland, 52, Beverly Augello, 47, and Glenn Seeler, 37, who are charged with first-degree racketeering.


Paul Pagano, 61, and Tabitha Chapman, 35, were charged with second-degree racketeering. 


Joseph Mullholland, left, was suspected of carrying out the shooting. He was found dead from a drug overdose a year after the killing. Glen Seeler, 37, right, was charged with racketeering

Paul Pagano, 61, left, Tabitha Chapman, 35, center and, Beverly Augello, 47, right, were charged with racketeering

April Kauffman's daughter, Kimberly Pack, who had long alleged that her stepfather killed her mother, said the death 'forever changed my life.'


'I have been waiting patiently for justice, and today I was lucky enough to be granted justice,' Pack said. 'I think for the first time, today I can actually breathe.'


James Kauffman, 68,  April's husband whom she was attempting to divorce was charged with 1st degree racketeering 

Pack had earlier fought a legal battle against her stepfather sparked by his attempts to claim April Kauffman's two life insurance policies. 


His claim was turned down because prosecutors couldn't provide a letter saying he wasn't considered a suspect.


April Kauffman was a local businesswoman who hosted weekly talk shows and advocated for military veterans. She had received a governor's award for outstanding community service a few days before her death.


Prosecutors said James Kauffman gave free prescriptions to people sent by Augello and Augello would receive $1,000 per script or a number of pills after the script was filled. Those who received them either used the drugs or sold them, authorities said.  


In the summer of 2011, April Kauffman wanted a divorce and after James Kauffman objected she threatened to expose the drug ring, Tyner said.


Tyner said that Kauffman told Augello about his wife's threats and solicited him to have her killed. 


The casket of April Kauffman is carried from Beth El Synagogue, in Margate, N.J., after the funeral service Monday May 14, 2012

Police work the scene of the fatal shooting of April Kauffman, a local radio talk show host, businesswoman and community volunteer found dead in her Linwood, N.J.




 Another six people connected to the gang were charged with racketeering in the drug ring, which prosecutors said continued until last summer. Kim Pack, daughter of murder victim April Kauffman is pictured

After about a year, a man who agreed to do it, Francis Mullholland, was driven to the home, where the doors were left open, and was given a gun, authorities said. April was shot twice, and her body was found by a handyman.


Tyner said Mullholland, who said he got about $20,000 in cash, was later found dead of a drug overdose.


Mullholland originally was identified as a cousin of a member of the motorcycle gang, but a spokeswoman for the prosecutor's office later said that was incorrect. She declined to release more details about him.


Prosecutors said the drug empire lasted until June, when Kauffman was arrested on weapons charges at his Egg Harbor Township office. 


Authorities said he brandished a handgun as agents executed a search warrant and said, 'I'm not going to jail for this!' A hostage negotiator persuaded him to surrender. 




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group