Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Support

Support

Chat Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The first in a series about education at the Rutherford County jail examines recidivism rates overall.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The Rutherford County Sheriff's Department offers different classes and programs to the inmates housed at the jail.
    HELEN COMER/DNJ

Lieutenant Richard Grissom, Facilities Coordinator and Program Director at the Rutherford County Sheriff's office shows off one of the program rooms on Thursday Nov. 30, 2017.
(Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)Buy Photo

A series of stories by the USA TODAY NETWORK-Tennessee will dive into the many different aspects of the new push inside the Rutherford County Adult Detention Center to give inmates educational opportunities.


The Rutherford County Sheriff’s Office is in a period of transition, and nowhere are the winds of change felt more strongly than in the Adult Detention Center.


“Of course we’re going to have our bumps here and there—it’s corrections, it’s a jail, things are going to happen—but our goal is to provide the opportunity and create the right environment for success,” Capt. Chris Fly said.


 


Fly, previously in charge of the Rutherford County Correction Work Center, has started laying the ground work for a much more programs-based experience for those incarcerated at the jail.


More: Sheriff hires Salandy as jail administrator


“The main focus we’re doing is, instead of these guys and girls sitting in their cells staring at the walls, we want them to use their time effectively, in a way to work, reduce them from having to come back,” Lt. Richard Grissom, program director, said. “We just want to give them the tools they can use to be productive citizens when they leave and possibly keep them from returning.”


Rutherford County jail inmates (L to R)  Charles Estes, Juan Garcia, Patrick His, Colton James and Troy Smith wait to receive their diploma after passing the HiSET exam and earning a high school equivalency diploma during a graduation ceremony on Nov. 30, 2017, at the Rutherford County Adult Detention Center.  (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)

A 2013 report from the nonprofit, nonpartisan RAND corporation demonstrated that increasing the opportunity for education inside jails and prisons significantly reduces the rates of recidivism for the individuals who participate in the programs.


Under the terms of the study, which looked at more than 30 years of recidivism rates, those involved in the studied treatment groups were 43 percent less likely to be reincarcerated within three years of their release. 


Carolyn Stanley, left, one of the HiSET teachers from Workforce Essentials talks with one of her students Rutherford County jail inmate Devlyn Malone Jones before she received a diploma after passing the HiSET exam and earning a high school equivalency diploma in a graduation ceremony on Nov. 30, 2017, at the Rutherford County Adult Detention Center.  (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)

On top of the findings of recidivism rates itself, the study determined the 12.9 percentage-point reduction shows that correctional education programs far exceed the break-even point in reducing the risk. From that data, the cost to educate an inmate is far below rehousing those individuals later on.


More: State decertifies Rutherford County jail


“This works,” Grissom said. “When you can use different parts of different programs that have been proven to work and when you start getting that amount of input, you can make a lot of difference.”


Antwan Gilliam, 26, who is currently serving time at the Rutherford County Jail for a felony, is a recent graduate of the Rutherford County Sheriff's Department's high school equivalency credential program formerly known as the GED. (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)

“Collaboration is very important. You just can’t shut your doors and shut everyone out,” Fly said. “it’s about opening it up, building those collaborations, even if it’s across the country, and seeing what other institutions are doing that are successful and trying to bring those ideas back and implement them.”


Classes in Rutherford County are entirely volunteer-run. Many volunteers are run by faith-based organizations, but not all.


More: Rutherford sheriff's office: Inmate hanging ruled as suicide


More: Rutherford sheriff's office: Inmate hanging ruled as suicide


Former visitation rooms have been converted into classroom spaces in side the detention center, and new exterior buildings are nearing completion. 


"Our goal is to have those areas occupied on at least a 4-5-hour basis daily, for inmates to be able to go to those programs, Fyy said. "If an inmate wants to go to the program, we want to be able to provide the opportunity for the inmate to go to the program."


Lieutenant Richard Grissom, Facilities Coordinator and Program Director at the Rutherford County Sheriff's office walks next to one of the new classroom buildings, on Thursday Nov. 30, 2017. (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)

In certain cases, detention center staff will use compulsory attendance at certain classes as an alternative to traditional disciplinary methods.


“I feel like it’s not a waste of time, I’m not just sitting in this box and just wasting time out of my life. I’m doing stuff to prepare me for when I get out of here to better myself,” 26-year-old Antwan Gilliam said. He is serving time for a felony and noticed a change in the atmosphere between his last incarceration and this one.


 “A lot of people in here, like me, I didn’t have nothing behind my name to stand for,” he said. “Now, when I get out of here, I’ve got a GED. I have something instead of going back to the same things that got us in here.”


"We don’t need bigger jails, we need fewer inmates," Sgt. Joe Scott said. "The whole goal is to cut down on the number of inmates because we’ve got to stop releasing inmates back into the community, we need to be releasing productive citizens back into the community. That starts here."


Reach Mariah Timms at mtimms@dnj.com and on Twitter @MariahTimms. 
