;        
        .fc-pinned-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/KHOU.png') calc(100% - 45px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
        .fc-dialog-header:after {
            background: #000000 url('/content/logos/dark/KHOU.png') calc(100% - 20px) 10px no-repeat;
            background-size: auto 25px;
            content: 'Ad blocker detected';
        }
     



Houston Weather Summary: 94 degrees

Police have arrested William Strampel, the former Michigan State University dean who was Larry Nassar's boss, according to multiple sources with knowledge of the situation.


Strampel, 70, is being held in the Ingham County Jail.


Ingham County Sheriff Scott Wriggelsworth confirmed that Strampel is lodged in the jail, but said information on what charges he is being held on would not be released until he is arraigned. 

Strampel faces multiple charges. At least one is a felony and others are misdemeanors, sources told the Free Press without specifying what the charges were. Strampel served as dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine from 2002 until December, when he stepped down for medical reasons. 





Nassar, 54, formerly of Holt, has been sentenced to 60 years in federal prison on child pornography charges and is in custody. He also faces a 40- to 175-year sentence issued in Ingham County and a 40- to 125-year sentence from Eaton County, where he was charged with a total of 10 sexual assaults. Those sentences will not begin until he finishes the federal sentence.


A spokesman for the state police told the Free Press all questions should be directed to Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette's office. The Free Press left a message with the AG's spokeswoman but was not called back.


Lansing television station WILX broadcast pictures of state police vehicles outside of Strampel's DeWitt home. 


The arrest comes as the attorney general has called a press conference for noon Tuesday.  A press release said Special Prosecutor Bill Forsyth will provide an update on his investigation into MSU at the press conference. 


Nassar, once a highly regarded MSU osteopathic physician who provided medical care to Olympic athletes and scores of youth gymnasts, is now a convicted felon who is expected to spend the rest of his life in prison for multiple sexual assaults. 


Interim MSU President John Engler has started the process to strip Strampel of his tenure and fire him for his failure to enforce special protocols put in place for Nassar following a 2014 sexual assault investigation.

“William Strampel did not act with the level of professionalism we expect from individuals who hold senior leadership positions, particularly in a position that involves student and patient safety,” Engler said in a statement released by the university at the time. “Further, allegations have arisen that question whether his personal conduct over a long period of time met MSU’s standards. We are sending an unmistakable message today that we will remove employees who do not treat students, faculty, staff, or anyone else in our community in an appropriate manner."


The 2014 Title IX investigation has been the focus of much of the criticism directed at MSU over the university's handling of Nassar.  Nassar was cleared of policy violations then, in part, based on the opinions of four medical experts who all worked for the university and had close ties to Nassar. 


Strampel apparently responded to the guidance in an MSU investigator's report by creating protocols for Nassar’s return to seeing patients. They included a requirement to wear gloves when performing procedures in intimate areas, to have another person present during such treatments and to explain the procedure and obtain consent before treating patients.


When MSU terminated Nassar in September 2016, one of the reasons was his failure to follow those protocols, although Strampel himself later acknowledged that he had not tried to enforce them after the Title IX review concluded there was no violation of university policy.


Strampel regularly checked in on the status of the investigation when it was ongoing, voiced his support for Nassar and told Nassar he could return to clinical work before the investigation concluded, according to emails. It's not clear whether Nassar did so. 