Get the latest sports news, coverage and opinion – all in your inbox.


                
                    Now reading the latest in
                

                
                Colleges News
            


            
                The latest in
            
            
            Colleges News
        


        This story is about
        Colleges
    


        Published
        Nov. 30
    


                    Julie Jacobson/AP                

Seton Hall forward Michael Nzei (1) shoots against Texas Tech guard Brandone Francis (1) during the first half of an NCAA college basketball game, Thursday, Nov. 30, 2017, in New York. (AP Photo/Julie Jacobson)



        
            By
            
                            
                            Akshay  Mirchandani            , Staff Writer        

                    
            
                Contact Akshay  Mirchandani
                
                    
                    on Twitter:
                    @amirchandani41
                                            
            

Texas Tech lost to Seton Hall 89-79 on Thursday in New York City at Madison Square Garden. Here's the box score.

Here are three takeaways from the loss:


Disappointing loss


The Red Raiders came into this game at 6-0 and ranked No. 22 in the latest AP Poll. A win against a good Seton Hall team in Madison Square Garden would've been another big win for the Red Raiders in front of a national audience. 


Instead, Texas Tech falls to 6-1 and return home to play Nevada next week. It's not a world-ending loss for the Red Raiders by any stretch and its still very early in the season. But Texas Tech missed an opportunity to make another statement. 


Defense struggles


Texas Tech lost this game on the defensive end. Seton Hall shot 50.8 percent from the field and 55 percent from the 3-point line. The Pirates had four players in double-figures, led by forward Desi Rodriguez with 24 points and seven rebounds. The Red Raiders simply didn't have to offensive fire power to match Seton Hall tonight. 

But Texas Tech's defense needed to be better to keep the Red Raiders in the game. It was ultimately Texas Tech's downfall. 


Guard duo continues to impress


Senior guard Keenan Evans, to no surprise, continued to lead Texas Tech. He had 21 points and six assists in the loss and continues to be the Red Raiders' best player. 


What should really be exciting to Texas Tech fans is the play of freshman guard Jarrett Culver. He had 17 points and knocked down five 3-pointers against Seton Hall. It marks the third consecutive game Culver has scored in double-figures. Texas Tech will be dangerous if Culver and Evans continue to put up numbers like that. 


Here's how Twitter reacted to the game:

Seton Hall defended in second half unlike it has defended this year up to this point. That's their identity. Really nice win over No. 22 Texas Tech. #shbb

Seton Hall dropping 89 on that Texas Tech defense is probably the most impressive result of the evening for me. That Red Raiders group is long and defends like hell.

Unbeaten teams remaining: 18 (Sorry, Texas Tech).

Seton Hall looks like a different team than the one that lost to Rhode Island. Pirates win a battle of NCAA teams at MSG over Texas Tech. Louisville next. #shbb

Greetings from 33rd and 8th. Here for the UA Reunion at MSG. First up: Seton Hall-Texas Tech. Feels like a Round of 64 caliber game.