
              San Francisco Giants' Pablo Sandoval, right, celebrates with Joe Panik (12) after hitting a two-run home run off Miami Marlins pitcher Caleb Smith in the second inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              San Francisco Giants' Pablo Sandoval celebrates after hitting a two-run home run off Miami Marlins pitcher Caleb Smith in the second inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              Miami Marlins' Brian Anderson, right, speaks with home plate umpire Manny Gonzalez in the first inning of a baseball game against the San Francisco Giants Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              San Francisco Giants pitcher Andrew Suarez works against the Miami Marlins in the first inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              San Francisco Giants pitcher Andrew Suarez works against the Miami Marlins in the first inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              Miami Marlins pitcher Caleb Smith works against the San Francisco Giants in the first inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              Miami Marlins' Starlin Castro, left, tags out San Francisco Giants' Andrew McCutchen in a rundown between first and second base in the first inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              Miami Marlins pitcher Caleb Smith works against the San Francisco Giants in the first inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              Miami Marlins' Lewis Brinson, right, and Cameron Maybin (1) celebrate after scoring against the San Francisco Giants in the inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              Miami Marlins' Miguel Rojas swings for a two run single off San Francisco Giants' Andrew Suarez in the fifth inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              San Francisco Giants' Buster Posey (28) is congratulated by manager Bruce Bochy, right, after scoring against the Miami Marlins in the second inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            


              A fan catches a two-run home run hit by San Francisco Giants' Pablo Sandoval over Miami Marlins left fielder Cameron Maybin in the second inning of a baseball game Monday, June 18, 2018, in San Francisco. (AP Photo/Ben Margot)
            

SAN FRANCISCO (AP) — Hunter Strickland realizes the San Francisco Giants have a fine-line for winning games, and he was disgusted to leave one on the field.

Walks were the closer's culprit again.

Miguel Rojas followed Lewis Brinson's RBI single with a go-ahead base hit as the Miami Marlins rallied against Strickland in the ninth inning and overcame an early four-run deficit, beating the Giants 5-4 on Monday night.

"It's unacceptable," Strickland said. "Obviously I'm not thrilled about it right now, I didn't do my job."


Strickland (3-3), San Francisco's second reliever, blew his fourth save in 17 chances. He walked Brian Anderson to begin the ninth then surrendered J.T. Realmuto's RBI double.

"All the credit to Andy in the ninth inning, putting that at-bat against their closer," Rojas said of Anderson. "That for sure rattled him right there. He wasn't expecting that at-bat from the leadoff guy and I think everything started from that at-bat."

Tayron Guerrero (1-2) pitched the eighth before Kyle Barraclough closed out the 2-hour, 47-minute game for his third save as Giants fans booed the home team.

Pablo Sandoval hit a two-run homer in the second and Andrew Suarez struck out seven, but San Francisco failed to hold a lead as it opened an extended stretch at home.

Joe Panik added an RBI single in the second after Buster Posey led off the inning with a double that center fielder Brinson misjudged, letting it go over his head.

Suarez had his third straight no-decision and second in a row against the Marlins after the Giants' 5-4 loss at Miami on Wednesday, when the clubs played a four-game series in South Florida to begin last week.

Mac Williamson also had an RBI single as the Giants lost for just the second time in their last nine home games. They began a schedule with 20 of 26 at AT&amp;T Park after nearly a month with only eight games in the Bay Area.

"For eight innings we played great baseball," manager Bruce Bochy said.

Marlins starter Caleb Smith, who made his first start against the Giants last Wednesday and matched up against Suarez for a second straight outing, was done after four innings, allowing four runs on six hits, striking out four and walking two.

Miami committed two errors and had managed only Rojas' two-run single in the fifth before getting to Strickland. Among the Marlins' most reliable hitters this month, Anderson played at AT&amp;T Park for the first time and went 0 for 3 — making him 0 for 10 in his past three games.

BART ARRIVES

Giants' first-round draft pick and catcher Joey Bart, the No. 2 overall selection who signed for a bonus of more than $7 million, arrived to AT&amp;T Park for a stop before he returns to Arizona to get some at-bats before reporting to Class A short-season Salem-Keizer in the Northwest League.

"This is unbelievable," he said. "I'm lucky to be in this position. I'm ready to take off from here."

Bart planned to ride BART — Bay Area Rapid Transit — on Tuesday.

He enjoyed the atmosphere at the ballpark.

"I'd love to be out here as soon as possible," he said of reaching the big leagues.

JOHNSON'S GREETING

Marlins second-round pick Osiris Johnson of Alameda's Encinal High — where cousin Jimmy Rollins and Dontrelle Willis also played — met manager Don Mattingly before the game and watched batting practice.

"I've seen a lot of good things," Mattingly said, "moving around at short, swinging it."

TRAINER'S ROOM

Marlins: Mattingly is hopeful 3B Martin Prado will return from a strained left hamstring that put him on the disabled list May 26 sometime before the All-Star break. Prado is on a running progression and taking groundballs and hitting back home. "He's been a surprise he's doing this good this fast," Mattingly said. "He's been 100 percent." ... 1B Garrett Cooper (bruised right wrist) played four innings at Class A Jupiter and will do so again Tuesday before continuing his rehab with Triple-A New Orleans.

Giants: RHP Johnny Cueto threw a 40-pitch, two-inning simulated game, facing Hunter Pence as one of the hitters, as he works back from inflammation in his pitching elbow. The Giants will determine the next step — starting a rehab appearance or throwing again to live hitters — based on how he feels Tuesday. ... RHP Jeff Samardzija, on the disabled list for a second stint this time with tightness in his pitching shoulder, threw a bullpen and will make a rehab outing with Triple-A Sacramento on Thursday and then it will be determined if he needs another or is activated. ... Athletic trainer Dave Groeschner will travel to Los Angeles to be with Evan Longoria as the third baseman has surgery Tuesday on his fractured left hand. ... SS Brandon Crawford went on the paternity list for the birth of his son and fourth child and INF Kelby Tomlinson was recalled from Sacramento.

UP NEXT

Marlins: RHP Dan Straily (2-2, 4.23 ERA) is 4-0 with 2.82 against the Giants entering his seventh career start vs. San Francisco.

Giants: RHP Dereck Rodriguez (1-1, 4.34) makes his fourth career start after a no-decision in a 16-inning Giants win against the Marlins last Thursday.

___

More AP Baseball: https://apnews.com/tag/MLBbaseball