Apparently, it was all legal.

Though an investigation continues, it appears that everything Stephen Paddock did last Sunday night, before breaking the windows in his 32nd-floor hotel room and pouring gunfire onto a crowd at a Las Vegas country music festival, complied with state and federal gun laws.

No law prohibited Paddock from buying the 23 firearms, including semiautomatic rifles, that were found in his room after the slaughter. And although federal law has forbidden the sale of machine guns since 1986, except for a limited number of high-priced weapons made and registered before then, neither U.S. nor Nevada law bans the modestly priced kits that Paddock apparently used to convert 12 of his weapons to automatic rifles that could fire hundreds of rounds per minute.

The worst civilian mass shooting in modern U.S. history has revived the long-running debate about gun control, public safety and the rights of gun owners. The carnage at an elementary school in Newtown, Conn., in 2012 and a nightclub in Orlando in 2016 prompted much talk but no action, at least at the federal level; this time, some congressional Republicans have expressed support for banning “bump stocks,” the semiautomatic weapons conversion kits.

The events of last Sunday have also illuminated the gaping divide in gun regulations among states and the federal government.

Nevada fits the definition of a “purple” state — a Republican governor, a Democratic Legislature, U.S. senators from each party, and an electorate that voted narrowly for Hillary Clinton last year — but its gun laws are among the nation’s most lenient, reflecting regional attitudes and the influence of firearms groups.

Anyone in the state who passes a federal background check can buy an unlimited number of handguns or long guns and, after meeting minimal permit requirements, can carry guns openly in public. Semiautomatic weapons are legal, as are federally registered machine guns and converter kits.

Nevada, like the federal government, requires background checks only for purchases from licensed gun dealers. The state’s voters narrowly approved an initiative last November to extend the checks to private sales and gun shows, but Nevada’s Republican attorney general, Adam Laxalt, declared the law unenforceable after a dispute over whether the FBI or a state agency would conduct the reviews.

Neighboring California, by contrast, has perhaps the strictest gun regulations of any state.

State law bans semiautomatic rifles and converter kits. Federally licensed machine guns are technically legal in California, but permits are generally available only to members of the military, police and film studios. State law prohibits the sale of gun magazines that hold more than 10 cartridges, and a new law, passed by voters, would bar their possession as well, but is currently blocked by a federal judge. 

California also requires background checks, and a 10-day waiting period, for all purchasers of firearms, and will require them for buyers of ammunition starting in 2019. 

To some extent, states like California “can fill the gap,” said Adam Winkler, a UCLA law professor who studies gun regulation. But with the stark differences among states, he said, “laws will be less effective than they otherwise might be. If you can buy one of these bump stocks in Nevada and transport them across the state border, a determined shooter will be able to get their hands on them.”

Another obstacle, Winkler said, is the shortage of research on gun violence — due largely to federal budget amendments, backed by gun groups since 1996, that have halted firearms studies by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Federal data are available for deaths caused by firearms, however, and they show that after California began tightening its gun laws in 1993, following the murders of eight people at a San Francisco law office, gun-related deaths fell by 56.6 percent in the state over the next 20 years, more than twice the rate of decline in the rest of the nation.

Another study, released in June by researchers led by Stanford law Professor John Donohue, found that overall violent crime rose 13 to 15 percent more over a 10-year period in 33 states that allow their residents to carry concealed handguns, with few or no restrictions, compared with states like California that allow local law enforcement offices to deny requests for handgun permits.

Using data through 2014, Donohue found no evidence to support a 1997 study by two University of Chicago researchers that concluded “right-to-carry” laws reduced violent crime.

Research has been less conclusive on the impact of a federal ban on semiautomatic weapons, which was sponsored by Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., after the 1993 San Francisco shootings and remained in effect until 2004, when Congress refused to renew it. Some studies found no impact on violent crime, while others reported a decline in mass shootings while the ban was in effect.

In general, the studies show that “California law is a good model,” said Hannah Shearer, an attorney with the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, a gun-control group based in San Francisco. In a nation horrified by the events in Las Vegas, she said, now is “exactly the time to have that conversation.”

It’s precisely the wrong time to make political decisions, countered Craig DeLuz, spokesman for the Firearms Policy Coalition in Sacramento.

“Those who seek to ban the right to keep and bear arms are utilizing this tragedy in order to advance their own political agenda,” DeLuz said. He attributed California’s 20-year drop in violent crime to the enactment of laws like “three strikes” that increased prison sentences, and to an increase in statewide gun sales during that period despite the laws restricting certain weapons.

While California continues to pass gun-control laws — bills on Gov. Jerry Brown’s desk would ban carrying rifles openly in non-hunting areas and eliminate school officials’ authority to let staff members carry guns — Congress is considering legislation that would allow gun owners to carry concealed handguns anywhere in the country if they have permits from their home states.

Republican sponsors put that measure on hold after the Las Vegas shootings but are likely to return to it after the furor dies down. But the usual partisan divide may not apply to one measure aimed squarely at gunman Paddock’s arsenal: the “bump stock” kits that convert semiautomatic weapons into the equivalent of machine guns. 

A bill introduced Wednesday by Feinstein would outlaw them.

Feinstein included a similar ban in a 2013 measure that attempted to revive the federal prohibition on semiautomatics. The bill was rejected along party lines. Her new bill has two dozen co-sponsors, all Democrats, including California’s Kamala Harris. But a Republican congressman, Carlos Curbelo of Florida, is proposing a bump-stock ban in the House, and several Republican senators have also voiced support, including Senate majority whip, John Cornyn of Texas.

“For the first time in decades, there is growing bipartisan consensus for firearm reform,” Curbelo said in announcing his legislation co-sponsored by Rep. Seth Moulton, D-Mass. The effort gained momentum Thursday when the National Rifle Association said it would support “additional regulations” of the devices.

Congress may be emboldened to act against the converter kits, said UCLA’s Winkler, because “gun owners don’t like them. They make firearms highly inaccurate.” 

Although public opinion on firearms regulation fluctuates — support for restrictions tends to rise, usually only briefly, after mass shootings — polls generally indicate that gun control is more popular with the public than with a majority of Congress.

Gallup reports that 55 percent of those surveyed a year ago said gun laws should be more strict than they are, compared with 34 percent who said they should be less strict. Majorities approaching 90 percent favor background checks for all gun sales, the polling company reports, but a ban on semiautomatic rifles, once popular, had less than 40 percent support in the most recent survey.

Bob Egelko is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: begelko@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @egelko
                  

California’s firearms laws

Here is a closer look at California’s regulation of firearms — “common-sense gun laws,” as described by  Hannah Shearer’s group and like-minded organizations, which say they could be a model for the nation; or, in the view of Craig DeLuz’s group, as attacks on the right to “keep and bear arms.” 


                  Background checks: All purchasers must have their backgrounds checked for serious criminal convictions and other disqualifying factors, such as mental disorders, drug addiction and domestic violence restraining orders. California conducts a more searching examination than federal background checks and imposes a 10-day waiting period before gun delivery. A law approved by state voters last November, the first of its kind in the nation, will require background checks for buyers of firearm ammunition, starting in 2019. 


                  Handgun limits: The state limits private citizens to one handgun purchase per month, a law passed in 1999 after two high school students in Littleton, Colo., used multiple firearms to kill 12 fellow students and a teacher before taking their own lives. Similar laws exist in Maryland, New Jersey and the District of Columbia. Legislation to extend the one-per-month limit to rifles and shotguns was vetoed by Brown last year, and another attempt this year was rejected in the  Assembly.


                  Assault weapons: The nation’s first ban on “assault weapons” — semiautomatic firearms with detachable magazines — was narrowly passed in California in 1989 and signed by Republican Gov. George Deukmejian after a gunman used such a weapon to kill five schoolchildren in Stockton. Lawmakers expanded the ban to additional rifles in 2000 and enlarged it again last year to cover guns with “bullet buttons,” devices that allowed users to manually remove magazines and reload quickly. 

The National Rifle Association, which campaigned successfully to block renewal of the federal law sponsored by Feinstein, has sued to overturn assault-weapons laws in California and other states, arguing that the guns are no more dangerous than other firearms and are legitimate weapons of self-defense. A federal appeals court upheld Maryland’s law in February, and gun owners backed by the NRA have appealed to the Supreme Court. Lower federal courts are reviewing California’s law. 


                  Large-capacity magazines: In 2000, California banned manufacture and sale of gun magazines carrying 10 or more cartridges, a prohibition that was also part of Feinstein’s federal law against semiautomatic rifles and stayed in effect after the nationwide law expired. The new voter-approved law would take it a step further by banning possession of large-capacity magazines. It was scheduled to take effect in July but was blocked two days earlier by a federal judge in San Diego, who said lawmakers would be “disarming California’s law-abiding citizens.” The state has appealed. 


                  Concealed-carry permits: California, and seven other states, allow local law enforcement agencies to decide whether to issue a permit to carry a concealed handgun outside the home. Such permits are usually granted in rural areas of California to those without criminal records, but are generally denied in populous counties except for police and security guards.

The concealed-carry laws were fiercely challenged by gun organizations, who argued that the constitutional right to bear arms, which the Supreme Court invoked in 2008 to allow possession of handguns at home for self-defense, applies equally outside the home. But a federal appeals court upheld California’s law in June 2016, and the nation’s high court denied review a year later.


                  Family/police intervention: Family members or police can ask a judge to prohibit gun ownership by persons who are determined, after a court hearing, to be dangerous to themselves or others. The law was passed in 2014 after a mentally disturbed man fatally shot three UC Santa Barbara students and stabbed three others to death in the college town of Isla Vista before killing himself. 


                  Gun violence research: In July, California introduced another first-in-the-nation project, the Firearm Violence Research Center at UC Davis, with a five-year grant of $5 million approved by the Legislature last year. The political sensitivity of such research had been clear since 1996, when Congress, at the NRA’s prodding, prohibited the Centers for Disease Control and Education from using any federal funds to “advocate or promote gun control,” a ban the agency has interpreted to apply to any studies of gun violence.

Bob Egelko has been a reporter since June 1970. He spent 30 years with the Associated Press, covering news, politics and occasionally sports in Los Angeles, San Diego and Sacramento, and legal affairs in San Francisco from 1984 onward. He worked for the San Francisco Examiner for five months in 2000, then joined The Chronicle in November 2000.


His beat includes state and federal courts in California, the Supreme Court and the State Bar. He has a law degree from McGeorge School of Law in Sacramento and is a member of the bar. Coverage has included the passage of Proposition 13 in 1978, the appointment of Rose Bird to the state Supreme Court and her removal by the voters, the death penalty in California and the battles over gay rights and same-sex marriage.


 

About

Contact

Services

©2018 Hearst