











RW, maybe you should have the doc check your meds. 


This sounds like something he found by way of the nutbar called "Alex Jones"


Alex Jones covered this sort of treatment of children in government care being standard, what? A decade ago? I think GWB was still in office. But now because Trump people care? If Trump sitting in oval office will finally get people angry enough about government evils to not dismiss things as crazy conspiracy theories maybe he's actually more effective at getting people to hate the state than you gave him credit for. 


Maybe Trump was trying to turn them into future Republican voters.


Well now that they are in the USA these immigrants need to be treated like the rest of the children here, subjected to bureaucracies, ignorance and corruption that see it fit to drug children so that they conform to the establishment. This is mostly a reference to public schools.


Yes, this applies to so many children well beyond this little immigrant circumstance.  And its been going on well before Trump. Social workers, judges, school admins and "doctors" force this crap on all types, including petty criminals and 'sex' offenders that might involve a 19 year old with a 15 year old.  Drug everybody, put them in classes, put them in straightjackets and let everyone who administers the system feel like god and get paid.


Yes, it was a shame what the Obama admin did to these kids. Hopefully Trump changes that Obama-era policy: https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/frenzied-media-blame-trump-for-obamas-drugging-of-immigrant-kidsHowever, and a bit off the topic of psychiatric drugs, these third-world children and their parents (where available) absolutely should be forced inoculations to avoid spreading any potentially communicable diseases. Thanks taxpayers!


Forcedninnoccumation is object rape.


Didn't people vote for Trump because he is the anti-Obama? So why are you celebrating the fact that he's just as awful as Obama? Unless you're now sayong Obama was right. 


As Hayek explained, you cannot measure the road not taken (Hillary, for example). Trump's horrible nature presents the possibility of almost unlimited anti-state lessons that might be taught. Did or do Democrats care about the Iraqi children?https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cEtdw7Z04QQDo they care about the Syrian children made orphans by Obama's aiding of Al Qaeda in Syria? https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/11/syria-unicef-warns-dangers-facing-war-orphans-171115165757024.htmlWhat will happen to the children of everyone jailed for their failure to turn in their guns?  In fact, "Progressives" propose some draconian law about every 20 minutes aimed at non-criminals. Where do their children go when those criminal non-criminals are in jail? 


I voted for Trump and I'm more pleased now than when I voted for him. I know you guys are all for wide open borders, but you can have either: - a high trust, liberal (small L) society, or- open bordersYou can't have both. Libertarians are totally delusional if they think they can.


I'm not celebrating. These dirty deeds were done under the Obama administration. In fairness, this was the result of a government contractor gone bad, not the policy of either administration.Don't worry. Trump will change it and stop the human traffickers.https://twitter.com/i/status/1009536237881847808https://twitter.com/i/status/1009844059211366401


Re: Bob Roddis,--- In fact, "Progressives" propose some draconian law about every 20 minutes aimed at non-criminals.  ---Which should tell you that Trump and his merry band of fascists are Progressives.


Re: Robert What?--- I know you guys are all for wide open borders, but you can have either: a high trust, liberal (small L) society, or- open borders ---You are repeating the same ridiculous dales dichotomy. A liberal society NEEDS borders open to trade, to the free flow of goods, of services, of capital and, yes, of labor, otherwise that society grows POORER. You're ignoring comparative advantage, division of labor and specialization to shoehorn a society into an insular organism that is self-sufficient in order to paint "open borders" as a threat. That's YOUR ignorance speaking, or your mendacity. 


Re: Stuffed Pimento,--- These dirty deeds were done under the Obama administration ---Then the fact that Trump is doing the same things should be enough to condemn both, right?


@Robert What?No, you can either have:- the state- freedomYou can’t have both. Minarchists are totally delusional if they think they can bring freedom by rejecting it.


I've called Trump the leader of the Archie Bunker Democrats, socially conservative "progressives". The official Democrats are the Meathead Democrats. They both believe in the magical powers of the U.S. government, just different magical powers. http://bobroddis.blogspot.com/2014/09/the-two-branches-of-american-statist.html


@FranciscoEXACTLY!  Let’s review:2016: “I’m gonna drain the swamp!”2018: “Bbbbut Obama...”


Maybe it's just me, but the phrase "Poster Child" just screams out of this issue.







