Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High near 95F. Winds E at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. W winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:56 pm

A composite of two Daily Herald photos shows the two Republican candidates for Utah County sheriff, including Jim Phelps, at left, and Mike Smith.

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Mike Smith poses for a portrait in the Daily Herald's office on Thursday, May 31, 2018, in Provo. Smith currently serves as the chief of police in Pleasant Grove.

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Jim Phelps poses for a portrait Wednesday, May 30, 2018, at the Daily Herald in Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Jim Phelps poses for a portrait Wednesday, May 30, 2018, at the Daily Herald in Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Jim Phelps poses for a portrait Wednesday, May 30, 2018, at the Daily Herald in Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Mike Smith poses for a portrait in the Daily Herald's office on Thursday, May 31, 2018, in Provo.

A composite of two Daily Herald photos shows the two Republican candidates for Utah County sheriff, including Jim Phelps, at left, and Mike Smith.

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Mike Smith poses for a portrait in the Daily Herald's office on Thursday, May 31, 2018, in Provo. Smith currently serves as the chief of police in Pleasant Grove.

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Jim Phelps poses for a portrait Wednesday, May 30, 2018, at the Daily Herald in Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Jim Phelps poses for a portrait Wednesday, May 30, 2018, at the Daily Herald in Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Jim Phelps poses for a portrait Wednesday, May 30, 2018, at the Daily Herald in Provo. Isaac Hale, Daily Herald

Utah County Sheriff Republican candidate Mike Smith poses for a portrait in the Daily Herald's office on Thursday, May 31, 2018, in Provo.

Utah County voters don’t have to wait until November to find out who their new sheriff will be: the June 26 primary decides that, since only Republicans filed for the seat.


With Utah County Sheriff Jim Tracy choosing not to seek re-election, the choices for sheriff are Pleasant Grove Police Chief Mike Smith and retired U.S. Marshall Jim Phelps.


Tensions are already high in the race, with Phelps filing a complaint last week against Smith because a uniformed Pleasant Grove police officer was hanging Smith’s campaign signs, something Smith responded by saying was a disappointing “campaign tactic.”


Though both boast long careers in law enforcement, the two men bring different ideas and skill sets to the table when it comes to managing the Utah County Sheriff’s Office.


One of the major issues facing the department right now is wages. A market study completed in 2017 showed that many Utah County employees are being payed below the market rate, and representatives from the sheriff’s office have repeatedly come before the commission to talk about retention problems stemming from having lower wages than surrounding agencies.


Both candidates listed employee retention as a top issue should they be elected.


Smith said retention and wage issues are something he’s worked through before as the head of a smaller police agency.


“We have dealt with the same issues (in Pleasant Grove) for a long time,” Smith said. “So when I became chief, that became one of my goals to work on that.”


Smith said the Pleasant Grove Police Department developed a career path, which allowed employees to “check off boxes,” for example, attending certain training in order to move up career levels.


The structure allows employees to set goals, Smith said, and have a more defined path for their end career goals, like if they want to be a detective. They also get a raise every time they hit a new level.


“I’m not just coming to (the city council) saying, ‘Give us more money,’” Smith said. “I’m saying, ‘This officer deserves a raise, not just because they’ve been here for three years, but because they are a better officer than they were three years ago, and they’ve done this, they’ve taken it upon themselves to do this.’”


Smith said a similar program would be a benefit to Utah County.


“That’s something they’re struggling with right now. Their employees are disgruntled, they really are, about their wages and the things that are happening down there ... I want to work with (the commission) and say, ‘hey, we’re gonna put together a program that is going to help our employees, not just helping with wages, but also increasing their value to Utah County.’”


Phelps said retention is a concern of his.


“We have some great officers,” Phelps said. “But we are down 24 officers right now in the jail. So I need to make sure we are working with our county commission, making sure we are doing everything we can so we don’t lose good officers.”


Phelps said he has already reached out to the current commissioners and commission candidates to start building that relationship, but said he’s not the type to just show the commissioners the problem on paper.


“I’ll be one to say, ‘I’m not just going to show you this on paper. I am going to bring you in, show you these are the issues we are facing, and if we don’t make some changes, these could be the results,’” Phelps said.


Phelps said if elected he also hopes to implement a task force specifically dedicated to tracking gangs and gang activity in the county.


“We need a true gang unit with a suppression unit and a prevention side,” Phelps said.


Those in the suppression unit gathers intel on gang members so that, when a crime is committed by a gang member, police can catch them quickly because they already have their family, friends and gang associates documented.


“If we don’t arrest that guy, then we’ve empowered him and his gang,” Phelps said. “But we could throw those guys in jail within a couple of hours, then that sets a whole different tone with that gang.”


Both candidates are clear that, whatever voters decide on a ballot initiative seeking to legalize medical cannabis this November, they will uphold the law of the land.


Phelps said he is against legalizing recreational marijuana, but said he believes medical needs to be looked into.


“I’m very much on the side that, if a parent is trying to take care of a child, and they are treating that child, I am not going to criminalize them, and I don’t want to criminalize our youth either,” Phelps said. “My position would be, we are not going to lock up people just because of their addiction, whether that be marijuana or other addictions. I want to go after the dealers.”


Smith said he wishes the medical community would step up and give more input on the issue, saying they are the experts he looks to to say there is value in legalizing medical cannabis.


“I have a hard time when somebody says, ‘This medication is helping,’ especially a child, who am I to say, ‘No, you can’t do that?’” Smith said. “It’s not my decision, so whatever the state decides to do we’ll honor. But I really, I think there might be some long-term bad fallout that I would hate to see come to Utah, and we can see it has come to other states.”


Smith has been in law enforcement for 24 years, beginning as a volunteer officer at the Pleasant Grove Police Department. He was then hired full time before moving his way up through the ranks, becoming Chief of Police six years ago.


As a sergeant, Smith said he helped start a motorcycle unit in Pleasant Grove. He also spent 18 years on the Utah County Metro SWAT team, and spent six years on the fugitive apprehension task force with the U.S. Marshals.


Smith said he believes his background in community and municipal policing help set him apart from his opponent.


“As Utah County grows, bringing that concept as the county is growing and unincorporated areas get gobbled up, having a sheriff’s department that can work closely with all the chiefs and all the cities and helping them do the same, that’s a unique perspective I can bring to the sheriff’s office,” Smith said. “That comes from a whole career of municipal policing and being a police chief.”


Phelps grew up in Lehi, and recently retired from a career as a U.S. Marshal. He served on the FBI’s violent crimes task force, where he also spent time as the task force coordinator.


Phelps said he was also instrumental in creating a task force that sought violent fugitives and served three years on a unit that investigated gang crimes.


Though he spent his career in Salt Lake City, Phelps says that experience has given him the experience he needs to prevent and deal with issues like gangs as Utah County’s population grows.


“I want to make sure we are able to raise our kids and our future generations in the same type of environment that we’ve been able to do the last several years,” Phelps said. “Even though we’re not a rural county anymore, we want that feel. We are now a true urban county, and with that we are going to get urban problems, and you need someone with the experience to handle those types of urban crimes.”


Katie England covers politics, the environment and courts for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.

If you were too busy this weekend to catch up on the news, here's a little Monday morning help to get you caught up with what you may have missed. 

Review some of the top news stories of the week. 

Katie England covers politics, county government and southern Utah County for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.



                                    
                                        Whenever Katie  England posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
