The late game on Wednesday night held some intrigue, if only because the San Antonio Spurs continue to be one of the most interesting stories of this NBA season. With no Kawhi Leonard, the team has been up-and-down. Surprisingly, heading into the midweek matchup against the Los Angeles Lakers, San Antonio once again found itself battling for a top position in the Western Conference, just a few games back of the Portland Trail Blazers.

The Spurs lost to the Los Angeles Clippers on Tuesday, so as San Antonio took on the Lakers at Staples Center on Wednesday the question would be whether they would really drop two in a row and get swept by the blue and gold on the season.

Fans tuning in watched a tightly-contested matchup on ESPN, with both teams making baskets in the final minute to square the game, 108-108, with under 24 seconds to go. San Antonio took the foul to give with 4.8 seconds left, allowing LA a chance at a final bucket.

Then, this happened:

OH COME ON pic.twitter.com/2AkQ9Nw7dU

— Deadspin (@Deadspin) April 5, 2018



All of basketball Twitter simultaneously lost their minds about the brief commercial interruption. Meanwhile, LA’s Josh Hart missed his layup attempt at the buzzer, sending the game to overtime.

What did KCP say to Josh Hart after his missed layup? “He should’ve made it,” KCP said, laughing.

— Bill Oram (@billoram) April 5, 2018



Two nights in a row Gregg Popovich spoke before most reporters were allowed into the hallways here at Staples. Spoke for less than a minute, didn't take questions then bolted.

— Ramona Shelburne (@ramonashelburne) April 5, 2018



Los Angeles was able to pull away from the Spurs during the extra period, 122-112.

The Utah Jazz now hold a half-game lead over San Antonio for fourth place in the West.

Interrupting all the handwringing about the Rockets losing forwards Trevor Ariza and Luc Mbah a Moute, Houston is adding a combo forward.

Not Carmelo Anthony (yet).

James Ennis.

Shams Charania of Yahoo Sports:

Free agent James Ennis has agreed to a two-year deal with the Houston Rockets, league sources tell Yahoo. Deal includes player option in second season.

— Shams Charania (@ShamsCharania) July 11, 2018



Houston might have dipped into its mid-level exception for Ennis. This might be a minimum contract. The player option – which makes Ennis more expensive next season (in direct salary and luxury tax) due to the NBA’s policy for one-year minimum contracts – and the Rockets’ strong team could have set them apart from other minimum-offering suitors.

The 6-foot-7 Ennis is big and athletic enough to handle several defensive matchups. He’ll fit right into Houston’s switching scheme. He’s a capable 3-point with enough off-ball activity to get some easy looks set up by James Harden and Chris Paul.

Ennis isn’t as good as Ariza or Mbah a Moute, and at 28, Ennis doesn’t have major upside. But Ariza and Mbah a Moute are already gone, and at this point, Ennis is a decent fallback.

Kevin Durant:

Everything else off the court, social media, perception, isn’t important. What people say, how they view you, it’s not important.

Also Kevin Durant:

 Thoughts? Agree or disagree? 💭🏀 #bucketgetters

A post shared by  Kalyb Champion (@bucketscenter) on Jul 10, 2018 at 10:37am PDT

 Nothing gonna stop me from achieving my dream now @kevindurant

A post shared by  Kalyb Champion (@bucketscenter) on Jul 10, 2018 at 4:59pm PDT

KD left the burner account at home this time. 💀👀 pic.twitter.com/FuidXOwLoi

— theScore (@theScore) July 11, 2018



KD out here beefing a high schooler in the DMs. 😶[Via Instagram/bucketscenter] pic.twitter.com/vnTdCJLlzu

— theScore (@theScore) July 11, 2018



Durant has already explained why he does these things, and I’m cool with it – because he’s not using a burner account. This is genuine.

It’s petty. It’s sensitive. It’s silly.

But it’s also genuine.

Just because Durant is successful, he shouldn’t argue with people online? Plenty of unsuccessful people spend a lot of time mad online, and nobody bats an eye. Durant will remain successful either way.

Nobody gets hurt. Durant clearly enjoys this (even if it’s a joy in misery). The teenager gets a desired rush of attention. It’s totally harmless.

And for what it’s worth, Durant is an elite two-way player who doesn’t elevate a team quite like LeBron James due to his playmaking/leadership deficiencies – relative to LeBron. I could go either way on Durant vs. Stephen Curry.

That’s hardly a slight! LeBron is the best player in the NBA, and Curry and Durant are in the discussion for No. 2.

LAS VEGAS —  Right now, everybody is waiting.

At Summer League, the buzz is that the Sacramento Kings are ready to make an offer to Marcus Smart. Which leads to two questions: At what number? And, will the Celtics match?

Enter Danny Ainge, via Brian Robb of the Boston Sports Journal.

Ainge on free agency: “Marcus is our top priority.”

— Brian Robb (@BrianTRobb) July 11, 2018



Danny Ainge on how luxury tax will factor into C's offseason moves: "It's my job to be fiscally responsible, but we will pay the tax. We plan on being a taxpayer for sure."

— Brian Robb (@BrianTRobb) July 11, 2018



All of this ties in. Boston expects to be a tax payer, but if they can put off crossing that line for one more season — delaying the repeater tax that will inevitably come — all the better. The Celtics have $112.3 in committed salary for next season, the luxury tax line is $123.7. The sense in Las Vegas is that the Celtics would still match a $12 million a year offer and make other moves during the season to get under the tax line, but if the Kings come in at $15 million or so, Boston will let him walk.

Ainge is going to say things that make it sound like he will match any offer, trying to scare off the Kings (or any other suitor). Do the Kings buy into it, or do they come in big? Sacramento thought they did with Zach LaVine, but the Bulls matched. Boston would LOVE it if Smart played for the qualifying offer and became an unrestricted free agent in a year.

The elite defensive wing is one of the few quality free agents still on the market, and where he lands is still up in the air.

Karl-Anthony Towns was the Third Team All-NBA center last season, averaging 21.3 points and 12.3 rebounds a game, shooting 54.5 percent from the floor.

That in just his third NBA season.

He is the definition of a no-brainer max contract extension, and the two sides are talking about it according to Michael Scotto and Jon Krawczynski of The Athletic.

The Athletic Sources: Karl-Anthony Towns and the Minnesota Timberwolves are discussing a maximum rookie scale contract extension, colleague @JonKrawczynski and I are told.

— Michael Scotto (@MikeAScotto) July 11, 2018



Towns recently returned to the States from Italy. Discussions are in early stages. Like Wiggins last year, Wolves making it clear they want Towns in the fold for the long term

— Jon Krawczynski (@JonKrawczynski) July 11, 2018



The only negotiation is about what kind of contract Towns wants. He likely will sign the “designated” rookie-scale extension — what Andrew Wiggins signed with the Timberwolves last season — and that means five years and $158 million (25 percent of the salary cap). However, if he makes All-NBA again next year he can get 30 percent of the cap, or $190 million over five.

Offensively, Towns is going to earn that contract. However, if he really wants to lift Minnesota to contender level is defense has to get better and more consistent. He still does not read that end of the floor well, and the effort is not there nightly.

This deal is going to get done, but it leaves a lot of questions about the future of the Timberwolves. Towns is an elite-level player who Minnesota has to bring back, unquestionably, but Jimmy Butler is not a fan of Towns and his work ethic. There appear to be factions within the Timberwolves locker room, with the hard-driving Tom Thibodeau and his backers like Butler on one side, Towns and the younger players on another, and Wiggins off in his own world (everyone seems frustrated with him, especially after his lackluster effort and focus after signing his big deal a year ago). One way or another changes are coming to that team in the next year, the chemistry is rough, and signing Towns to a max extension may signal where the franchise is going to plant its flag.