Ass-Grab Lawsuit Losing DJ To Taylor Swift: 'How Can You Live With Yourself? You Ruined My Life'


Kylie Jenner Lands The Cover Of Forbes As The Next Youngest Self-Made Billionaire!


Lena Dunham Celebrates Her Weight Gain With Side-By-Side Body Transformation Photos!


Selena Gomez WILL Give Her Thoughts On THIS Celebrity Engagement!


Selena Gomez Was Reportedly 'Shocked' By Justin Bieber's Engagement News -- But Also Realized She 'Doesn't Really Care'!


Taylor Swift Talks Musical Muses, Nightmares, &amp; Cosplay With Legendary Model Pattie Boyd! 


Chrissy Teigen Shames Man For Taking Pics Of Her Pumping Breast Milk In Her Car!


Justin Bieber Made Sure To Get Stephen Baldwin's Blessing Before Popping The Question To Hailey!


'You Are The Love Of My Life': Justin Bieber Confirms Engagement To Hailey Baldwin With Epic Love Note!


North West Makes Her Modeling Debut In Fendi's Latest Campaign! LOOK! 


Did Beyoncé Just Confirm ANOTHER Pregnancy?? See The Video That Has The Beyhive Buzzing!


Justin Bieber Has Been Engaged 1 DAY &amp; Mom Is ALREADY Tweeting Traditional Wedding Words!


Snooki Reveals How She Found Out She Was Adopted -- Watch!


A Timeline Of Justin Bieber &amp; Hailey Baldwin's Relationship!


Justin Bieber Did GOOD! Feast Your Eyes On Hailey Baldwin's Stunning Engagement Ring! 


Twitter Seriously Can't Believe It's Hailey Baldwin Engaged To Justin Bieber And Not Selena Gomez!


Meghan Trainor And Daryl Sabara Celebrate Two-Year Anniversary Together In Beautiful Hawaii!


Justin Bieber And Hailey Baldwin Are ENGAGED!


Jamie Foxx Won't Face Charges After Allegedly Slapping A Woman In The Face With His Penis


Serena Williams Reveals She Cried After Missing Daughter Alexis' Very First Steps Due To Training For Wimbledon


Kylie Jenner Says She Prayed That Stormi Webster Would Inherit Her Eyes... But Not Her Lips! 


Khloé Kardashian Claps Back At 'Disgusting Human' Who Called True Thompson 'Not Cute At All'!


After Seven Years, Arnold Schwarzenegger And Maria Shriver STILL Have Not Made Their Divorce Final...


Bella Thorne, Khloé Kardashian, &amp; More Worst Dressed Celebs Of The Week!


Halsey Breaks Down And Cries Mid-Concert After G-Eazy Split -- Watch 


Selena Gomez, Mandy Moore, &amp; More Best Dressed Celebs Of The Week!


Ben Simmons DENIES Texting Tinashe While With Kendall Jenner!


Ariel Winter Deletes Her Twitter 'Because Of The Constant Negativity She Experiences'


Sources Would Not Be Surprised If Nick Jonas &amp; Priyanka Chopra 'Eventually Get Engaged'


Watch G-Eazy's Awkward Solo Performance Of His Halsey Duet Him &amp; I Following Their Split!


Movie Kisses That Were Pure Fireworks! 


Tinashe Says Ex Ben Simmons Was Texting Her After Running Into Him &amp; Kendall Jenner At The Club -- She's Kidding, Right?


Chris Brown Arrested On Felony Battery Warrant


Meghan Markle Got Herself A Prince AND A British Accent! Listen For Yourself! 


Ariana Grande Says It's Been 'Very Tough &amp; Conflicting' On Her Heart After Learning Of Pete Davidson's Manchester Bombing Joke!


Kim Kardashian Reveals New Security Measures After Scary Paris Robbery!


Eric Church's Brother Dead At 36 After Suffering Multiple Seizures


David Eason Jokes That Jenelle Evans Is '13 Weeks' Pregnant Amid All This Custody Drama!


Gigi Hadid Is NOT Faking Her Relationship With Zayn Malik, BB!


Teen Mom 2's Jenelle Evans Gets Son Kaiser Back From Ex's Mom Amid Custody Drama




Former NFL star Kellen Winslow Jr. is facing multiple serious criminal charges — including two counts of kidnapping with intent to commit rape, and two counts of forcible rape — after being arrested in San Diego County, California earlier today.

This is the second time in less than a week that Winslow Jr. has been arrested; days ago, he was detained by police after being accused of breaking into a home in a mobile home park near San Diego.

He was eventually arrested and charged with felony burglary in that case, and later released. But that's nothing compared to the severe, scary allegations being levied against Winslow now.

Related: Another Woman Says Chris Brown Hit Her

Hours ago, San Diego County authorities issued an arrest warrant for Winslow covering at LEAST nine new and extremely serious charges, which are as follows (below): 


- Kidnapping with intent to commit rape (2 counts)
- Forcible rape (2 counts)
- Forcible sodomy (1 count)
- Forcible oral copulation (1 count)
- Residential burglary (2 counts)
- Indecent exposure (1 count)

Goodness gracious…

Having just been arrested on these charges today, it's obviously still very early in the process… but if Winslow is found guilty of all those charges as he's been accused, he is facing a life sentence in prison.

A search warrant has been reportedly executed on his home as police would appear to be searching for more evidence related to the alleged crimes; Winslow himself was booked into a county jail in San Diego a few hours ago, and he's being held there now.

Related: Chris Brown Responds To Pics Of Him Choking A Woman

For those unfamiliar with American football, the now-34-year-old Winslow was a longtime star in the NFL; he played in the league for a decade (2004 to 2013), which is no small feat in and of itself, and made the 2007 Pro Bowl as a tight end representing the Cleveland Browns.

His father, Kellen Winslow Sr., was also a longtime member of the NFL in his time; the elder Winslow is considered one of the greatest tight ends in league history, and is a member of both the College Football Hall of Fame and the Pro Football Hall of Fame — so, suffice to say, Junior here comes from a very high-profile football family.

As for this case, arraignment — and a formal announcement of these charges — is expected tomorrow. We'll keep you updated as we hear more.

So scary…

[Image via Getty Images.]


Tags: arrest, busted!, football, kellen winslow, kidnapping, legal matters, nfl, prison, rape, san diego, san diego county, scary!, violence, viral: news

Papa John's Pizza Founder John Schnatter Admits To Using N-Word In Business Conference Call, Resigns From College Board 

Nev Schulman Says He Felt 'So Powerless' While Battling Catfish Sexual Misconduct Allegations -- For Which He Is Now CLEARED!

A Second Suspect Is Arrested For The Murder of XXXTentacion

Hailey Baldwin Got Justin Bieber His Own Diamond Ring To Celebrate Their Engagement!





Five years after the alleged incident, and one year after losing his trial, how is this guy STILL talking?!?!

David Mueller -- the former Denver radio DJ who was found guilty of assault and battery a year ago for grabbing Taylor Swift's bare butt during a photo op before one of her concerts -- is back in the public eye commenting about Swift, and the incident itself.

Related: Taylor Opens Up About Case In Time "Silence Breakers" Interview

In an interview with Radar Online, Mueller doesn't hold back from voicing his displeasure about what he says Swift did to him (never the other way around, is it?), and he opens with a hell of an accusation himself (below):


[Image via WENN.]

Kylie Jenner Lands The Cover Of Forbes As The Next Youngest Self-Made Billionaire!

Lena Dunham Celebrates Her Weight Gain With Side-By-Side Body Transformation Photos!

Johnny Depp Updates His Amber Heard Tattoo Again -- &amp; It's Just As Shady!

Kylie Jenner Is More 'Natural' These Days, And Sources Say It's All Thanks To Baby Stormi Webster!

Cardi B Welcomes Her First Child With Offset -- Find Out The Name HERE!

Childish Gambino Drops TWO Surprise Summer Songs -- Listen!

George Clooney Thrown From Scooter In Intense Crash Video -- WATCH!

Sarah Palin Is PISSED Sacha Baron Cohen 'Duped' Her Into Interview Where He Posed As A Disabled Vet!

Selena Gomez WILL Give Her Thoughts On THIS Celebrity Engagement!

Tori Spelling Says Her 15-Month-Old Son Was 'Stabbed' By Nails At Four Seasons Hotel!

SCARY! Celebrities Who´ve Had Near-Death Experiences!

VERY NSFW: Sex Scenes Hotter Than 50 Shades!

Strangest Celebrity Feuds!

All The Times Pete Davidson &amp; Ariana Grande Flaunted Their Love On Social Media!

STANDING!!! (Pre-walking!!!) We are past the baby phase and she's jumped straight to toddler! Everything starts happening so quickly now! So many milestones! She's so bright and engaged and an angel!!! Watch this video in full HERE: https://goo.gl/4BVcg4

#ChrissyTeigen violated by photographer! #GeorgeClooney's super scary motorcycle crash! #GEazy banned in Canada! Shocking claims against #NFL star #LeSeanMcCoy! #RussellSimmons accused of raping another woman. #JadaPinkettSmith reveals sex addiction! And all of today's hottest topics, including #JustinBieber, #SerenaWilliams, #KhloeKardashian, the #WorldCup, #ReeseWitherspoon, #CherylBurke, #TyraBanks, the #BlackEyedPeas and MORE! Watch this video in full HERE: https://goo.gl/2o2aSc

Life In Cuba: My Grandparents' Story! My mom holds the key to my family history! Making the most of her and what she holds within! I was surprised by so much I learned from this!! What a fascinating and complicated time this was! And I even got her old home address in Havana! ONE DAY I will take my kids to a free Cuba!!! Watch this video in full HERE: https://goo.gl/FpWLBn

This may be the best Cameo I've ever made! 😜 Get your own personalized video greeting from me on the Cameo app or directly at http://Cameo.com/PerezHilton

#Beyonce is pregnant again, says the Beyhive!#ArianaGrande is fed up!! How #SelenaGomez is dealing with the news of #JustinBieber's engagement! #KylieJenner lies about removing all her lip fillers! #KhloeKardashian's babydaddy does not want to live with her! #BenSimmons accuses #Tinashe of stalking! #JonathanRhys Myers arrested - again! #Halsey not handling split from #GEazy well. And all of today's hottest topics, including #KristenBell, #JohnnyDepp, the #RoyalChristening, #KevinSpacey, #ArielWinter, #TiffanyHaddish and MORE! Watch this video in full HERE: ​https://goo.gl/Ptah2j

In The Shower With Perez!

TanaCon! TanaCONNED! Rihanna's New Man! Cardi B's Shotgun Wedding! AND...

QUIZ: Which Celebrity Makeup Brand Fits You Best?

VOTE: Which New Celeb Couple Will Be The Next To Surprise Us With A Quick Engagement??

QUIZ: Which TV Couple Are You And Your Partner?

Home | About | Contact Perez | Newsletter | Advertising | Sitemap | RSS


Copyright statement | Conditions of Use | Privacy Notice | perez_mailto('7465636840706572657a68696c746f6e2e636f6d', 'Report technical problems');


© 2005-2018 PerezHilton.com