Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

What happened in Vegas gives promoters cause to look at security protections already in place and see where they can be fine tuned.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Desperate to help after last night's shooting massacre at Route 91 Harvest Festival, hundreds are donating blood for victims in need in Las Vegas.
    Brett Kelman, The Desert Sun

A memorial is growing on the Las Vegas Strip in remembrance of the 58 souls lost in the Oct. 1, 2017, massacre. Laura Rodriguez and her daughter, Sara Rivero, 23, both of Las Vegas, pay their respects on Oct. 3, 2017.
(Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

In a world of copycat killers, music festival organizers and public officials must grapple with the possibility that America’s major entertainment venues may, in moments, be transformed into killing grounds.


Although authorities from Coachella to Bonnaroo have taken precautions and devised elaborate contingency plans, the massacre at the Route 91 Harvest festival in Las Vegas underscored a devastating reality: No amount of planning and preparation is guaranteed to stop every lone wolf.


Chris Robinette, president of Los Angeles-based Prevent Advisors, which specializes in arena and stadium security, offered a sobering assessment of the Las Vegas tragedy, which left 59 dead and more than 580 wounded.


“I don’t think a lot could have been done to prevent this,” Robinette said, given that gunman Stephen Paddock didn’t appear to have any kind of criminal or mental health history that would have suggested to authorities that he should be watched.


“This was a vicious and nightmarish black swan event,” Robinette said.


KILLED: More than 30 of the dead are from California


After the Manchester, UK, terrorist attack at an Ariana Grande concert, entertainment events company Live Nation – promoter of the Route 91 Harvest festival – announced that it was stepping up security efforts, including banning backpacks and bags, at all its venues. But such measures proved futile at the Route 91 Harvest festival, as the gunman shot at the crowd from his hotel room on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay Resort.


“We are heartbroken over the tragedy that took place at the Route 91 Harvest festival,” the Beverly Hills company said in a statement. “To think that anyone would want to inflict harm on a gathering of music lovers is beyond our comprehension. And while we are stunned and grieving over this incomprehensible act of violence, we know that this is a moment when we must come together to prevent more tragedies like this from occurring.”


Live Nation said its upcoming shows – including Cal Jam 17 in Devore, Calif. – would go on.


Meanwhile, with every tragedy, concert planners around the country continue to evaluate and reevaluate their venue safety plans.


The Nashville Convention and Visitors Corp. has reexamined safety protocols for the outdoor events and concerts it operates following deadly incidents at concerts in recent years.


People gather and hug after an interfaith prayer service at the Guardian Angel Cathedral in Las Vegas, October 2, 2017. (Photo: Jay Calderon/USA Today)

After a motorist drove into a crowd at the SXSW festival in Austin, killing four and injuring dozens, the CVC and Nashville police altered the security barriers on the perimeter of the downtown July 4 and New Year’s Eve parties. Typically held in Nashville’s honky tonk district on lower Broadway, the July 4 celebration features live music and fireworks and attracted 240,000 people in 2017.


The CVC moved its New Year’s Eve bash to a nearby public park instead of on lower Broadway, which is surrounded by historic buildings that house bars and restaurants.


Since the SXSW festival, Nashville has used a combination of hydraulic barriers that can open and close, stationary barriers and strategically arranged police cars on side streets that would prevent a runaway vehicle, but allow access to fire trucks and ambulances if necessary.


Following the shooting in Las Vegas, Nashville CVC President and CEO Butch Spyridon said he was communicating with the Nashville police and mayor’s office about how to restrict who has access to buildings that surround the crowd during those large-scale gatherings.


Spyridon said the city also wants to be sure the state law that allows bar owners to ban firearms is properly enforced so that a gunman could not gain access to a building perched above the throngs below.


The CVC also co-promotes the annual CMA Fest along with the Country Music Association. That event draws upwards of 80,000 people to the streets of downtown Nashville.


“Anything outside poses a much greater opportunity for an event of this magnitude,” Spyridon said. “So we’re always looking at how we can improve, what can be done better.”


Outside Nashville at Bonnaroo, organizers have implemented strict security safeguards for years, including searching vehicles that drive onto the rural farm that hosts the annual music festival, mandatory metal detectors at each entrance to the festival grounds and armed security, including local police, throughout the property. 


MORE: Night of shooting, Las Vegas hospitals 'just stopping the dying'


In Phoenix, Ariz., where the three-day Lost Lake Festival is set to premiere later this month, drawing tens of thousands to the 75-acre Steele Indian School Park just north of downtown, law enforcement officials say they do not anticipate any major security changes.


“We always work with event organizers to ensure city emergency services are available as part of their overall security plans,” Phoenix Police Sgt. Jonathan Howard said in a statement.


Barnett English, promoter of the global-themed Joshua Tree Music Festival in the Southern California desert, said his festival's health and safety protocol will remain unchanged. The festival, running Friday through Sunday, will have a support crew of 200 people for an expected crowd of 2,500 people, and English said the staff will have “a heightened sensitivity to the feelings of all those around us at the fest.”


The inaugural Desert Oasis Music Festival, running Saturday and Sunday at Empire Polo Club in California, announced on Facebook and Twitter that it will run as scheduled with 24 bands, led by Damian Marley, Rebelution, Steel Pulse, Los Lobos and Kinky. Producer Alex Haagen IV has said the festival expects to attract 10,000 people.


As for the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, which draws over 100,000 visitors each weekend to Indio, Calif., event organizer Goldenvoice is required to have a safety operation plan that includes medical, police and fire services. The city of Indio coordinates police, contracted security, medical services and outside law enforcement, but Goldenvoice is required to reimburse it for any out-of-pocket costs. Private security guards patrol nearby neighborhoods and campgrounds and the city has a concert hotline set up that locals can call with questions or concerns.


MORE ON COACHELLA: San Diego music producer threatens to bring assault rifle to Coachella 2018 on Twitter


Indio police Sgt. Dan Marshall and Community Services Supervisor Jim Curtis have said they couldn’t disclose the details of their safety planning, but Marshall said there are contingency plans for everything from a natural disaster to a mass shooting.


“We have staging areas throughout the city; we have plans to get people out as fast as possible; we have plans to shelter people in place,” he said. “We’re definitely not a soft target like somebody might think.”


Robinette applauded efforts of first-responders in their handling of what happened in Vegas, but now all involved need to have more discussions of where any needed improvements can be made, including evacuating people.


“It’s now incumbent upon the professionals to analyze and evaluate and put measures in place” that would prevent a similar incident to occur, Robinette said.


One of the factors organizers and security professionals may have to consider is whether festivals and concerts in urban settings, like Las Vegas or Nashville, pose different—and more complicated—problems than those in more isolated outdoor venues like Coachella or Joshua Tree.


As the Las Vegas shooting suggests, urban settings provide attackers far more vantage points from which to launch their deadly assaults. Like modern urban warfare, contemporary urban concert security may have become a strategic nightmare.


AFTER VEGAS: California desert hospitals train for mass shootings


With all this in mind, does Robinette expect Sunday’s massacre to keep people from concerts or sporting events?


“If you look at what happened in the past, what happened on 9/11 and at the Boston Marathon (bombing), we see that Americans are very resilient and defiant,” he said. “I don’t see fear reducing the number of concerts or where they take place.”


Still, Robinette said, concertgoers have a “reasonable expectation that promoters, law enforcement and other first-responders will be looking at this incident for areas and ways they can improve security measures to better ensure their safety."


He added: “The public wants to know how we have learned and made appropriate adjustments."
