


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

San Diego police say Rebecca Zahau committed suicide in a Coronado mansion after Max Shacknai's death; her family calls it murder.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



2011 photo of the Spreckels Mansion, former home of Jonah Shacknai on Coronado Island, San Diego.

(Photo: 
Robert Anglen/The Arizona Republic
)

A wrongful-death trial is under way in San Diego, with the family of Rebecca Zahau maintaining she was murdered in 2011 by the brother of her millionaire boyfriend, Jonah Shacknai.


Jurors will have to determine if Zahau hanged herself at a Coronado mansion or if she was killed, perhaps as part of an aborted sexual assault. 


Authorities say Zahau stripped, tied her own hands and feet, gagged herself with her own shirt then fastened a homemade noose around her neck and threw herself from a courtyard balcony.


Zahau's family, determined to prove she did not kill herself, want the jury to find Jonah's brother Adam Shacknai responsible for strangling Zahau and staging the scene to make it look like suicide.


MORE: Murder or suicide? Jurors hear opening statements in Coronado hanging trial


Competing murder theories, child-abuse allegations and claims of botched investigations by the both the Shacknai and Zahau families have helped fuel internet speculation, conspiracy theories and media coverage. 


The wrongful death lawsuit is the latest in a case that has captivated the public with its cast of super-rich characters and double tragedies amidst some of California's most exclusive coastal real estate. 


Here are key details and people you need to know as you follow the case.


Shacknai co-founded Medicis Pharmaceuticals in 1988 and helped take the company public in 1990.


Under Shacknai's leadership, Medicis sold the acne drug Solodyn and diversified with cosmetic products such as the skin filler Restylane and the botulinum toxin Dysport, which competes with Botox.


He served as chairman and chief executive officer until 2012, when the company was sold for $2.6 billion to Valeant Pharmaceuticals.


MORE: Bizarre death at Arizona CEO's mansion grips Coronado Island


Zahau's name in her native Burmese was "springtime beauty." 


Photographs reflect a smiling, vibrant woman ready to embrace any outdoor challenge: standing on a mountain peak, kneeling over a tide pool, clambering across a wooden bridge.


Zahau, who immigrated with her sister to America from Myanmar, lived in New York and California before moving to Phoenix with her then-husband in 2007. They were divorced in 2010 after eight years of marriage.


Zahau worked as a technician for a Valley eye clinic but quit in 2011 to spend more time with Shacknai's children, friends and relatives said.


She was 32 when she died.



    Rebecca Zahau was found hanging in a mansion just days after her boyfriend's son was fatally injured in a staircase fall in the same mansion in 2011.
    Wochit

Two days before Zahau's death, police and paramedics were called to the 27-room Spreckels Mansion.   


Max Shacknai, 6, died of injuries he sustained in a fall in 2011 inside the family home. (Photo: Jonah Shacknai/Special for The Republic)

Zahau was watching Shacknai's 6-year-old son, Max, on July 11, 2011, when police said he fell over a stairwell banister and suffered a traumatic spinal cord injury.


Max was rushed to a hospital in a coma and died five days later.


The Coronado Police Department, which handled the investigation of Max's death, determined his death was accidental.


They said Max appeared to be running down a hallway at the top of the stairs when he pitched over the second-floor railing. Police said the boy crashed into a chandelier, then hit a banister on a stairway landing, before falling to the floor.


Police said they had no idea what caused Max to fall, but noted that a soccer ball was found near the stairs.  


Zahau, who was in a nearby bathroom, told police that she rushed out when she heard the crash and found Max facedown on the floor. The glass chandelier was next to him.


She reportedly preformed CPR on Max and shouted for someone to call 911.


On the morning of July 13, police were called to the mansion a second time. 


Adam Shacknai dialed 911 and told the operator that he had just found Zahau hanging from a bedroom balcony. While talking to a dispatcher, Shacknai dragged a table to her body, climbed up and cut her down.


Adam Shacknai worked for a tugboat company that operated on the Mississippi River in Memphis. He had flown to the mansion the day before after learning about his nephew's accident.


Shacknai, who was staying at a guesthouse on the property, was the only person at the mansion on the night Zahau died. The rest of the family was at the hospital with Max. 


Coronado police and the sheriff investigate the scene of a death at the old Spreckels Mansion on July 14, 2011, on Ocean Boulevard in Coronado. (Photo: John Gibbins/Union-Tribune)

What San Diego Sheriff's Department investigators found at the Spreckels Mansion had all the hallmarks of murder.


Zahau was nude. Her hands and feet were found bound in a complicated series of ligatures. A T-shirt was stuffed in her mouth. On the closed door of the bedroom, officers found a message painted in black paint: "She saved him. Can you save her?"


Inside the room, officers found a rope tied to the framework of a bed, which strung out across the the balcony.


MORE: Mysterious deaths at Coronado mansion explained


Seven weeks after Zahau's body was found, the Coronado Police Department, the San Diego County Sheriff's Department and the county medical examiner announced she committed suicide.


Rebecca Zahau (Photo: Dwight Smith/Special for The Republic)

Officials concluded she took her own life because she felt responsible for Max. They interpreted the message on the door as a suicide note.


They shared their findings at a lengthy news conference, methodically laying out Zahau's activities shortly before her death:


Zahau was alone in the big house when she carried out her plan just before 1 a.m.. They said she had just received a phone call from Jonah Shacknai telling her that Max was not going to survive.


Here is the scenario as laid out by investigators:


At some point, Zahau removed her clothes. She tied one end of a rope to the footboard of a bed. At the other end, she fashioned a noose. She slipped it over her head and cinched it. Then, she tied her ankles together.


She made her way onto a small balcony. She put her hands behind her back, forcing them into a binding. Then she leaned over, far over. The drop was 9 feet. Her neck did not break. She lost consciousness in 15 seconds and died about 20 minutes later.


Zahau likely found the rope in the mansion's garage, investigators said. Using two kitchen-type knives, they said she cut off two lengths of the rope and used them to bind her ankles, then her wrists.


In a video presentation, an investigator used the same binding that Zahau had used and demonstrated how Zahau could have tied her hands behind her back.


The binding was such that she could slip one of her hands in and out of the ligature while the other side remained secured around her other wrist. When the time came, she could put both hands behind her back and into the binding.



    The San Diego Sheriff's Department demonstrate how Rebecca Zahau could have tied her hands together on her own when she committed suicide in 2011.
    

Dr. Jonathan Lucas of the Medical Examiner's Office, who performed Zahau's autopsy, said that when her body was found, her hand was still clutching the end of the rope that she used to tighten the binding around her wrists.


Zahau's DNA was found on the knots of the rope and on one of the knives she used to cut the rope. Black paint was found on her hands and the rope. Her fingerprints were found on the paint tube and the other of the two knives. Her foot and heel prints were found in the dust on the balcony.


No other DNA or fingerprints were found.


A dusty boot print found on the balcony was traced to the first officer on the scene.


From the outset, Zahau's family refused to believe she committed suicide.


They said Zahau had strong religious beliefs and familial obligations that would have prevented her from carrying out such an act.  


Mary Zahau-Loehner said her sister was articulate and artistic, adding that the note was completely out of character.


MORE: Wrongful-death lawsuit revisits 2011 Coronado mansion hanging death


"I have no idea, I have no idea (what the message means)," Zahau-Loehner told The Arizona Republic in 2011. "That is not something my sister would write."


Zahau-Loehner said that she spoke with her sister the night before her body was found and that she gave no indication she planned to take her own life. She said her sister was concerned about 6-year-old Max but not suicidal.


"She sounded tired, but other than that, she sounded like Rebecca," Zahau-Loehner said. "I wouldn't call her distraught. She was upset, very concerned and very worried over Max's condition, just like any caregiver or parent would be."


A funeral service for Zahau was held July 27, 2011, in St. Joseph, Missouri.


Zahau-Loehner wrote about her sister's capacity for life in an online tribute:


"There are no words in any dictionary or language to describe the full beauty, love, compassion, selflessness, generosity, and kindness of Rebecca. Rebecca lived a life in motion. She focused on wellness in both body and spirit."

She also noted the special relationship Zahau shared with Max.


"Rebecca loved and adored Max as her own son. She often shared stories with us about Jonah's children, especially Little 'Maxie.' " 

Zahau's family publicly questioned the findings and described the death investigation as rushed.


The Zahau family set out to "clear" Rebecca's name and prove she was murdered. They hired investigators, retained legal counsel, insisted that the sheriff reopen the case. 


Zahau's brother-in-law, Doug Loehner of St. Joseph, in 2011 pointed specifically to what he said was forensic evidence downplayed by the medical examiner that suggested Zahau may have been hit on the head.


He also said a lie-detector test administered to Adam Shacknai was inconclusive.


He said police also failed to download information from Zahau's cellphone and hadn't obtained the message Shacknai left Zahau on the night she died.


Homicide investigators and the medical examiner said questions raised about the autopsy in no way changed their opinion about Zahau's suicide. They said the bruises on her head were superficial and could have been caused during the fall.


Although investigators initially said Adam Shacknai passed a polygraph examination, search warrants released after the news conference showed the results were inconclusive, although the person who administered the test believed that he was telling the truth.


Two months after Zahau died, Jonah Shacknai asked the California attorney general to review the deaths of both his son and his girlfriend. 


Jonah  Shacknai (Photo: Associated Press)

The Medicis CEO said he wanted to put an end to rampant speculation about the deaths, both in the media and from Zahau's family.


The attorney general rejected his request, saying the state's scarce resources must be reserved for cases where local law-enforcement agencies request help or where "there are allegations of gross malfeasance by the investigative agency."


 Shacknai said in a statement that he had no reason to doubt conclusions by investigators and respected the decision of California's chief law-enforcement authority not to review the case.


"Given the unusual facts of this tragedy, I understand that Rebecca's family and others continue to have questions," Shacknai said. "If at any time there is new substantive evidence bearing on this case, it should be presented, not in tabloid form to fuel rumor and innuendo, but rather to appropriate law-enforcement authorities who may determine whether further investigation is warranted."


A year after the deaths, Max Shacknai's mother claimed an investigation she commissioned found her son likely died of a beating.


Dina Shacknai, a clinical a psychologist specializing in child and family relations, petitioned the Coronado Police Department in 2012 to reopen Max's case based on new forensic evidence.


Dina Shacknai and Jonah Shacknai were divorced prior to 2011. Max was their only son. At the time, she owned a house in Coronado only blocks away from the Spreckels Mansion and another in the town of Paradise Valley, Arizona.


Dina Shacknai hired  Dr. Judy Melinek, a forensic pathologist who works at the San Francisco Medical Examiner's Office, to review her son's death.


Melinek said the police findings could not be accurate. She said that Max was too small to fly over the railing and that his injuries were not consistent with a fall.


Dina did not name a suspect, but Melinek said it was more likely that Max was assaulted in the hallway of the mansion while under Zahau's care.


Police declined to reopen the case.


Dina Shacknai in 2012 created Maxie's H.O.U.S.E., a foundation in Max's name, to promote safety measures for children living in blended households.


Dina Shacknai, mother of 6-year-old Maxfield Shaknai, who died after he fell down a flight of stairs at his father’s southern California mansion, dedicates a foundation in his honor in 2012. (Photo: The Republic)

Zahau's family claimed in a 2014 federal lawsuit that Rebecca Zahau was killed as part of revenge plot.


Their $10 million lawsuit accused Adam Shacknai of conspiring with Dina Shacknai and her twin sister, Nina Romano, to kill Zahau in retaliation for allowing Max to be injured.


They all denied involvement in the death. Lawyers for Dina Shacknai lambasted the lawsuit.


Zahau's mother and sister said Dina, Adam and Romano confronted Zahau two days after the fall, while Max lay dying in a hospital.


The lawsuit accused Dina of hitting Zahau on the head with a blunt instrument and knocking her out.


It claimed Adam restrained and gagged Zahau while they discussed how to kill her. Adam then choked Zahau, removed her clothes, trussed her up and threw her off the balcony, according to the lawsuit. Zahau died of strangulation or from being hanged, the suit states.


The lawsuit contends Dina ordered Adam to write the cryptic message on the door to the room as part of a fake suicide note.


The suit was initially thrown out, but U.S. District Court Judge Thomas Whelan said a second complaint by the family met the threshold to go forward by laying out the roles each of the defendants played in the alleged murder plot.


Whelan said he had no choice but to rule in favor of the plaintiffs despite "the prima facie evidence of the facts stated in the coroner's report" that Zahou committed suicide.


New evidence in 2017 forced Zahau's to dismiss Dina Shacknai and Nina Romano from their wrongful death suit.


The family announced its decision after video surveillance footage showed the twin sisters were at the hospital with Max Shacknai when police say Zahau died. 


Zahau's family focused its claims on Adam Shacknai,


In a new lawsuit filed in San Diego County in 2017, they claimed he killed Zahau in a sexual assault.


Greer said in court last week that Adam Shacknai attacked her, then staged the scene to make it look as if she took her own life. 


Dan Webb, Shacknai's lawyer, countered there was no evidence connecting him to the murder. Only Zahau's fingerprints and DNA were found on the knives and the ropes she used to bind herself, he said.


Webb hammered home the point that Shacknai had been questioned by homicide investigators in Zahau's death — and they had cleared him.


Because the case was filed in civil court, Shacknai does not face any criminal charges and cannot be sentenced to prison.


Zahau's mother, Pari Zahau, and her sister, Mary Zahau-Loehner, said they no longer are seeking monetary damages. They want a jury to conclude Adam Shacknai was responsible for her death, to vindicate Zahau and show she did not kill herself.


READ MORE:


Bizarre death at Arizona CEO's mansion grips Coronado Island


Wrongful-death lawsuit revisits 2011 Coronado mansion hanging death


Murder or suicide? Jurors hear opening statements in Coronado hanging trial


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.