By

Dailymail.com Reporter


and 
Danyal Hussain For Mailonline






  Published:
  01:55 EDT, 28 May 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  17:28 EDT, 28 May 2018







         148

View  comments

Thousands of people have been evacuated from their homes as the subtropical Storm Alberto approaches the Florida Panhandle, but that hasn't stopped some surfers from taking advantage of the weather.


A number of surfers ignored warnings of swells that could cause 'life-threatening and rip current conditions' and rode huge waves in Pensacola, Florida on Monday morning as Alberto neared landfall.


The storm has caused a state of emergency to be declared in Florida, Mississippi, and Alabama. 


Thousands of people have been evacuated from their homes as the subtropical Storm Alberto approaches the Florida Panhandle, but that hasn't stopped some surfers from taking advantage of the weather

A number of surfers ignored warnings of swells that could cause 'life-threatening and rip current conditions' and rode huge waves in Pensacola, Florida on Monday morning as Alberto neared landfall

Alberto, which has begun to weaken as it approaches the Gulf Coast, is expected to make landfall in Pensacola at 1pm 

Alberto, which has begun to weaken as it approaches the Gulf Coast, is expected to make landfall in Pensacola at 1pm and winds are expected to reach 40 to 50 mph, according to ABC News.  


The Florida Division of Emergency Management said in a statement on Sunday that a mandatory evacuation has been issued in Franklin County in the Florida Panhandle, with the evacuations affecting about 4,200 homes.


The National Hurricane Center in Miami said in an advisory issued at 8am on Monday that the storm's center was located about 100 miles south-southeast of Destin, Florida, and moving north at 6 mph.


Maximum sustained winds were clocked at 65 mph.


A tropical storm warning remains in effect for an area stretching from Florida's Suwannee River to the border of Alabama and Mississippi.


A storm surge watch remains in effect for much of northern Florida, from the Suwannee to Navarre in the Panhandle

A storm surge watch means life-threatening inundations are possible from rising water moving inland from the coast. Destin and Panama City Beach are within the watch area as well 

New emotional footage shows boys being saved from Thai cave

Woman slips note to vet staff about armed and abusive boyfriend

Trump and Melania join world leaders for Brussels cocktail party

Melania Trump chats cheerfully with Brigitte Macron in Brussels

Ex-UCLA basketball star posts heartbreaking video before suicide

England fans react to Croatia goal and match heads into extra time

'Germany is totally controlled by Russia': Trump at NATO meeting

Thai boys give wave to the world in first video since rescue

Harry and Meghan thrilled to receive framed gift from Dublin crowd

Three teens taunt a one-year-old girl with a taser while babysitting

President and Melania Trump arrive in Brussels for NATO summit

Behind the scene footage of Allen &amp; Co party grounds

A storm surge watch also remains in effect for much of northern Florida, from the Suwannee to Navarre in the Panhandle. 


A storm surge watch means life-threatening inundations are possible from rising water moving inland from the coast. Destin and Panama City Beach are within the watch area. 


The Florida Panhandle is expected to be under the biggest threat from Alberto, with a potential of flash flooding and more than 6 inches of rain.


Tornadoes could also hit parts of Florida, Georgia, Alabama, and the Carolina. 


Rain falls on Clearwater Beach, Florida by Pier 60 early on Sunday morning, as northbound Subtropical Storm Alberto looms

The Gulf Coast is bracing for Subtropical Storm Alberto this Memorial Day Weekend. A satellite image taken Saturday at 5.30pm shows the storm

Forecasts predict that Alberto will significantly weaken once it hits Florida, but will dump heavy rain on Atlanta, Nashville, the Carolinas, and Birmingham, Alabama by Tuesday. 


Alberto, the first named storm of the year,  gained an early jump on the 2018 hurricane season and disrupted long holiday weekend plans from Pensacola in the Florida Panhandle to Miami Beach on Florida's southeastern edge. 


Lifeguards posted red flags along the white sands of Pensacola Beach, where swimming and wading were banned amid high surf and dangerous conditions. 


Alberto has hurtled through the Caribbean Sea and is threatening to bring heavy rainfall, mudslides, and flash floods to parts of Mexico, Cuba, Florida and the US Gulf Coast. 


Alabama, Florida and Mississippi were declared under states of emergency ahead of Subtropical Storm Alberto's landfall

Forecasts predict that Alberto will significantly weaken once it hits Florida, but will dump heavy rain on Atlanta, Nashville, the Carolinas, and Birmingham, Alabama by Tuesday. Isolated tornadoes could also hit the states 

The hurricane center said a tropical storm warning was in effect from the Suwannee River in Florida to the Mississippi-Alabama state line.


The storm's approach also triggered mandatory evacuations of some small, sparsely populated Gulf Coast barrier islands in one Florida county.  


Though the Atlantic hurricane season doesn't officially start until Friday, Alberto has thrown long holiday weekend plans in disarray up and down Florida's Gulf Coast, causing tourists and Memorial Day crowds to abandon the sandy white beaches. 


And just as Memorial Day marked summer's unofficial start in the US, Alberto welcomed the unofficial start of what forecasters recently predicted would be an active hurricane season.


In Southern Alabama, Mississippi and the western Florida panhandle there could be as much as one foot of rain. Flooding is expected to be heavy as a result

A cyclist tries to stay dry along Collins Avenue in Miami Beach, Florida, on Friday as they are drenched by torrential rain from the storm 

The National Hurricane Center in Miami said that on Monday, at 2 am EDT, Alberto was maintaining its strength as it approached the Florida panhandle and was centered about 115 miles  south-southwest of Panama City.


The storm had sustained winds of 65 mph  as it approached the northern Gulf of Mexico.


In a statement, the Hurricane Center said: 'These swells are likely to cause life-threatening surf and rip current conditions.'


'On the forecast track, the center of Alberto will move over the northern Gulf of Mexico overnight and cross the northern Gulf Coast in the warning area on Monday,' it said.


As well as life-threatening surf conditions, it warned of the possibility of a few brief tornadoes in much of Florida and parts of Georgia, South Carolina and Alabama. Heavy rains are also expected in many areas.


Lifeguards posted red flags along the white sands of Pensacola Beach, where swimming and wading were banned amid high surf and dangerous conditions. 


Alicia Herrera visiting from Germany doesn't let dark clouds ruin her day at beach in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, Friday 

A man rides a bicycle down a flooded road as Subtropical Storm Alberto passes by the west coast of Cuba, in Bahia Honda on Saturday

Family members shovel sand into bags at a Harrison County Road Department sand bag location, preparing for Subtropical Storm Alberto 



A subtropical storm like Alberto has a less defined and cooler center than a tropical storm, and its strongest winds are found farther from its center. 


Subtropical storms can develop into tropical storms, which in turn can strengthen into hurricanes. 


Forecasters cautioned that heavy rain and tropical storm conditions could reach the northern Gulf Coast well ahead of the center of Alberto making landfall.


Empty beaches and low-hanging clouds are shown, Friday, May 25, 2018, at Fort Lauderdale Beach

Flood alerts are seen on the map above. Residents have been preparing for the storm by filling sandbags around their properties

The storm prompted Florida, Alabama and Mississippi to launch emergency preparations over the weekend amid expectations Alberto would reach land sometime Monday. 


Rough conditions were expected to roil the seas off the eastern and northern Gulf Coast region through Tuesday.


Earlier, Mississippi governor Phil Bryant had declared a state of emergency as the storm continued on its potentially destructive path. 


Florida governor Rick Scott also declared a state of emergency for all 67 counties on Saturday morning to 'prepare for the torrential rain and severe flooding this storm will bring'.  


A view of a partially flooded farm as Subtropical Storm Alberto passes by the west coast of Cuba, in Bahia Honda, Cuba, on May 26

Hannibal and Emily Baldwin pose for a wedding photo under an umbrella outside the Casa Marina Resort in Key West, Fla. The  couple had planned an outdoor wedding, but the evening ceremony and reception were moved inside due to rain  from Subtropical Storm Alberto

In a tweet from Saturday, Governor Bryant said he signed an order making the Mississippi National Guard and other state resources available should they become necessary.


Meanwhile, at a briefing at the state emergency operations center in Tallahassee, authorities urged Floridians to take the storm seriously. 


Mark Bowen, the Bay County Emergency management director, said at a Sunday afternoon news conference that Alberto's biggest threat will be its heavy rains, with forecasts of anywhere from four to 12 inches of rain in some areas.


Rain falls on Clearwater Beach by Pier 60 early Sunday morning with officials warning residents to take the subtropical storm seriously

In Gulf County, T. H. Stone Memorial St. Joseph Peninsula State Park began evacuations Sunday morning.


In Miami, organizers called off the sea portion of the Miami Beach Air &amp; Sea Show on Sunday because of heavy rain and rough waters.


While in the Tampa Bay area on the central Gulf Coast, cities offered sandbags for homeowners worried about floods.


The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released a hurricane season forecast on Thursday that predicts  10 to 16 named storms, with five to nine hurricanes. 


Tommy Whitlock, left, places a filled sand bag onto his trailer at a Harrison County Road Department sand bag location, as his friend Joseph Buckner adjusts the load while preparing for Subtropical Storm Alberto to make its way through the Gulf of Mexico in Gulfport, Mississippi

Gulfport, Mississippi, residents shovel sand into bags at a Harrison County Road Department sand bagging location, while preparing for Subtropical Storm Alberto

One to four hurricanes could be 'major' with sustained winds of at least 111 mph.


An average hurricane season produces 12 named storms, of which six become hurricanes, including three major hurricanes.


'There are no strong climate signals saying it's going to be extremely active, like last year, or extremely weak,' said Gerry Bell, the lead hurricane forecaster at NOAA's Climate Prediction Center.


Sea turtle nest monitors with the Clearwater Marine Aquarium return in the rain from north end of Clearwater Beach, as rain falls on the beach early on Sunday morning

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group