Crip Dyke is the long cherished internet-ego and sometime nom de plume of an entirely-too-wordy feminist, philosopher and failure who now makes her home at Pervert Justice. While her credentials are long established, some argument continues as to whether she is herself a handmaiden to Death, or whether she merely submits to the whims of Death's handmaiden as readily as to Death Herself.

Now THIS is what I’ve been looking for.

Yahoo News just released a story detailing some of the companies who are actually profiting off Trump’s zero-tolerance policy. Without alleging that individuals at these corporations feel subjective malice towards others based on race, we can unequivocally say that they are participating in a harmful, horrifying, racist policy. The fact that they’re doing it for the money instead of true belief in Racial Holy War will be their defense. Let it also be the sum total of their sources of comfort.

Comprehensive Health Services Inc. (CHSI), a Florida-based company that touts its experience with “immigrant shelter services” received the bulk of the contracts.

Dynamic Service Solutions, a Maryland firm, was awarded a contract worth up to $8.7 million from HHS through the “shelter care for unaccompanied children” vehicle in September 2017.

Southwest Key Programs was awarded two contracts through the vehicle in September 2017 worth up to $1.8 million each for “emergency shelter operations.”

Dynamic Educational Systems, a subsidiary of the Arizona firm Exodyne, was awarded a pair of HHS contracts worth up to approximately $5.6 million for “emergency shelter operations.”

The fifth business with contracts through the HHS vehicle for “shelter care for unaccompanied children” is Virginia-based MVM. According to GovTribe, the company was awarded two contracts worth up to $9.5 million in September 2017 for “shelter operations” and for unspecified “emergency and other relief services.”

The Southwest Key link goes to a temporary page – the increase in traffic after they were identified as profiting from the ICEolation policy apparently broke their old server. Otherwise, all links go directly to corporate contact/comment pages.

Please do your part and respectfully (though firmly, if you wish) let these companies know that their participation in this ongoing violation of international and domestic law has been noticed and will affect their respective corporate images. It appears that most, if not all, of these get most, if not all, of their money from direct or indirect government contracts. We can’t threaten to stop buying their widgets, but we can let them know that their bad behavior has been immortalized and will follow them.

 

 

 


chigau (違う) says 


June 21, 2018 at 1:31 am 

I Am Canadian. We Don’t Do This Kind Of Stuff.
.
LLALLALALAALALALA


Connect with



Enter your WordPress.com blog URL



http://.wordpress.com 
Proceed


Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *


Comment 


Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Notify me of followup comments via e-mail. You can also subscribe without commenting.


 







 Notify me of follow-up comments by email.


 Notify me of new posts by email.




© 2014 - FreethoughtBlogs.com