
								 June 23, 2018 by  Sam Roecker  Leave A Comment			


Delta Job Posting on LinkedIn

View From the Wing reported yesterday that Delta will upgrade Austin-Bergstrom International Airport (AUS) to a focus city. If true, Austin will join Boston (BOS), Cincinnati (CVG), and Raleigh-Durham (RDU) as Delta’s fourth focus city. A focus city operates like a mini-hub with additional point-to-point flights beyond the carrier’s hubs.

Delta has not confirmed the report, but the Atlanta-based carrier did post a job on LinkedIn for an Austin-based “Focus City” sales position. According to the job description, the Sales Account Executive (SAE) will “develop relationships and ties in the Austin market with key community and industry organizations to support Delta’s Focus City initiative.” 

Austin is already a sizeable operation for Delta with service to ten destinations, including Delta’s three current focus cities. Delta is Austin’s fourth-largest carrier behind Southwest, American, and United.

 

Delta Serves 10 Nonstop Destinations from AUS | Image: Great Circle Mapper

Recent additions suggest Delta is indeed focusing on the fast-growing Capitol City. On May 1, Delta resumed six-weekly service to Cincinnati (CVG) on a CRJ-700. Last year, the carrier added nonstop flights to Boston (BOS), Raleigh-Durham (RDU), and Seattle (SEA). For SXSW in March 2018, Delta operated four flights to Amsterdam Schipol (AMS).

Delta also announced the opening of a new SkyClub in spring 2019. At the Austin Chamber of Commerce annual meeting, Erik Snell, Delta’s Vice President for Operations &amp; Customer Center affirmed Delta’s commitment to Austin’s business community:

From our strong operational performance to adding new routes, Delta is committed to serving the residents and business community of Austin. As a part of the airline’s efforts to enhancing customers’ experience in Austin, this Club will give guests a new space where they can relax during their travel.

Austin SkyClub Rendering | Image: Delta Air Lines

An Austin focus city makes sense for Delta for two reasons: geography and a strong local economy. American operates a mega-hub at Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW) and United operates its second-largest hub at Houston Intercontinental (IAH). Southwest is also strong throughout Texas, with sizeable operations in Austin (AUS), Dallas–Love (DAL), Houston–Hobby (HOU) and San Antonio (SAT). Delta is the clear lone(ly) star.

Delta doesn’t need a focus city in Austin, but it would give the third-largest airline access to one of the fastest growing economies and booming tech hubs. The LinkedIn posting alluded to international travel possibilities, and I could easily picture Delta adding Amsterdam and/or Paris.

 


								 Posted in Delta, News &amp; Polls, Uncategorized			


The responses below are not provided or commissioned by the bank advertiser. Responses have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by the bank advertiser. It is not the bank advertiser's responsibility to ensure all posts and/or questions are answered.

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *


Comment 


Name * 

Email * 

Website 

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 







 Notify me of follow-up comments by email.


 Notify me of new posts by email.




This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.



© 2018 · Point Me to the Plane

 RSS

