




These are my 100 favourite songs of 2017: songs I love more than snow-men, group-texts and royal weddings.

I follow just one arbitrary rule: that no primary artist may appear twice.

I have been making these lists for 13 years: see 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016.

The best way to browse this list is to click the little arrow beside each song and then to listen as you read. The things you like you can then download by right- or ctrl-clicking with your mouse.

You can also download the complete 100 songs in four parts:


Among these 100 artists, 38 are mostly American, 27 are Canadian, 15 are British and there are 2 Norwegians, 2 Germans, 2 French, 2 Swedish, 2 Korean, 2 Kiwi, 1 Australian, 1 Colombian, 1 Argentinian, 1 South African, 1 Malian, 1 Italian and 1 Spanish act, plus 1 Aussie/American split. 45 of the frontpeople/bandleaders identify as women, 53 as men and 2 acts are girl/boy duos. As far as I know, none of this year's songs are by transgender artists. This is the way it worked out; it certainly ain't perfect. Here are some charts of past lists' demographics. 
 
My favourite songs of the year do not necessarily speak to my favourite albums of the year. Songs and LPs are entirely different creatures. 

My favourite albums of 2017 were:



Some songs that you heard in 2017 may have been omitted from this tally because I heard them before this year, and included them in my Best of 2016.  

Finally, some disclosures. I've done paid writing work for some of the artists in this list: Leif Vollebekk, Partner, Land of Talk and Young Galaxy.

Now, without further rigamarole:





"Die 4 You" gestures to a refuge somewhere else. Not outward but inward; not in children, the clichés of hetero metaphor, but in intimate, erotic love. Gay love, selfless love - a love white-hot and gleaming, sensuous, fearless, rare. "Die 4 You" is not a song so much as a moment. Place and time reproduced in sound: organ, drums, strings, piano, voice. Mike Hadreas sings in a gorgeous, rose-coloured falsetto and it's his own partner, Alan Wyffels, whose baritone surfaces at the chorus, lifting under him. The duet is extraordinary - sexy, hushed, insistent. There is some Sade in it, and obviously some Prince, but also glimmers of less obvious artists: Talk Talk, Portishead, Mary Margaret O'Hara, Glenn Gould, Radiohead. Each of these acts has created lustrous, enduring recordings. With this - and the rest of No Shape - Perfume Genius joins them.









































































































































































































































































































Small comforts, enjoy them while we can.

Thanks for reading, sorry for the broken links, please support these artists with your money. (Invest in things that are important.) Be kind to each other, be brave, outlast. Remember: music is magic, an invisible force.

This is one of my favorite parts of December. From the passage of 100 songs — accompanying subways, walks, the works and days of hands — I'll emerge clutching a handful of songs, singers, albums and footnotes that will travel with me for the rest of my life. I can't imagine a world in which Rokia Traoré's N'Téri isn't available to drop (like a bomb, or a mic) into a mixtape, or that my involuntary reaction against a vast unknown genre might have denied me Caribou's Swim. One year, I even added your commentary to the lyrics section of each track's metadata, plotting an ascent of the playlist that would occupy a week or two's worth of snatched moments.

All of which is to say that the StG 100, more than all the other year-end lists, has become part of the rhythm of my life. It is both a gift and a treasure, and I hope it continues for years to come.

Thank you Sean, from the top of my 

No waning never, please. This is most complete ultimate overview for many yrs. Thanks P.

Sth is wrong w part 1, doesn´t show open any file after dl and unzip. Sorry and pity

Brilliant! December will be magic again! Thanks for sharing this each year. Like KC already added, it is your words and the music.

So happy for the "Vacation" love. I think I listened to this track more than any other this year. Blissful. 

Thank you for this list and all the others!

-Steve

Like your first commenter, this post is always the highlight of my December. I've been following you for almost 10 years now and always appreciate your reflections on each song as well as the eclectic mix you put together--helps me reflect on my year and expand my horizon.  I hope that this year end recap might survive for years to come! 

Another voice hoping you never wane and appreciating this list every December. The first year I anticipated the list (i.e. the second year I knew about it) your picks kept me company as I assembled the research for my undergrad thesis. This year's will hopefully do the same for my PhD thesis. Time passes and a lot changes but certain themes remain! Thanks as always for this effort and I hope for warmth and comfort for all of you this winter. 

I've been waiting for this, so much I've missed and so much to discover, excellent! Best year-end list by far, and hopefully for many years to come.

And for those interested, I also made a playlist on Deezer: https://www.deezer.com/de/playlist/3903482422

Sean, just as every year: thanks a lot for this! There are so many great artists and songs I've discovered through the 'StG 100 Best Of' lists that I've lost track. Can't wait to listen to all the songs, and I strongly hope the blog will stay around for many more years. 

Thanks as always for this compilation, Sean.

I've been lurker for 5 years and have never posted before now. I wanted to chime in with the others to say thank you and to keep up the good work. The "Best Songs" post is my favorite too but I do check-in on a weekly basis. I keep a personal playlist of all the quirky songs I've loved over the recent years and I'll bet half of them I learned of through this blog. Cheers!

I've been coming to StG for years now, but never commented.  Just wanted to say thanks for this list, and for all the year round posts.  I look forward to seeing the end of year comp every December.  After a while, I was even inspired into doing my own end of year comps.  Thanks again, and hope you all stay strong for years to come!   

thank you! excited to dig in. this is consistently my favorite music mix/piece of the internet every year. 

I look forward to this every year. So many of my favorite artists and songs ever found through your lists. Thank you so much for continuing on! 

Happy holiday and new year, Sean. I'm still listening and appreciating all you do. It's been quite awhile now. 

Lots of love to you and yours,

Lynn from Boston


Echoing the rest, I love these lists, easily my favorite end-of-year. I threw 96 of these together in a Google Music playlist for those who are on that train. Thanks for your hard work: https://play.google.com/music/playlist/AMaBXynBobK4U4wjX8dqZCo9HGP_ji-F75KqfmPorMskXwDFyk1sSFSZ5AR593yVQ8U59JAVGSVP6ivNW3Kz6yGrdBT3KvR1Bg%3D%3D

Love what I got, but part 1 still doesn't work, unpack and nothing is there

Thank you all! And for commenting too. These notes are very gratefully received.

Max, Joey - thanks for the Google Music and Deezer playlists; I've updated the post to include it.

Petr and AC - I've tried (re)downloading the Zippyshare link and Mediafire mirror. Both zips worked fine for me and you are the only complaints I have received... Mystifying and don't know what to suggest to you! Sorry &amp; good luck.


Another person popping in to say thank you. I've been a fan of this yearly list since 2010, and I look forward to it each year. I appreciate the selections and the commentary.

As the owner of another of the oldest music blogs--in operation since Arcade Fire came out--I thank you for staying with it.  I look forward to your end-of-year song collection every year.

We are indeed a waning breed, but we still have our fans!

Echoing all - always such a great post!  However, I am also experiencing the same issue with Part 1 - both Zippy and Mediafire.  : (

OK! No idea what the issue was with all those who had a broken download for Part 1, but I've re-compressed and re-uploaded that pack of songs.

The Mediafire and Zippyshare links are now updated with a "new" upload - hopefully it works!

Everything I feel about this playlist has already been said above. One of the best gifts I receive each year. I cannot thank you enough for all the hidden gems. Please never stop x 

you all really are the best. the songs themselves, and then the personal, thoughtful insight and context to each song. 
we have some shared favorites on my year-end list, but some of these i'm certainly borrowing for mine too. 
thank u again. 

yeah, its all been said above but -- this is the best list, always, and I look forward to it each december. please dont wane... :) thanks for your work

I'd like to add my thanks for this excellent end-of-year post which I've been enjoying for many years now. It's very much appreciated as I feel quite removed from the whole guitar/rock/pop music scene as my main interests lie in the world of electronic music.

For anyone interested in an alternative selection of the best tracks of 2017, feel free to listen and download over at my own blog: https://theletter.co.uk/blog/fav-tracks-of-2017

Long time lurker, first time chiming in. I haven't much to add other than to express my gratitude for what y'all do here. It's such a refreshing splash of cold crisp cleansing water to my ears crusted over from the plaque of adding albums to my spotify library after reading clinical anti-septic reviews that seem to be written behind dusty bi-focals peering down a 'puter. What you do here celebrates the joy de vivre (sp?) that one ought to feel from hearing something new and exciting! I can't remember when I stumbled into this corner of the blogosphere but every year since I did I anxiously await the gramophone's glorious year-end recap.(I try to keep up year round and do but the year in review is like gorging oneself with a whole cake and the sugar high from it gets me excited for a new year.) It has exposed me to so much exciting music that til then hadn't been a blip on my radar. The gramophone is a indispensable unique resource; long may god bless your hustle! Thanks again for spreading tidings of comfort, tunes and joy.

Happy New Year, Sean, and thanks for once again making my end of year holidaze more clear.
For many, many years, it's not that you've helped me find some musics I otherwise would have missed, but I ALWAYS take great pleasure in the words which emerge from your listening. Thanks/

No.81 - Hair and Beauty

If you like this , he just dropped a new record and its massive 

xx

Hooray!  I have pep in my step again.  

You guys are just incredible. Thank you for the list, it's been a real pleasure discovering this music.

Name: 

Email Address (required): 

URL:   

Comments:  

Type the word 'singsong' below. (required):
