The New York Giants came into Mile High depleted and winless and they took it to the Denver Broncos to win 23-10. After a Chiefs’ loss, Denver had a golden opportunity to stand tied atop the division. Instead, they blew that chance in an inexcusable and embarrassing fashion against a team with every reason to lose handedly.


Coming off a bye and playing at home in primetime, the Broncos were expected to come out of the gate flying. Denver’s offense came out lifeless with a one-yard run, five yard out, and a quick incompletion. The Broncos were punting before fans could find their seats. The opening drive lasted less than one minute and was a sign of things to come.


“We just got our butt kicked tonight,” declared C.J. Anderson. “I don’t know what else to say. It’s plain and simple. It was bad execution and bad football. It’s on us. The good thing is we know it’s on us and it can be corrected.”


I played terrible tonight I'm so sorry I have to play better I will get better


— Cj Anderson (@cjandersonb22) October 16, 2017




Defensively the Giants had one player on offense that could beat you, and he did. Giants’ rookie tight end Evan Engram caught two passes to set up the game’s first points and later added a touchdown. Engram finished with five catches for 82 yards and a touchdown.


The Broncos entered Sunday with the number one ranked rushing defense that had only allowed Melvin Gordon, Ezekiel Elliott, LeSean McCoy, and Marshawn Lynch to rush for a combined 95 yards. On Sunday night, Giants’ back-up running back Orleans Darkwa tallied 117 yards on 21 carries including a 47 yard trap right up the gut.


However, the Trevor Siemian led offense failed to put any pressure on New York. The Broncos ended the game converting just four of 14 third downs. This allowed the Giants to play conservatively on offense all night long.


“That was a great game plan,” noted Broncos cornerback Chris Harris Jr. “They just kept the ball away. But the way their defense played really affected how we played them. If we would have scored and got up on them, they would have to throw the ball more. But with us not scoring, they could just play safe like that.”


The tipping point came with a minute to go in the first half. Siemian dropped back to throw another quick out route, but this time straight into a Giants’ cover two defense and into the arms of cornerback Janoris Jenkins for an easy six points.


“The turnovers obviously, that’s the story of the game for us at least,” said Siemian. “The first one I tried to anticipate D.T. rolling in there and I threw it early and the guy made a play. The second one I tried to high low a cloud corner and he squatted on it and took it.”


There was no need for Eli Manning to test the “No Fly Zone” when your defense is scoring more points than the Broncos’ offense. The Giants entire wide receiving core finished with just two catches.


On paper, Siemian threw for 376 yards, a career high, but stats can be deceitful. Sunday was Siemian’s worst performance in his young career. With a championship caliber defense, the Broncos are not asking much out of their offense. Since the 2015 season, the Denver defense has proved that if you don’t turn the ball over the Broncos will have a chance in every game. After Simian’s two interceptions Sunday, he now has six interceptions and three fumbles through five games. The Broncos’ offense is also averaging an abysmal 14 points in its last three games.


It doesn’t matter how great your defense is with that offensive production. The rumblings are starting to get louder and louder for a change at the quarterback position. Although the question remains, who is the alternative?


The injury bug going around the league caught up with Denver. The Broncos lost two receivers too as both Emmanuel Sanders and Isaiah McKenzie left with ankle injuries. X-rays came back negative, but both have MRIs scheduled for later today.


The road ahead for the Broncos is gloomy. Denver’s next three are on the road before hosting the Patriots on November 12th. Two of the road games are quite possibly against the two best teams in the league in Kansas City and Philadelphia. If there’s a silver lining it’s that there continues to be no clear favorite throughout the league. The season is far from over, but the Broncos are now forced to take a long and hard look in the mirror. In the coming weeks, Broncos country will find out just what this team is made of.


SaveSaveSaveSave


SaveSave


SaveSave