Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Andrew Tanner Harper, of Lebanon, was booked late Saturday night according to Wilson County Jail records.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Nashville Crime Stoppers allows people to anonymously submit tips to crimes they may have information about. Here are several ways you can submit a tip to Crime Stoppers.
    Ayrika Whitney/USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee

Andrew Tanner Harper
(Photo: Wilson County Jail)

An 18-year-old has been charged in connection to a shooting that killed two teenagers at a Lebanon gas station in April that police then described as a drug deal gone bad.


Andrew Tanner Harper, of Lebanon, was booked late Saturday night according to Wilson County Jail records. Harper was indicted by a grand jury and turned himself in according to Lebanon Police Department Sgt. PJ Hardy.


Charges issued against Harper include first-degree murder and criminal attempt, jail records state.


A 17-year-old at the time of the shooting is also charged in the case.


Jacob Ethan Doughten, 19, and a 15-year-old boy were killed in the shooting at a Pilot station on Murfreesboro Road, according to police.


Police believe the shooting occurred during a robbery attempt when three individuals in one vehicle agreed to meet an individual in another to sell an agreed amount of drugs, according to the Lebanon Police Department.


Both vehicles allegedly had multiple individuals when the parties met for the exchange. Police stated after the shooting they believed both Doughten and the 17-year-old fired shots.


The continuing investigation has included elements of “culpability,” related to the case, Hardy said.


Police are continuing to investigate and Hardy didn't rule out more charges related to the case, he said.


Reach Andy Humbles at ahumbles@tennessean.com or 615-726-5939 and on Twitter @ AndyHumbles.


 
