Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Tammy 'Sunny' Sytch was arrested Tuesday by Aberdeen Police Department, according to Monmouth County Jail records.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Tommy Dreamer’s House of Hardcore 32 will be LIVE at iPlay America’s Warehouse 100 on Friday, August 11 starting at 6:00 p.m.
    Brian Johnston

Tammy "Sunny" Sytch of the WWE sign autographs for crowd at Brackmen School in Barnegat in this 2000 file photo.
(Photo: ROBERT WARD/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

FREEHOLD - Former WWE star Tammy 'Sunny' Sytch is being held in Monmouth County Jail on a $6,000 bond.


Sytch, 45, was arrested Tuesday by Aberdeen Police Department, according to Monmouth County Jail records.


She is charged with two counts of fugitive from justice and six counts of contempt of court. It's not clear what led to this week's arrest. 


More: How Luke Harper made Jonathan Huber a 'Mohawk' movie star


More: WWE star Alexa Bliss gives advice to young wrestlers


Sytch, an Old Bridge native, rose to fame as “Sunny” in the then-World Wrestling Federation in the mid-1990s.


Sytch told the Asbury Park Press in 2010 that she was a pre-med student at the University of Tennessee when she was hired by then WWF chairman and CEO Vince McMahon. So she quit school with one semester to go and headed on the road with the company.


More: Diamond Dallas Page brings Jersey work ethic to WWE Hall of Fame


More: Charlotte Flair talks WWE success, family legacy and who's next


She was a manager for several championship tag teams and was inducted into the now-World Wrestling Entertainment Hall of Fame in 2011.


Susanne Cervenka: @scervenka; 732-643-4229; scervenka@gannettnj.com
