Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The future of the Cheatham County jail remains unclear after county officials discussed the expansion options again – yet did not eliminate any of them as possibilities – at a meeting Wednesday night.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


The current Cheatham County Jail.
(Photo: Times file photo)

The future of the Cheatham County jail remains unclear after county officials discussed the expansion options again – yet did not eliminate any of them as possibilities – at a meeting Wednesday night.


The meeting was meant to review, compare and contrast the three options currently on the table to address the overcrowding issue – which the county is mandated by the state to improve – as well as laying out the estimated short-term and long-term costs of each.


According to information presented by County Mayor Kerry McCarver, the first option, which would add on to the existing jailhouse, would cost approximately $44,444,960 in the short-term and $202 million over a 25-year timespan, calculating costs such as staffing and maintenance.


The second option, to build an entirely new criminal justice center – taking both the jail and the courts off the current site – would cost an estimated $48,262,640, or about $191 million over the next 25 years.


And the third option, a hybrid between renovating the current jail and locating a site to construct a new jail would mean roughly $40,499,600, or $203 million over 25 years.


The options would bring the total number of beds to 300, 300 and 313, respectively.


Cope Associates, a Knoxville-based architecture company, determined that 300 beds would be sufficient to accommodate future growth by the year 2042.


Tennessee Corrections Institute officials previously explained that 70 percent of the county’s liability comes from the jail.


McCarver laid out advantages and challenges to each plan, including whether to seek additional land, parking garage expenses, costs to transport inmates to court if the plan moves them to another site, security measures, staffing levels and others.


There would be certain limitations, too. If the county were to construct a new justice center altogether, it would have to remain within Ashland City limits to keep the courthouse at the county seat, or the town would have to annex county land.


Bob Bass of the TCI encouraged those in attendance to “be a forecaster,” and look at trends to determine what the facility’s needs would be down the road.


County officials met in July with members of the TCI and Cope Associates to discuss the options to address the jail’s problems.


McCarver delivered a presentation to the commissioners, county sheriff and other officials present, reminding that the overcrowding and current conditions of the jail have led to the state’s consideration of decertification, which could mean civil action lawsuits and higher insurance, if the committee goes with the “wait and see” approach rather than taking corrective action as soon as possible.


At maximum capacity, the jail, which was built in the mid-1980s, is meant to hold approximately 116 inmates, but currently houses 165 and typically holds around 160.


“It is clear that we must keep moving forward, or the decision will be made outside of Cheatham County,” McCarver’s presentation stated. “A federal judge will determine what we will do. (The) judge can order a new jail on his terms/costs.”


Despite the discussions and questions raised of many factors at Wednesday night’s meeting, the committee members present did not eliminate any of the three options.


Cheatham County Sheriff Mike Breedlove said “(we) see the storm coming…progressively, every day (issues with the jail are) a little worse.”


Breedlove previously said that he would go before the state with a plan in September.


The county plans to pass the information and data collected thus far to Jail Management Consultant Jim Hart, of County Technical Assistance Service, to weigh in prior to making a final decision.


The next meeting regarding the jail expansion will be a special session Oct. 12.


Kelly Fisher, reporter for the Ashland City Times, can be reached at KPFisher@gannett.com, 615-801-3866 or on Twitter at @KellyPFisher.
