Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The Cheatham County Jail, which has long faced an overcrowding issue and has been ordered by the state to come to a solution, recently hit a “record number of inmates,” County Sheriff Mike Breedlove said.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Cheatham County Jail
(Photo: Times file photo)

The Cheatham County Jail, which has long faced an overcrowding issue and has been ordered by the state to come to a solution, recently hit a “record number of inmates,” County Sheriff Mike Breedlove said.


Breedlove stated to the Cheatham County Commission at its meeting Monday that there were 209 inmates in the 116-bed facility, a number that has since decreased to 182, which is still higher than the typical 170 previously reported.


The jail reached its record number Nov. 27, and remained above 200 in population for several days, Breedlove said.


On the morning of the Nov. 20 commission meeting, there were about 188 inmates in the Cheatham County Jail, and more than 200 over the weekend.


One problem the overcrowding has caused is an increased number of assaults on officers and other inmates, Breedlove told the commissioners Monday.


One inmate in particular, he said, would be transferred to Nashville on Tuesday; that inmate had been destroying property, vandalizing and assaulting other inmates while detained.


The state mandated that the county address the overpopulation issue, which could lead to consideration of decertification, County Mayor Kerry McCarver said in a public meeting in September.


County officials met in July with members of the Tennessee Corrections Institute and Cope Associates to discuss the options to address the jail’s problems.


At the meeting held in September, officials aimed to review, compare and contrast the three options currently on the table to address the overcrowding issue as well as laying out the estimated short-term and long-term costs of each.


Options included adding onto the existing jailhouse, constructing an entirely new criminal justice center, and a hybrid between renovating the current jail and locating a site to construct a new jail. McCarver laid out the advantages and challenges that come with each plan.


“It is clear that we must keep moving forward, or the decision will be made outside of Cheatham County,” McCarver’s presentation from the September meeting stated. “A federal judge will determine what we will do. (The) judge can order a new jail on his terms/costs.”


Officials determined that a County Technical Assistance Service jail management consultant should assess the data and weigh in prior to making a final decision.


“We are in the process of sending requested jail records to CTAS Jim Hart who is set to do the final study on what the county needs are and projections for the future,” Breedlove said in a text message to the Times, specifying that the study should take four to six months. “The hope is to have a decision in place by the commission before the August election.”


He added that there would likely not be another public meeting regarding the issue until spring.


Kelly Fisher, reporter for the Ashland City Times, can be reached at KPFisher@gannett.com, 615-801-3866 or on Twitter at @KellyPFisher.
