Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Suspect accused of armed holdups in Evesham,  Bucks County

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Authorities allege an Atlantic County man is the armed robber seen in this surveillance photo from an Evesham bank robbery.
(Photo: Photo provided)

UPDATE: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Matthew Burney as a resident of Barnegat, Ocean County.


CAMDEN - An Atlantic County man was the gun-wielding robber who threatened to shoot employees of an Evesham bank in December, then menaced workers at a Pennsylvania bank one day later, authorities say.


Matthew Burney took more than $3,800 from the Greentree Road office of PNC Bank on Dec. 8, scooping money into a bag at two teller stations, according to a criminal complaint filed Monday in federal court in Camden.


The Brigantine resident allegedly took $29,700 around 1 p.m. the next day from a Bank of America branch in Fairless Hills, Pennsylvania.


Burney, 43, allegedly wore a black sweatshirt with the hood pulled over his head and a mask covering the lower part of his face during each holdup, according to an affidavit by FBI Special Agent Brian McCaffery.


More: Lumberton man admits guilt in slaying


More: Bike-share program could pedal into Camden


A criminal complaint with the affidavit charges Burney with bank robbery by force or violence.


"The robber threatened to shoot everyone if anyone activated the alarm," McCaffery recounted of the Evesham holdup. Burney also allegedly threatened to shoot a PNC teller, he said.


Burney allegedly announced the next day's holdup by shouting: "This is a robbery! Give me all your large (bills), this is not a joke."


A robber enters a PNC Bank office in Evesham on Dec. 8, 2017. (Photo: Photo provided)

Burney allegedly ordered a Bank of America employee onto the floor at gunpoint, McCaffery said. "The robber warned the bank employees not to push an alarm button and stated that he did not want to hear any telephones ring," he added.


Despite the robber's effort to hide his identify, witnesses at each holdup described the suspect as being of "Asian or Pacific Island descent based on the shape of his eyes."


In addition, police in Fairless Hills were able to follow footprints in recently fallen snow to the parking lot of a vacant gas station, where tire tracks indicated the fleeing man had driven onto the street.


Security cameras at nearby businesses showed the robber leave the SUV, enter the bank and return about a minute later, McCaffery's affidavit said.


Surveillance video shows a robber at a PNC Bank in Evesham on Dec. 8, 2017. (Photo: Photo provided)

One camera caught the SUV's license plate, which was traced to Burney, McCaffery said.


The FBI agent noted Burney was convicted of committing two armed bank robberies in Ocean County in May 2007. He was placed on supervised release in 2016.


In the earlier holdups, Burney wore a dark motorcycle helmet and a single glove on his right hand while taking about $24,600 from a Toms River bank and almost $13,000 from a bank in Brick.


He was caught while trying to flee the Brick holdup and later admitted to four additional bank robberies, court records say.


McCaffery's affidavit says Burney was arrested Dec. 15 at his job at a Lakewood pinball arcade in connection with the Evesham holdup. He is being held in Burlington County Jail.


A search of his vehicle netted $6,188, including fifty-seven $100 bills.


Investigators also recovered a black hooded sweatshirt similar to the one worn by the robber, as well as two pairs of black jeans, black and gray gloves, and black sneakers, authorities said.


Burney has confessed to both holdups, contending he carried an imitation gun during the Evesham holdup, according to the affidavit. He also admitted to robbing a Chase Bank in North Brunswick on Feb. 28, 2017.


Jim Walsh: @jimwalsh_cp; 856-486-2646; jwalsh@gannettnj.com


 Download our apps and get alerts for local news, crime, weather, traffic and more. Search "Courier-Post" in the app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app | iPad app. And be sure to 'like' us on Facebook!