Nearly five years ago, Patrick Higuera was sent to prison after robbing a Seattle bank and attempting to rob another, claiming he had a bomb. Just months after his release, Higuera is again accused of robbing a Ballard bank armed with a note about fictitious explosives.

Patrick Higuera’s preferred method of robbing banks hasn’t changed over the years, nor has it become more successful, King County prosecutors say.

The 50-year-old Seattle man is accused of passing a note to a teller at a Chase bank branch in Ballard in October that read, “I’ve got a bomb. Give me $3,000,” according to charging papers filed Thursday. He was given cash and fled, the charges say.

His bomb threat and monetary request are similar to a robbery he committed at a U.S. Bank branch on Capitol Hill in December 2012, and an attempted robbery at a downtown Key Bank branch six weeks later, court records show. 

Higuera was caught and convicted in the earlier cases. He was sentenced in March 2013 to six years in prison, court records say. He was released from the Airway Heights Corrections Center west of Spokane in August, according to a spokeswoman with the state Department of Corrections (DOC).

On Thursday morning, Higuera was booked into the King County Jail, charged with first-degree robbery in connection with the October heist, court and jail records show. He remains jailed in lieu of $250,000 bail.

As in his earlier bank-robbery cases, it does not appear that Higuera was actually armed with a bomb, according to court records.

But the charges note Higuera also has repeatedly given police the alias of Ollie Brant or Ollie Brantman, just as he did at the time of his earlier crimes, charging papers say. 

Seattle police distributed still images taken from surveillance footage at the Chase branch in Ballard, and Higuera was identified by his DOC community-corrections officer, the charges say.

Back in 2013, it was a different corrections officer who recognized Higuera from bank-surveillance photos and provided his name to Seattle police, the court records say.

“In this case, the defendant entered a bank and demanded $3,000 while noting he was armed with a bomb,” Senior Deputy Prosecutor Bryan Wynne wrote in charging papers. “ … The state’s concern is furthered by his criminal history, which shows the defendant has developed a modus operandi when he robs financial institutions.”


          The opinions expressed in reader comments are those of the author only, and do not reflect the opinions of The Seattle Times.
          