Gallery: Police shoot suspect in North Tabor


    
        
            By Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com

 The Oregonian/OregonLive

Jess L. Brockner, who was shot in the neck by police after fleeing a traffic stop as a suspect in a bank robbery, on Tuesday pleaded guilty in federal court to two felony charges.

Brockner, wearing a black-and-white striped jail suit with the word "INMATE'' stenciled in red on the back, pleaded guilty to bank robbery and possession of a firearm in the furtherance of a crime of violence.

About 9:30 a.m. on Aug. 30, he robbed the U.S. Bank at 18485 S.W. Farmington Rd., in Beaverton.  He entered the bank wearing a welding mask and holding a gun in his right hand, according to prosecutors.  He demanded money from a teller, and at one point, pointed a 9mm handgun at the teller, according to prosecutors.

Gun in hand, Brockner demanded money from a bank teller, saying, "Where are the 100s? You have 10 seconds or I'll shoot," according to a court affidavit. At one point, he pointed the gun at the teller, the affidavit said. 

Brockner took more than $3,400 from the bank, the affidavit said.

About two hours later, a Portland police officer with an FBI task force spotted a stolen SUV driven by Brockner near Southeast Cesar Chavez Boulevard and Clinton Street. Authorities believed the blue Chevrolet Blazer had been the getaway vehicle in a Washington County barn robbery earlier that morning.

Brockner drove off and a police chase ensued.

The chase ended with a crash at Northeast 55th Avenue, between East Burnside Street and Couch Street. According to police, Brockner, after the crash, refused police orders to get out of the vehicle and was shot in the neck by Portland police Officer David Staab. Brockner was transported by ambulance to Legacy Emanuel Hospital for treatment.

Investigators determined that earlier on Aug. 30, Brockner was with two other men who burglarized a barn in Yamhill County, stealing the victim's vehicle and filling a rented moving truck with the victim's belongings. Brockner fled in the victim's Chevrolet Blazer, while his two alleged accomplices fled in a U-Haul truck.

Brockner, 32, faces a seven-year mandatory minimum sentence for the firearms conviction, which could bring a maximum sentence of life in prison. He will be sentenced Aug. 14, 2018.

-- Maxine Bernstein

mbernstein@oregonian.com 503-221-8212 @maxoregonian


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        