Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Treasure Coast environmentalists blame Pressley Ranch's biosolids for high phosphorus, but DEP says there's no proof of a direct link.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Don Buhr, a resident of Blue Cypress Village on Blue Cypress Lake in northwest Indian River County, talks Thursday, May 31, 2018, about his concern over the pollution from runoff from a nearby ranch that spreads human sewage sludge as fertilizer on its fields.
    Wochit

A truck dumps a load of biosolids shortly after 7 a.m. May 1, 2018, on a Pressley Ranch pasture west of Blue Cypress Lake.
(Photo: CONTRIBUTED PHOTO BY BARBARA BUHR)

BLUE CYPRESS LAKE — More than 300 pairs of ospreys nest in the cypress trees ringing the Treasure Coast's largest lake, at the headwaters of the St. Johns River.


But the ospreys don't hunt for fish here.


"You can see ospreys fishing in Stick Marsh, the Fellsmere Water Management Area and other bodies of water around here," said Richard Baker, head of the Pelican Island Audubon Society, "but you don't see them fishing in Blue Cypress Lake."


The lake in northwest Indian River County is being polluted by runoff from a nearby ranch that fertilizes its pastures with partially treated human sewage sludge, typically called "biosolids," several prominent environmentalists contend.


More: TCPalm's award-winning "Laying Waste" investigation on biosolids 


An osprey flies from its nest in a cypress tree along the shore of Blue Cypress Lake Thursday, May 31, 2018, in northwest Indian River County. Phosphorus levels in the lake have risen and can feed harmful, sometimes toxic, algae blooms that can lead to fish kills and ruin the lake's ecosystem. (Photo: PATRICK DOVE/TCPALM)

While the lake's phosphorus levels are increasing, a direct link to biosolids hasn't been proven, counter officials with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and the St. Johns River Water Management District.


Phosphorus can feed harmful, sometimes toxic, algae blooms that can lead to fish kills and ruin the lake's ecosystem.


The threat isn't limited to Blue Cypress Lake.


Biosolids-dumping throughout the St. Johns watershed has spiked since 2013, when the Legislature banned the practice in the watershed containing Lake Okeechobee and the St. Lucie and Caloosahatchee rivers.


"When they started seeing spikes in phosphorus in the other areas, they shifted the dumping here," said St. Johns Riverkeeper Lisa Rinaman. "Why would it surprise anyone that phosphorus is spiking in the upper St. Johns River? It's sacrificing water quality in one of the few pristine lakes in Florida."


Biosolids applications in the upper St. Johns River watershed spiked after the practice was banned in the Lake Okeechobee, St. Lucie River and Caloosahatchee River basins. (Photo: St. Johns River Water Management District)

By 2016, Blue Cypress was polluted with more phosphorus than 25 of 26 water quality monitoring sites the Ocean Research &amp; Conservation Association maintains along the St. Lucie River and Indian River Lagoon. At 0.21 milligrams per liter, the level was twice that of 21 of the ORCA-monitored sites.


The level was even higher than in the C-44 Canal, which conveyed a blue-green algae bloom from Lake Okeechobee into the St. Lucie River estuary in summer 2016.


"That's remarkably high," said Edie Widder, founder and lead scientist at ORCA in Fort Pierce, which recently started sampling lake water.


Pressley Ranch, which lies southwest of the lake, spreads biosolids on 3,059 acres of pasture to help grow Bahia grass for cattle grazing.


The ranch spread over 5,277 dry tons in 2017, according to DEP documents. That's about 1.7 tons per acre — the weight of 10 Boeing 747 jumbo jets.


About 90 percent of it came from the Broward County North Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant, DEP reports say. The rest came from 11 wastewater treatment plants, mostly in Miami-Dade County and the cities of Sunrise and Margate and Bradenton.


The biosolids are about 85 percent water, said Alan Garcia, director of Broward County's Water and Wastewater Services. So the actual weight of the Broward County biosolids spread on Pressley Ranch last year was 29,861 tons, about 9.7 tons an acre.


Gary Pressley, listed as the ranch owner on DEP permits, declined to comment.


A sign on a fence at Pressley Ranch in western Indian River County indicates sewage sludge has been spread nearby. (Photo: TYLER TREADWAY/TCPALM.COM)

Fertilizing with biosolids isn't a problem if it's done correctly, but it's becoming more common for landowners to dump too much in areas that don't need it, so rain washes the excess into area waters, some science and industry officials say.


"They're not putting all that sludge on their land to fertilize the soil," said Rinaman, the St. Johns Riverkeeper. "This is just a way for municipalities in South Florida to get rid of sewage sludge and for people to make money from it."


More: Bill Gates backs 'toilet-to-tap' experiment; even drinks water | Video


Broward County paid H&amp;H Liquid Sludge Disposal Inc. of Branford over $1.08 million to haul its biosolids to Pressley Ranch last year, based on Garcia's numbers. Company President Rick D. Hacht did not return a phone message and emails seeking comment.


The sludge may turn grass green, Rinaman said, "but it also turns Blue Cypress Lake green."


Don Buhr, a permanent resident on Blue Cypress Lake, guides his boat Thursday, May 31, 2018, through the cypress trees that line the shore. "This area is a gem in the state of Florida, some of the most beautiful you'll ever see," said Buhr. "Can you imagine living here all these years telling people that this is the cleanest water in the state then come to find out it's all a lie?" (Photo: PATRICK DOVE/TCPALM)

DEP in March renewed Pressley Ranch's 2013 permit to spread Class B biosolids, and extended it for 10 years.


Class B biosolids have been treated, but still contain pathogens and heavy metals — far more than the highly processed Class AA biosolids, which are classified as “fertilizer” and can be used without permits, even near waterways.


More: "Laying Waste" investigation: Florida springs at risk from biosolids


The ranch is not allowed to apply biosolids within 1,000 feet of Blue Cypress Lake, and not during inclement weather, said DEP spokeswoman Dee Ann Miller.


A Feb. 16 DEP inspection conducted in advance of the permit renewal found the ranch in compliance with state regulations, including no biosolids runoff, according to a March 22 report by John Reffranz, the agency's southeast district environmental manager.


At the time of the inspection, though, no biosolids had been applied in eight months, Miller acknowledged in an email to TCPalm.


"Thus, the department did not visibly observe any runoff of biosolids," she said.


Chart shows the amounts of biosolids spread at Pressley Ranch since the practice started in 2013. (Photo: Ocean Research &amp; Conservation Association)

Pressley Ranch spread biosolids in late April and early May, just before two weeks of near-daily rains. A DEP report shows the biosolids the ranch dumped in 2017 contained:


"The loads of biosolids being dumped out there are pretty insane," Widder said. "The fact that it's shipped up here from Broward and Miami-Dade counties is ridiculous. And to dump it near an environmental treasure like Blue Cypress Lake is even more egregious."


Indian River County treats and disposes of sludge from its wastewater treatment plants at its landfill. Most other Treasure Coast cities and counties either ship their biosolids to area farms or the Okeechobee landfill. Note: Scroll down for a full chart.


Blue Cypress phosphorus levels have increased steadily since 1984, according to water district data.


But research by the district, "while it evaluated biosolids as a potential source, concludes that there was not enough data to establish a direct connection to nutrient levels," said DEP spokeswoman Jill Margolius. 


Maybe not, Widder said, but "when you look at the amount of waste they're dumping and the pollution problems the lake has been having, if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it's probably a duck."


There is a "very strong scientific correlation" between the start of biosolids disposal at Pressley Ranch and the degradation of water quality at Blue Cypress, Rinaman said.


Dumping nutrient-laden sludge so close to Blue Cypress "undermines the hundreds of millions of dollars invested to restore the St. Johns headwaters," Rinaman said, referring to a decades-long, $260 million project to re-engineer the river back to its original flow to the north by buying and reflooding farmlands along the Indian River-Brevard county line.


A monitoring station was put in place by the St. Johns River Water Management District along the southern shore of Blue Cypress Lake to measure contaminant levels in the water. Several prominent environmentalists contend the lake is being polluted by runoff from a nearby ranch that fertilizes its pastures with human sewage sludge. (Photo: PATRICK DOVE/TCPALM)

Don and Barbara Buhr have lived at Blue Cypress Lake for 25 years and operated Blue Cypress Tours for six.


"We've never been concerned about pollution in the lake before," Barbara Buhr said, "but we are now."


More: Ospreys nest in record numbers at Blue Cypress Lake


Don Buhr started seeing algae blooms when Pressley Ranch began spreading biosolids.


"Sometimes they look like a weed line in the water, but they can get pretty thick from time to time," he said.


After heavy rains, there's a sewage smell in Trim Creek, which flows into the southern end of Blue Cypress Lake and "drains pastures immediately to the west," he said.


"When it starts stinking to high heaven, you know they're dumping," Barbara Buhr said.


Experts from government agencies, private businesses and environmental groups will discuss current and future uses of biosolids at a June 8 symposium at Indian River State College in Stuart.


Sponsored by the Treasure Coast Regional Planning Council and the Indian River Lagoon Council, the symposium's topics and participants will include:


What: Regional Biosolids SymposiumWhen: 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Friday, June 8  Where: Wolf High Technology Center, Indian River State College, 2400 S.E. Salerno Road, StuartAdmission: Free, but registration is required and limited to 150 peopleTo register: irlcouncil.com/2018-meetings.html


 
