Partly cloudy with a slight chance of thunderstorms. High 92F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 30%..

Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:35 pm

FILE - In this July 15, 2017, file photo, Sturgill Simpson performs during Forecastle Music Festival at Waterfront Park in Louisville, Ky. Eminem, The Killers, Muse, Future, Bassnectar and Simpson lead the lineup for the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival this June in Tennessee. The festival announced on Tuesday, Jan. 9, 2018, their lineup for the music festival in Manchester, June 7 -10. (Photo by Amy Harris/Invision/AP, File)

FILE - In this July 15, 2017, file photo, Sturgill Simpson performs during Forecastle Music Festival at Waterfront Park in Louisville, Ky. Eminem, The Killers, Muse, Future, Bassnectar and Simpson lead the lineup for the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival this June in Tennessee. The festival announced on Tuesday, Jan. 9, 2018, their lineup for the music festival in Manchester, June 7 -10. (Photo by Amy Harris/Invision/AP, File)

NASHVILLE (AP) — Eminem, The Killers, Muse, Future, Bassnectar and Sturgill Simpson lead the lineup for this year’s Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival.

The festival announced its lineup on Tuesday for the music festival to be held June 7-10 in Manchester, about 65 miles southeast of Nashville, Tennessee. Other artists include Bon Iver, Khalid, Kaskade, Paramore, Alt-J, Dua Lipa and Sheryl Crow.

Additional artists include Anderson .Paak &amp; The Free Nationals, Sylvan Esso, Nile Rodgers &amp; Chic, Old Crow Medicine Show, Trombone Shorty &amp; Orleans Avenue and Mavis Staples.

Tickets go on sale Friday at 10 a.m. at www.bonnaroo.com.

 

Four hurt in Chattanooga detention facility fire

CHATTANOOGA (AP) — Two inmates and two officers have been injured in a fire at a correctional facility in Tennessee.

Chattanooga Fire spokesman Bruce Garner tells news outlets that the two inmates received minor burns in the Monday evening fire that broke out in a jail cell at the Silverdale Detention Facilities. The inmates and two officers also suffered from smoke inhalation. All four were hospitalized.

Garner says all inmates from the cell block were evacuated, and the fire was extinguished within five minutes.

The fire department and Hamilton County Sheriff’s Office are investigating.

Facility spokesman Amanda Gilchrist initially said no inmates were injured, but later said the private company that manages Silverdale, CoreCivic, is aware of the injuries.

No further information has been released.

 

Goodwill returns Roy Acuff fiddle to owner

KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) — A fiddle believed to be once owned by the late country music star Roy Acuff is back with its owners after it was accidentally donated to a Goodwill store in Missouri.

The instrument was anonymously donated. Goodwill of Western Missouri and Eastern Kansas put it up for auction on Dec. 27.

The Kansas City Star reports that after bidding began, a member of the family that mistakenly donated the fiddle asked to have it returned.

Kevin Bentley is interim president and CEO of the Kansas City Goodwill organization. He says the item was given back because it was a family heirloom.

Acuff’s fiddles were made by his uncle, Evart Acuff, who numbered each one. A sticker inside said the fiddle, No. 19, was handmade in August 1945 in Maryville, Tenn.

 

Suicides in Tennessee reach record-breaking high

NASHVILLE — An average of three people died by suicide each day in Tennessee in 2016, the highest recorded in the state in more than 35 years.

News outlets cite state health officials as saying white middle-aged men in rural areas account for a majority of the deaths. White males make up 40 percent of Tennessee’s population, but made up 77 percent of suicide deaths in 2016.

But officials from the Tennessee Department of Health’s Office of Health Statistics say suicides also are increasing among those 10 to 19 years old.

East Tennessee Suicide Prevention Network official Amy Dolinky says the vast majority of people kill themselves with guns.

Dolinky says the difficulty of talking about feeling suicidal and the stigma surrounding mental illness have contributed to the rise in suicides.

 

New assistant adjutant general named in state

NASHVILLE — Col. Jason Glass is the new assistant adjutant general for the Tennessee Air National Guard.

Glass was previously commander of the 218th Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Group, Tennessee Air National Guard, at Joint Base Berry Field in Nashville.

Gov. Bill Haslam and Tennessee’s adjutant general, Maj. Gen. Max Haston, named Glass to the new post in a change of command ceremony on Sunday in Nashville.

Glass enlisted as a traditional guardsman in March 1989 and entered the Active Duty Air Force in 1994. He left in 2000 and returned to the Guard.

Glass replaces retiring Brig. Gen. Donald Johnson, who has served in the post since 2011.

 

Tennessean president is stepping down

NASHVILLE — The president of The Tennessean and the USA Today Network-Tennessee is leaving parent company Gannett.

The Tennessean reports longtime media executive Laura Hollingsworth announced the decision on Monday in a newsroom address to all newspaper employees. She said her last day with the company will be Feb. 2.

She said she would continue to live in Nashville, but wanted to explore other opportunities and new ways to make an impact.

The newspaper says during Hollingsworth tenure, the Tennessean renewed its emphasis on music coverage, expanded its health care coverage, increased its community engagement, and grew its digital audience.

Over the last 18 months, she has led the integration of the Commercial Appeal and the Knoxville News Sentinel into a statewide Gannett network.


                            
    Log In
                        

Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article.


Please disable your ad blocker, whitelist our site, or purchase a subscription