Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High near 95F. Winds E at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. W winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 1:56 pm

Baum

Baum

This report contains details that some readers may find graphic.

Editor’s Note: This report contains details that some readers may find graphic.


One man has been arrested by the Utah County Sheriff’s Office in the case of two missing teens from Tooele for allegedly murdering them out of jealousy that his girlfriend had a male visitor in their house.


Law enforcement found two bodies Wednesday, believed to be 17-year-old Breezy Otteson and 18-year-old Riley Powell, who have been missing since Dec. 30, when they left Tooele to go to Spanish Fork and Eureka.


Jerrod Baum, 41, was arrested and booked into Utah County Jail on Wednesday on multiple felony charges, including two charges of aggravated kidnapping and two charges of aggravated murder, both first-degree felonies.


The police report states that Baum and his live-in girlfriend, Morgan Henderson, were first contacted by police on Jan. 9. In the Utah County police report, the girlfriend was identified as Morgan Lewis, but she’s identified in Sanpete County booking records as Morgan Henderson.


According to Sanpete County booking reports, Henderson was arrested Sunday in Sanpete County for charges related to being a felon in possession of a dangerous weapon and possession of controlled substances.


Baum and Henderson said he had not heard from the missing teens, the police report states, but a search warrant allowed law enforcement to obtain a string of Facebook messages between Henderson and Powell on the day the teens went missing, showing that Powell had agreed to meet at the couple’s house.


Henderson told police Powell had never arrived at her house that night, the police report states, but she later told police that the two teens had arrived at the house past midnight on Dec. 30, smoked marijuana, then left.


Henderson was interviewed by police again in March, when she told police that Baum later told her he knew the teens had come over to the house, and he had told her not to have male guests over and that “it was too bad, because he had never killed anyone innocent before.”


Henderson told police that their shower smelled strongly of bleach, and that on New Year’s Eve, Baum burned some items in a barrel that smelled like bleach and the flames were green, according to the police report.


Henderson also told police that Baum told her that he made Powell suffer, but that he felt bad about Otteson and made it “quick and painless.”


Baum told Henderson he did not have time to dig a grave, the report said, and hid what Henderson believed to be cellphone in a sludge barrel near their house. Police were able to locate multiple destroyed phones in that barrel along with lengths of rope, used duct tape, pieces of two knife sheaths, roofing nails, baby wipes and plastic sacks.


Also in the barrel, police found a camouflage tie-down strap, similar to one found in Powell’s Jeep.


Henderson led police to the Tintic Standard No. 2 mine, where the two bodies were found Wednesday. Henderson also said she had driven the Jeep out to Cherry Creek where she and Baum dumped it.


After the bodies were found in the mine, Henderson told police she had seen Powell and Otteson tied up in the back of the Jeep the night they went missing, and Baum told her to get in the Jeep to go for a ride. She told police Baum used a knife to kill the teens before dumping them in a mine.


Both bodies recovered from the mine Wednesday had their hands bound behind their backs and had suffered multiple knife wounds, the police report says. No positive identification had been made on the bodies as of Thursday afternoon.


Baum has an extensive criminal record prior to these charges. According to Utah court records, Baum was previously charged with murder in 1991. Court records for that case are not available digitally, but the Daily Herald is attempting to attain them through other methods. He was also later charged with aggravated assault for his part in a prison riot while serving time at the Central Utah Correctional Facility at Gunnison.


Katie England covers politics, the environment and courts for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.

Baum

Review some of the top news stories of the week. 

Police agencies and the county courts saw alleged crimes of nearly every kind in February — from simple drug possession to murder. 

Law enforcement found two bodies in a remote mine shaft in southern Utah County near Eureka Wednesday, believed to be those of missing teens R…

Katie England covers politics, county government and southern Utah County for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.



                                    
                                        Whenever Katie  England posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
