Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 93F. Winds ENE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mostly cloudy skies this evening will become partly cloudy after midnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 66F. W winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 12:56 pm

Charges have been filed in Utah’s Fourth District Court against Morgan Henderson, the girlfriend of the man charged with murder for reportedly stabbing two teens to death and throwing their bodies down an abandoned mine shaft.


Morgan Henderson, 34, is charged with two second-degree felonies of obstructing justice.


She appeared in court for the first time Thursday afternoon before Judge Kraig Powell.


Powell said Henderson qualified to be represented by a public defender, and she will be assigned someone to represent her from the Utah County Public Defender’s Office.


Brelynne “Breezy” Otteson, 17, and Riley Powell, 18, went missing at the end of December when they left Tooele to go to Spanish Fork and Eureka.


According to the police report filed when Henderson was booked into Utah County Jail on March 30, Facebook messages between Powell and Henderson right before the teens went missing led police to question Henderson and her live-in boyfriend, Jerrod Baum.


Baum has since been charged with aggravated murder and aggravated kidnapping in the case, and could face the death penalty if convicted.


According to the probable cause statement, Henderson denied any knowledge of the teens’ whereabouts when questioned by police on Jan. 9.


She again denied knowledge of the missing teens to police Jan. 25, according to the probable cause statement.


On March 25, Henderson told police she had withheld knowledge about the teens and that she had been present when the two were killed by Baum.


The information provided by Henderson led law enforcement to Otteson and Powell’s bodies in a remote mine shaft near Eureka on March 27.


Henderson will next appear in court on April 12 before Judge Christine Johnson.


Katie England covers politics, the environment and courts for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.

Police agencies and the county courts saw alleged crimes of nearly every kind in April — from simple drug possession to murder. 

The man arrested for reportedly killing two Tooele teens and dumping their bodies down a remote mine shaft near Eureka could face the death pe…

Katie England covers politics, county government and southern Utah County for the Daily Herald. She can be reached at 801-344-2599 or kengland@heraldextra.com.



                                    
                                        Whenever Katie  England posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
