If you are a subscriber: Simply log in for unlimited access. 
                            If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now. 
                            Check out your options: tulsaworld.com/subscribe.-->
                            

If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Journalism worth your time and money. Join us for only 99 cents.

Partly cloudy. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. High 97F. Winds SSE at 5 to 10 mph..

Partly cloudy skies. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 76F. Winds SSE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Ronnie Dean Busick arrives at the Craig County jail in Vinita on Wednesday. SHEILA STOGSDILL/for the Tulsa World

Ronnie Dean Busick arrives at the Craig County jail in Vinita after being transferred from a Kansas jail. Gary Crow/for the Tulsa World

Ronnie Dean Busick arriving at the Craig County Jail. Gary Crow/For the Tulsa World

Ronnie Dean Busick as he arrives at the Craig County jail. Gary Crow/For the Tulsa World

Ronnie Dean Busick arrives at the Craig County jail in Vinita on Wednesday. SHEILA STOGSDILL/for the Tulsa World

Ronnie Dean Busick arrives at the Craig County jail in Vinita after being transferred from a Kansas jail. Gary Crow/for the Tulsa World

Ronnie Dean Busick arriving at the Craig County Jail. Gary Crow/For the Tulsa World

Ronnie Dean Busick as he arrives at the Craig County jail. Gary Crow/For the Tulsa World

VINITA — A man charged in the 1999 deaths of a Welch couple and two teenage girls denied involvement or knowledge on Wednesday but told the Tulsa World that he would “only talk to the families” about the location of the girls’ bodies.

Ronnie Dean Busick, 66, of Wichita, Kansas, was brought from the Harvey County, Kansas, jail to the Craig County jail in Vinita on Wednesday evening.

As Busick arrived handcuffed and shackled at the jail, he said he doesn’t know where Ashley Freeman and Lauria Bible’s bodies are.

Tulsa World journalism makes a difference. Be part of the story. Join us. Start a digital subscription for only 99¢. 





“I will only talk to the families,” Busick said when asked by a reporter where the remains are located as he was being led away.

But then, when Lauria Bible’s uncle, Lonnie Leforce, shouted to Busick, “Tell me where my niece is,” Busick turned around with a surprised look and denied any involvement in the slayings or knowledge of where the girls’ remains are.

Craig County Sheriff Heath Winfrey would not address specific questions about Busick on Wednesday, but he did say all jail inmates with similar charges are held in protective custody away from other inmates.

Related:

Finding closure: Family of slain Welch girl speaks on social media after charges filed

A timeline of the 1999 case of missing Welch girls Ashley Freeman and Lauria Bible

Victim's family seeks investigation into former law enforcement handling of Welch cold case

18 years later, finally answers: How investigators solved the murders of 2 Welch girls

Busick was charged Monday in the deaths of Ashley and Lauria, both 16, and Ashley’s parents, Kathy and Danny Freeman.

He faces four counts of first-degree murder with malice aforethought, four counts of accessory to first-degree murder, two counts of kidnapping, one count of arson and one count of accessory to first-degree arson.

Kathy and Danny Freeman’s remains were found in their burned mobile home on Dec. 30, 1999, but the girls have been missing ever since.

Authorities state in a court affidavit that they think the girls were kidnapped, tied up, raped and held in a mobile home in Picher for a “matter of days” before being strangled.

Several of Lauria’s and the Freemans’ survivors attended a Monday news conference in which prosecutors announced Busick’s arrest and charges in the long-cold case.

“There are several someones out there that can bring the girls home,” Lorene Bible, Lauria’s mother, said then. “It’s time to bring the girls home.”

“Hopefully I will get to look at him (Busick) right in the eye and say to him, ‘Tell me where my child is,’” Bible said Monday.

Bible said she wants the death penalty for Busick.

Busick has several drug-related convictions in Kansas.

He appeared in court in Harvey County on Tuesday and waived his right to an extradition hearing. He has been jailed there since Feb. 21 on a drug probation violation, according to court officials.

Two other suspects in the case — Warren Philip Welch II, 61, and David A. Pennington, 56 — died in the years since the homicides.




                                    
                                        Whenever SHEILA STOGSDILL posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

 Find your neighborhood fire division.

Find your neighborhood police division.

Tulsa regional boundaries

Tulsa Police and Fire Departments


	Police 
	SEARCH: Find details and map the live calls near you and your neighborhood.



	24 Hour Non-Emergency Assistance 
	(918) 596-9222



	Fire 
	Headquarters 
	(918) 596-9444



	Homicides 
	SEARCH: Find news on each case from 1989 to present	



	Meth Lab Busts 
	SEARCH: Map discovered labs from 2008 to present



	Federal prisoners / Oklahoma prisoners



	Search / Population Report / Daily Blotter



	Crime Stoppers: Go to the website or call 918-596-2677.	


Alert Neighbors

Generation TXT

Tulsa Police Department Warrants Check

Oklahoma State Courts Network

On Demand Court Records

918-581-8400 news@tulsaworld.com