AN EX-LAG is suing jail staff for allegedly mocking him over a four-day erection.


        
        
                    GETTY
            

Dustin Lance, 32, says he was aroused for at least 91 hours after popping a pill he got from another inmate.


He suffered “unbearable pain” and permanent damage to his todger, he claims in court papers.


Lance says he asked for medical treatment while continuing to suffer “intense and excruciating pain to his penis.”


        
                    MYDRIM JONES
            

But staff “repeatedly mocked him for his condition over the period of days while denying him medical treatment”.


And this caused Lance to suffer “irreparable harm to his penis”, it is claimed.


The lawsuit alleges staff should have known a long-lasting erection was cause for concern.


            “[it caused] irreparable harm to his penis”
        

“Any person that watches television has almost certainly seen Viagra or Cialis advertisements which tell people to see a doctor for an erection lasting four or more hours,” it says.


“The plaintiff’s erection lasted a minimum of 91 hours.”


Lance was booked into the Pittsburg County jail in McAlester, Oklahoma, on December 15, 2016, on charges of burglary and possession of a controlled dangerous substance, court documents say.

He was transferred to a health centre on the 19th but had already suffered permanent damage, the lawsuit says.


Doctors “were unable to relieve or treat” Lance’s penis and “told the defendants that the Plaintiff needed immediate transfer to a Tulsa hospital to be seen by a urologist specialist”.


But deputies reportedly took him back to jail to organise a recognisance bond and “further delayed the treatment” for him.

He was released later the same day and the charges against him were dismissed two months later in February.


Lance is seeking $5 million dollars (£3.8 million) damages.


“If our inmates need medical care, we give it to them,” Pittsburg County Sheriff Chris Morris said.

AN ENGLAND fan who lost his ticket after travelling to Russia to watch the World Cup has gone missing as the Three Lions face Croatia.

ENGLAND fans have called on Gareth Southgate to take Theresa May’s job as Prime Minister. 

A DESPERATE England fan has splashed £64,000 on a private jet flight to watch the World Cup final – despite the Three Lions still having to reach it.

Copyright ©2018 Express Newspapers. "Daily Star" is a registered trademark. All rights reserved.