If you are a subscriber: Simply log in for unlimited access. 
                            If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now. 
                            Check out your options: tulsaworld.com/subscribe.-->
                            

If you are a nonsubscriber: You have used your free views allowed every 30 days. You must really value what we do for you. Try a digital subscription for only $0.99. Subscribe now.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Journalism worth your time and money. Join us for only 99 cents.

Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 76F. Winds SSE at 5 to 10 mph..

Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 76F. Winds SSE at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:53 pm

The Tulsa County Sheriff’s Office has gone to court to force a former jail medical provider to pay its legal fees associated with an inmate death lawsuit.

A lawsuit filed Tuesday in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Oklahoma seeks an unspecified amount in excess of $75,000 from Correctional Healthcare Companies Inc.

The lawsuit claims Correctional Healthcare violated its contract by refusing to indemnify former sheriff Stanley Glanz in another federal lawsuit the county is fighting that was filed on behalf of former Tulsa County jail inmates.

Tulsa World journalism makes a difference. Be part of the story. Join us. Start a digital subscription for only 99¢. 





Glanz, who is being sued in his official and personal capacity, and Correctional Healthcare were both named in a lawsuit filed in 2013 by representatives for three inmates who died while at the jail and another former inmate who claims she received substandard medical care at the jail.

The inmate lawsuit claims the jail medical provider and Glanz were both aware of deficiencies in the delivery of health care but failed and refused to correct the deficiencies, leading to inmate deaths and injuries.

Tulsa County officials claim Correctional Healthcare Companies has refused demands by the county in 2013 and 2014 that it pay Glanz’s legal fees associated with defending itself in the inmate lawsuit.

The lawsuit filed this week cites a portion of a 2010 health services agreement between the county and Correctional Healthcare Companies that called for CHC to pay legal fees and costs associated with claims “arising out of any act, conduct, misconduct or omission of (Correctional Healthcare Companies), its agents, employees, or independent contractors in connection with the performance or non-performance of its duties…”

The lawsuit claims Correctional Healthcare Companies would only indemnify Glanz if he was represented by the medical provider’s retained counsel. Glanz has been represented in several inmate lawsuits by Clark Brewster and his firm, Brewster &amp; De Angelis PLLC.

The Brewster firm has billed county officials $304,252 in legal fees through October 2017 for services related to the inmate lawsuit filed on behalf of Bridget Revilla and three other former inmates.

County officials claim separate counsel was required for Glanz in the inmate death lawsuit due to a conflict of interest between Glanz and Correctional Healthcare Companies.

The conflict of interest came to light in another inmate civil lawsuit which named both Glanz and Correctional Healthcare Companies.

In that lawsuit, the disclosure of an audit report revealed “certain deficiencies in the services provided by” Correctional Healthcare Companies to the Tulsa County jail.

The so-called Roemer Report was prepared at the direction of Glanz, according to the county’s lawsuit.

“The same conflict that arose from the Roemer Report is also present in the Revilla litigation, as both cases center around alleged deficiencies in CHC’s services,” according to the county’s lawsuit.

Attorneys for the inmates who have sued the Sheriff’s Office and Correctional Healthcare Companies claim Glanz and the contracted medical provider did little, if anything, to address systemic problems identified in the Roemer Report, issued in November 2011.

A spokeswoman for Correctional Healthcare Companies could not be reached for comment.



Curtis is a member of the Projects Team with an emphasis on database analysis. He also covers federal court news, maintains the Tulsa World database page and develops online interactive graphics. Phone: 918-581-8471


                                    
                                        Whenever Staff Writer Curtis Killman posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.