

A man died at a hospital in India after reportedly being pulled into a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machine Saturday.


The man, who local media identified as Rajesh Maruti Maru, met his tragic fate after entering an MRI testing room while holding an oxygen tank. He entered the room after receiving the okay to proceed from the hospital staff member, the Washington Post reported.


However, the employee who instructed Maru to enter was reportedly unaware that the machine was turned on and, upon entering the room, Maru was pulled into the machine and trapped by its magnetic force.


RELATED: Most outrageous mugshots and crimes

  
                  
        
          

                                    


Kevin Gibson, arrested for possession of marijuana.

(Photo via Miami-Dade County Corrections)

Matthew Ezekiel Stager is a a convicted sex offender. 

(Photo:  U.S. Marshals)

Charles Justus, wanted for armed robbery, from Pleasant Hill, California. 

(Photo via Pleasant Hill Police Department)

Stockton Police Department photo shows Jeremy Meeks, 30, arrested on June 18, 2014 in a gang crackdown in a crime-ridden area of Stockton, California. The mugshot of Meeks, a convicted felon, went viral on a police Facebook page this week, making him an instant celebrity with Web users who have called him "handsome" and clicked "like" on his picture more than 64,000 times.

(REUTERS/Stockton Police/Handout via Reuters)

Ryan Elliot Giroux is seen in an undated picture from the Arizona Department of Corrections. Giroux has been identified by police as the gunman opened fire inside a motel room in the Phoenix suburb of Mesa on Wednesday, killing a man and wounding two women before shooting three more people.

(REUTERS/Arizona Department of Corrections/Handout)

The booking mugshot of 92-year-old Helen Staudinger is seen in this handout released March 23, 2011. The central Florida woman fired a semi-automatic pistol four times at her 53-year-old neighbor's house after he refused to kiss her, police said on Tuesday.

(REUTERS/Courtesy of Marion County Sheriffs Office/Handout)

Roger Hooton, charged with burglary of habitation in Dallas. 

(Photo via Dallas Police Department)

Danny West, wanted for 1st degree robbery out of Tulsa County, Oklahoma

(Photo via Tulsa Police Department)

Cody J Plagmann, 37, is seen in an undated booking photo released by the Oregon State Police April 5, 2016. Two men accused of hunting a pair of protected bighorn sheep on private land and beheading them alongside an interstate highway in northern Oregon have been arrested on suspicion of poaching, police say.

(REUTERS/Oregon State Police/Handout)

In this handout from the Utah County Jail, Megan Huntsman is seen in a booking photo April 13, 2014. Huntsman was arrested and booked after the discovery of seven dead babies in cardboard boxes in a garage of a home in Pleasant Grove, Utah. She is charged with six counts of murder, it is reportedly unclear why therer are only six counts, for allegedly killing her own infants between 1996 and 2006.

(Photo by Utah County Jail via Getty Images)

Jesus Rodela of Dallas, wanted for a probation violation. 

(Photo via Dallas Police Department)

In this image provided by the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, Larry Reid, brother of Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, is pictured in a booking photo following his arrest on February 2, 2015 in Las Vegas, Nevada. Reid was arrested by Nevada Highway Patrol and charged with driving under the influence and assaulting a police officer.

(Photo by Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department via Getty Images)

See Gallery

Maru reportedly died within minutes of entering the room. His hand had reportedly been trapped against the machine by the leaking oxygen tank.


“Magnetic force of the machine sucked him in. We are not sure how he went so close. An inquiry is on,” Dr. Ramesh Bharmal, the dean of the BYL Nair Charitable Hospital where Maru died, told the Indian Express.


According to the report, medical staffers claimed the knob on oxygen tank broke when Maru was pulled into the chamber, which caused it to leak.


SEE ALSO: Desperate parents forcing autistic kids to drink bleach


Relatives of Maru say the 32-year-old was visiting his sister’s mother-in-law at the hospital, who had been scheduled to undergo an MRI scan, and medical staff had asked Maru to carry the tank into the room,  NDTV reported.


Maru’s relative, Harish Solanki, blamed hospital staffers for his death. “It’s because of their carelessness that Rajesh died,” he told NDTV.


According to the Washington Post, three hospital employees, including a doctor, have been arrested on suspicion of negligence.


“It is a tragic incident, and we will cooperate with police officials,” Ramesh Bharmal, the dean of Bai Yamunabai Laxman Nair Charitable Hospital, told NDTV.


RELATED: Most famous US crime trials over the past 25 years

  
                  
        
          

                                    


OJ Simpson: Not guilty in the murder of wife Nicole Brown-Simpson and friend Ron Goldman

O.J. Simpson shows the jury a new pair of Aris extra-large gloves, similar to the gloves found at the Bundy and Rockingham crime scene 21 June during his double murder trial in Los Angeles. Deputy Sheriff Roland Jex (L) and Prosector Christopher Darden (R) look on.

(Photo credit AFP/Getty Images)

Casey Anthony: Not guilty in the murder of daughter Caylee Anthony

Casey Anthony (R) reacts to being found not guilty on murder charges at the Orange County Courthouse on July 5, 2011 in Orlando, Florida. At left is her attorney Jose Baez. Casey Anthony had been accused of murdering her two-year-old daughter Caylee in 2008. (Photo by Red Huber-Pool/Getty Images)

Scott Peterson: Sentenced to death for murder of pregnant wife, Laci Peterson

Scott Peterson listens to the prosecutor during his trial on charges in the murder of his wife, Laci Peterson, on January 4, 2004, in Modesto, California.

(Photo by Bart Ah You/Modesto Bee/MCT via Getty Images)

Martha Stewart: Guilty of conspiracy, obstruction of justice and making false statements to a federal investigator

Martha Stewart leaves US Federal Courthouse after being found guilty 05 March, 2004. The Multi-millionaire lifestyle guru was convicted on charges of conspiracy, obstruction of justice and two counts of making false statements to federal investigators. Each charge carries a maximum sentence of five years in jail. Stewart's stockbroker, Peter Bacanovic, was found guilty on the same counts, but cleared of a separate charge of making false documents. The jury of eight women and four men took a little over two days to reach their decision. Judge Miriam Cederbaum set sentencing for June 17.

(Photo credit TIMOTHY A. CLARY/AFP/Getty Images)

Whitey Bulger: Guilty of racketeering leading to 11 murders

Former mob boss and fugitive James "Whitey" Bulger, who was arrested in Santa Monica, California on June 22, 2011 along with his longtime girlfriend Catherine Greig, is seen in a combination of booking mug photos released to Reuters on August 1, 2011. Bulger, currently on trial in Boston for murder and racketeering, has angrily cursed in open court, his own lawyer has described him as a mobster and one potential witness this week turned up dead on the side of a road. As prosecutors prepare to wrap up their case early next week and hand it over to the defense, the biggest question on observers' minds is whether the 83-year-old defendant will break with convention once more and take to the witness stand.

(REUTERS/U.S. Marshals Service/U.S. Department of Justice/Handout)

Dzhokhar Tsarnaev: Sentenced to death for involvement in the Boston Marathon bombing

A courtroom sketch shows Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev (R) during the jury selection process in his trial at the federal courthouse in Boston, Massachusetts January 15, 2015. Tsarnaev, who appeared in court on Thursday wearing a sport jacket and collared shirt, more formally dressed than in last week's appearances, and had trimmed his hair, is also charged with fatally shooting a university police officer three days after the bombing. He has pleaded not guilty.

(REUTERS/Jane Flavell Collins)

Dylann Roof: Found guilty of killing nine black parishioners at Mother Emanuel church in South Carolina.

Dylann Storm Roof appears by closed-circuit television at his bond hearing in Charleston, South Carolina, U.S. June 19, 2015 in a still image from video.

(REUTERS/POOL/File Photo)

Timothy McVeigh: Sentenced to death for involvement in the Oklahoma City bombing

Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh is shown being escorted from the Noble County Courthouse as he is transported to Oklahoma City for arraignment in this April 22, 1995 file photo. One year ago today, on June 11, 2001, McVeigh was executed after being sentenced to death for the bombing of a federal building in Oaklahome City, a crime that took 168 lives and shook a complacent America to the core.

(Photo by Jim Bourg / Reuters)

George Zimmerman: Acquitted of murder in the shooting of Trayvon Martin

George Zimmerman leaves the courtroom a free man after being found not guilty in the 2012 shooting death of Trayvon Martin at the Seminole County Criminal Justice Center in Sanford, Florida, July 13, 2013. Zimmerman was acquitted of all charges on Saturday for the fatal shooting of unarmed black teenager Trayvon Martin in this central Florida town in February of last year.

(REUTERS/Joe Burbank/Pool)

Dr. Jack Kevorkian: Guilty of second-degree homicide for 'mercy killings' 

Dr. Jack Kevorkian is quiet after he was found guilty of second-degree murder and delivery of a controlled substance case in the death of Thomas Youk in a Oakland County Courtroom in Pontiac, March 26. Kevorkian was released on personal bond. 

(Reuters Photographer / Reuters)

Michael Jackson: Acquitted on child molestation charges

Michael Jackson leaves the courthouse after being found 'not-guilty' on all charges against him.

(Photo by Bob Riha Jr/WireImage)

Jeffrey Dahmer: Confessed to and was found guilty of 15 murders

Serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer is escorted into a Milwaukee County Circuit Court by a Milwaukee County Sheriffs Deputy for his second appearance in this July, 1991, file photo. Dahmer was found guility of the murders of 16 young men, and sentenced to life in prison in February of 1992. 

(Photo via Reuters)

Lyle and Erik Menendez: Found guilty of murdering their parents

Erik Menendez (R) and brother Lyle listen to court proceedings during a May 17, 1991 appearance in the case of the shotgun murder of their wealthy parents in August 1989. The California Supreme Court must decide whether to review a lower court decision to allow alleged tape confessions made to a psychiatrist as evidence before a preliminary hearing can take place.

(REUTERS/Lee Celano)

Jodi Arias: Found guilty in murder of boyfriend Travis Alexander

Jodi Arias is seen in photo from the Arizona Department of Corrections taken April 13, 2015. Arias has been moved to Perryville State Prison west of Phoenix to begin serving her sentence of life with no possibility of parole for shooting and stabbing her ex-boyfriend to death in 2008.

(REUTERS/Arizona Department of Corrections/Handout)



John Allen Muhammad: Sentenced to death for involvement in the Beltway sniper attacks

Sniper suspect John Allen Muhammad (L) listens with his attorney's Peter Greenspun (C) and Jonathan Shapiro during Muhammad's murder trial in courtroom 10 at the Virginia Beach Circuit Court October 22, 2003 in Virginia Beach, Virginia. Muhammad has decided not to represent himself in court and to turn his defense back to his attorneys.

(Photo by Vicki Cronis-Pool/Getty Images)

Rod Blagojevich: Found guilty for extortion and attempting to sell a senate seat

Former Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich (L) addresses the media while wife Patti Blagojevich holds back tears at the Dirksen Federal Building December 7, 2011 in Chicago, Illinois. Blagojevich was sentenced to 14 years in prison after he was found guilty of 17 public corruption charges.

(Photo by Frank Polich/Getty Images)

Scooter Libby: Found guilty of perjury, obstruction of justice and making false statements to federal investigators

I. Lewis 'Scooter' Libby , former Chief of Staff to Vice President Dick Cheney, arrives at federal court March 2, 2007 in Washington, DC. Jury deliberations continue in the case against Libby. He is accused of lying under oath during an investigation into CIA employee Valerie Plame Wilson's blown cover.

(Photo by Win McNamee/Getty Images)

Rae Carruth: Found guilty of conspiracy to commit murder and shooting into an occupied vehicle in the death of his pregnant girlfriend Cherica Adams

Former NFL player Rae Carruth looks at a Mecklenburg County Sheriff's deputy just after the verdicts were announced in his first degree murder trial in Charlotte, January 19, 2001. Carruth was found not guilty of first degree murder, but the jury returned guilty verdicts on three related charges in the shooting death of his former girlfriend Cherica Adams.

(Photo via Reuters)

Jeffrey Skilling and Kenneth Lay: Found guilty of conspiracy, insider trading, fraud and making false statements in the Enron scandal

Jeffrey Skilling, former president and CEO of Enron Corp., arrives at the Bob Casey Federal Courthouse in Houston, Texas Monday April 17, 2006. Skilling and Kenneth Lay, former chairman of Enron, are on trial for fraud and conspiracy.

(Photo by F. Carter Smith/Bloomberg via Getty Images)

Los Angeles police officer Laurence Powell (L), one of the four defendants in the Rodney King case, waits for the start of his hearing 15 May 1992 in Los Angeles, CA. Judge Stanley Weisberg ruled in favor of a second trial for Powell on brutality charges.

(Photo credit should read POOL/AFP/Getty Images)

Jerry Sandusky: Found guilty pf child sexual abuse.

Former Penn State assistant football coach Jerry Sandusky leaves the Centre County Courthouse in handcuffs after his conviction in his child sex abuse trial in Bellefonte, Pennsylvania, June 22, 2012. A jury found Sandusky guilty on 45 out of 48 counts in his child sex abuse trial on Friday. He was sentenced to between 30 and 60 years in prison.

(REUTERS/Pat Little)

Ariel Castro: Pled guilty in connection with the abductions and abuse of three women.

Ariel Castro, 53, walks into the courtroom in Cleveland, Ohio July 26, 2013. Accused Cleveland kidnapper Castro agreed to plead guilty and serve life in prison without parole for the abduction and abuse of three women over about a decade. He later committed suicide.

(REUTERS/Aaron Josefczyk)

See Gallery


    More from Aol.com:
                            Reddit user's childhood photo will freak you out 
                            Doomsday Clock moves thirty seconds closer to 'midnight' due to rising nuclear tensions, climate change
                            Photos of the week: 1/19 - 1/26
        

BrainCharm

BrainCharm

Boredom Therapy

Honest To Paws

Honest To Paws

New Ravel

New Ravel

Scribol

© 2018  Oath Inc. All rights reserved.

Get breaking news and big stories on your desktop.

You can always change your mind later.

If you change your mind, here's how to allow notifications:

If you’d like to allow notifications, please go into your browser’s Website or Privacy settings and set the permissions for AOL.com to “Allow.”