Gallery: Memorial Day events held across mid-Michigan


    
        
            By Zahra Ahmad

zahmad@mlive.com

GENESEE COUNTY, MI-- Residents throughout Genesee County joined in or gathered to watch Memorial Day parades in their towns to commemorate the day honoring fallen veterans. 

Here are glimpses from some of the Memorial Day gatherings across the area including Burton, Linden, and Fenton. 

Linden Memorial Day Parade 2018

With American flags and red poppy flowers in hand, hundreds of people marched in downtown Linden to honor those who have served to protect their country.

The parade began at the Linden VFW Price Crane Robinsons Post 4642 and ended at the Veteran Memorial in Fairview Cemetery.

Lined up and ready to march in the Memorial Day Parade were the Linden High School marching band, the Linden Eagles Dance Team and the Linden Boy Scouts troop.

John Bennett, director of the Linden High School marching band, said the group has a long-standing tradition of performing in the parade and started practicing one month ago for the 2018 version.

"We rehearse on Thursdays for three hours once a week," said Bennett, with the 65-student band playing a Salute to Freedom and cadence called Chicago. "I love being able to participate in the community event. It feels great to give back and it's a great opportunity to teach these students the same thing."

While the event has been put on for 70 years, it was the first time the Linden Eagles Dance Team was able to participate in the parade.

Head coach Heather Ryers said the dancers -- ranging from first graders to high school seniors -- are really excited to be a part of the event.

Josilynn Hradowsky, a 13-year-old who has been dancing for 11 years, said she loves being able to perform for people and is excited to be a part of the Memorial Day Parade.

In tune with tradition, the Linden Boy Scouts marched in the parade holding flags and honoring those that have served.

The Boy Scouts have always been a part of the parade for as long as Michael Hermann can remember.

Hermann, who has been the troops leader for three years, said the parade is a great opportunity to reinstall the major lessons boy scouts teaches -- character, citizenship and physical health.

"What better way to present citizenship than participating in a Memorial Day parade and give respect to those who died fighting for our country," Hermann said. "We were there Friday setting up flags out in the cemetery for those that were veterans. It reminds the troops about our community members legacies and what they fought for."

Tyler Hermann, Michael's 14-year-old son, has been in boy scouts for more than three years.

Participating in the Memorial Day Parade for him is important for various reasons, but the most important is showing respect for his father who served in the U.S. Air Force.

"My favorite part of the event is the ending ceremony," Tyler said.

The event ended at the Veteran Memorial in the Fairview Cemetery where hundreds gathered to pay respect to those who have served their country.

Among those in the crowd was Dan Brewer, standing against a tree beneath the shade on a warm morning next to three Jeep Wranglers.

Brewer, 64, who served in the U.S. Navy in 1971 during the Vietnam War, refurbished the vehicles and lends them to the parade each year.

"I was stationed six months south of Egypt on the coast across from Saudi Arabia, managed and oversaw shipping going to north Vietnam," Brewer said. "I was 17 when I joined. My dad had to sign for me at the time."

Brewer's father also served in the U.S. Navy and was a gunner in World War II.

In total, Brewer has restored seven cars, his most recent being a 1942 WWII Dodge Command Car also known as a WC15.

"I started collecting and restoring these vehicles in 1970," Brewer said. "I'm here today to honor those that served and didn't make it back home. I was never shot at, I was a lucky one."

Families and friends walked back towards VFW Price Crane Robinsons Post 4642 once the ceremony at the cemetery ended.

A concert was held in the nearby park and a community picnic was set up where people could enjoy free hot dogs, chips, water, and ice cream.

Fenton Memorial Day Parade

In Fenton, a small parade including the Linden High School marching band made its way through town and ended at Oakwood Cemetery where a memorial service took place honoring fallen veterans.

Richard Carmer, commander of Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 3243 in Fenton, commented that "Memorial Day is not for the living."

"Memorial Day is for us honoring our deceased veterans and the ones that gave the greatest sacrifice - their life - for our country," he added. "It's all about freedom and it's not to forget our fallen soldiers and to keep their memory alive."

Fenton resident Layne Schupbach arrived to the service by foot, walking nearly 10 miles from Great Lakes National Cemetery in Holly Township where her father Elmer is buried.

Families spend time with loved ones at Great Lakes National Cemetery

"It's just a way to honor and the vets," she said, with Elmer having served as a scout and gunny in World War II before he was captured and placed in a concentration camp.

He didn't share too many details with family members about his time in the service, but Layne does remember her father talking about sleeping in a casket in a funeral home while in Europe.

For Layne, Memorial Day is about "remembering and honoring the people that have fought for our freedom and didn't come home" and hoped the trek she's taken the past three years on the special day does her father some justice.

"The best way to honor the dead is by serving the living, so that's what we do," she said.

Burton Memorial Day Parade

Cars galore lined up on Center Road to take part in the Burton Memorial Day Parade. 

The celebrations began Monday morning with a Burton Memorial Day 5K Run/Walk event at Atherton High School and the first-ever Burton Mile race taking place just prior to the parade. 

The parade lined up on Center Road, between Atherton and Bristol roads, and ended at the 67th District Courthouse on Manor Drive near Burton City Hall and the Burton Police Department.

Karissa L. Robson and Robert E. Wilson serves as the parade's grand marshals. 

Festivities in Burton include a Rodeo Drive play on the lawn at Burton City Hall, memorial and candlelight ceremonies at the Veteran's Memorial Park, and capped off with a fireworks display at dusk.

MLive-The Flint Journal reporter Roberto Acosta contributed to this report.

Newspaper | Digital Editions | eNewsletters


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        