Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 67F. WSW winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph..

Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 67F. WSW winds shifting to ESE at 10 to 15 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:56 pm

Valdez

Valdez

A Utah County Sheriff’s Deputy was assaulted by an inmate in the Utah County Jail Tuesday morning.


According to a press release from the Utah County Sheriff’s Office, the deputy was assisting a nurse doing rounds and issuing medication to the inmates. During their interaction with Victor Luis Valdez, 26, of Provo, Valdez “became unruly with the nurse.” The deputy stepped in, trying to calm Valdez, but Valdez assaulted the deputy. Other deputies responded and subdued Valdez. The deputy sustained cuts, bruises, and abrasions during the assault and was taken to a local hospital where he was treated and released.


According to Sgt. Spencer Cannon with the Utah County Sheriff’s Office, the inmate has an extensive criminal history in Utah and has been booked into the Utah County Jail 36 times. Valdez is currently being held on charges out of Orem including retail theft, criminal trespass, and abuse of psychotoxic chemical solvents. Cannon said in a tweet that charges against Valdez for this assault are pending.


Karissa Neely reports on Business and North County events, and can be reached at 801-344-2537 or kneely@heraldextra.com. Follow her on Twitter: @DHKarissaNeely

Valdez

Karissa Neely reports on Business &amp; Community events, and loves telling people’s stories. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Karissa  Neely posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
