Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 67F. Winds WSW at 10 to 20 mph, becoming ESE and decreasing to less than 5 mph..

Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 67F. Winds WSW at 10 to 20 mph, becoming ESE and decreasing to less than 5 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 3:56 pm

Braden Roberts

Braden Roberts

A man was arrested and transported to the Utah County Jail as a result of reportedly sexually abusing a Saratoga Springs teenager.


Braden Roberts, 22, of Paris, Idaho was booked on two counts of object rape, a first degree felony; two counts of forcible sexual abuse; two counts of dealing in material harmful to a minor, a third degree felony; two counts of enticing a minor, a first degree felony; two counts of unlawful sexual activity with a minor, a third degree felony; and two counts of lewdness, a class B misdemeanor.


According to the police report, Roberts was advised of the evidence and allegations and read his Miranda rights. He then told police everything alleged was true, reports state.


Police reports state that Roberts and the teenager engaged in sexual relations multiple times in the past. The teenager told police that many of the interactions were unwanted and were against her consent.


The teenager had evidence of sexual conversations that occurred via electronic communication.


Daily Herald reporter Genelle Pugmire can be contacted at gpugmire@heraldextra.com, (801) 344-2910, Twitter @gpugmire

Braden Roberts

A 32-year veteran of covering news in Utah County, Genelle covers Provo, Orem, Faith/Religion, including the LDS Church and general assignments. 


                                    
                                        Whenever Genelle Pugmire posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

If you see news happening, or if you have an idea for a story, submit it to one of our editors. 
