


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Kami Gilstrap had worked as a nanny for years and was finally expecting her first child with her husband. A stray bullet cut their lives short.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Hundreds of people had been firing guns in the desert when Kami Gilstrap, of the Phoenix area, was struck in the chest.
    Wochit

Kami Gilstrap
(Photo: Facebook)

She had worked as a nanny for years and was expecting her first child with her husband, a senior Air Force airman stationed at Luke Air Force Base.


The bullet struck her chest. She died before she could reach a hospital.


Kevin Grampp said he had watched Kami Gilstrap care for his own child, a 2-year-old girl who loved her nanny.


"She was the happiest soul I've ever met," Grampp told The Arizona Republic about Gilstrap. "She was the most salt-of-the-earth type of woman. So giving. We loved her like a younger sister."


Gilstrap, 24, died Sunday afternoon after being hit by a stray bullet near a recreational shooting area in Buckeye. The open desert public land is popular among target shooters and hundreds of people were out shooting that day, complicating the process of identifying a suspect, according to authorities.


MORE: Buckeye target shooters react to stray-bullet death


Federal officials are considering shutting down the target shooting area.


From her posts on social media, Gilstrap was a country music fan, the nanny of "the most perfect little girl there has ever been" and a proud military wife. Her German Shepard Kaia kept her company while her husband, Blake Gilstrap, 24, was serving overseas.


In a joint statement, the families of Kami and Blake said:


"We are shocked and devastated at the passing of our beloved wife, daughter, and friend. We thank everyone who has reached out in love to share their condolences. They are much appreciated. We have set up a GoFundMe that will benefit the widower as he incurs final expenses and beyond. Please give to that as you are (led) and are able.


"As we seek answers both from God and from the open investigation into the events of this past Sunday, we ask for privacy as we grieve together."


A GoFundMe campaign has raised more than $13,000 on her family's behalf.


Many people shared posts on social media about her friendship, kindness and her "giant smile that always brought so much joy."


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Gilstrap was born in Bethany, Oklahoma, and studied elementary-school education at Southern Nazarene University, a private Christian institution in her hometown, according to her Facebook profile.


She and her husband settled in Glendale more than a year ago, according to her Facebook profile.


On Sunday, Gilstrap was on an outing with family and a group that was target shooting, police said.


Grampp said the Gilstraps would regularly go to that site.


"It’s not fair that what was supposed to be a usual family adventure, like we take every weekend, turned into a horrific tragedy in a split second," Amy Richards wrote in a Facebook post. "You are so loved beautiful."


The Buckeye Police Department is investigating the tragedy and seeking information from the public about what happened. Those with information can call the department's tip line at 623-349-6411 or email bpdtips@buckeyeaz.gov.


The day after her death, Parker Hovis posted on Facebook about the first double date he and his wife, Dee, went on with the Gilstraps.


"You guys showed Dee and I that married life isn’t so boring after all. Blake was such an awesome husband to you and seeing both of your personalities was almost like watching a very funny sitcom," Hovis wrote. "I don’t think I’ve seen and shed as many tears yesterday versus in my whole life. A great friend, bridesmaid, sister, wife, Kami."


In October, the month marking her first year since making the move to Arizona, Gilstrap wrote on Facebook about her new lifestyle in the Grand Canyon State and the personal growth that came with leaving Oklahoma.


"We lived through our first desert summer &amp; I now get cold when it’s below 80 degrees outside. We crossed off so many country artists &amp; MLB teams off our 'must see' list," Gilstrap wrote. "The military life is not easy &amp; it is not for everyone. But we have taken the phrase 'bloom where you are planted' &amp; ran with it. Oklahoma will always have part of my heart, but Blake has all of it &amp; wherever he (&amp; Kaia) is, is home enough for me."


A service is scheduled for Gilstrap at 2 p.m. Tuesday at the Council Road Baptist Church in her hometown.


READ MORE:


BLM: Target shooting near Buckeye may be suspended after death


Allhands: Kami Gilstrap's senseless death should anger all shooters


1 year later: What we know about missing Buckeye boy Jesse Wilson


Buckeye, Gilbert are safest Valley cities


Want more news like this? Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

 
