All four KPBS TV channels (KPBS, KPBS 2, Create and PBS KIDS) will be off air Tuesday and Wednesday, July 10 &amp; 11 from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. for scheduled upgrade work. This will NOT impact Cox, Spectrum or AT&amp;T users. You can watch the live stream of PBS Kids at KPBS.org/kids. We apologize for the inconvenience.


      Wednesday, April 25, 2018
      
    

By Associated Press

A DNA match led to the arrest of a 72-year-old former police officer in one of the most baffling and sadistic crime sprees of the 1970s and '80s — a string of at least 12 slayings and 45 rapes in California by an attacker dubbed the Golden State Killer, police said Wednesday.

Armed with a gun, the masked attacker would break into homes while single women or couples were sleeping. He sometimes tied up the man and piled dishes on his back, then raped the woman while threatening to kill them both if the dishes tumbled. He often took souvenirs, notably coins and jewelry, from his victims, who ranged in age from 13 to 41.

Photo credit: Sacramento County Sheriff's Office via AP

This undated law enforcement photo provided by the Sacramento County, Calif., Sheriff's Office shows Joseph James DeAngelo. 

The match led to Joseph James DeAngelo, who was fired in 1979 from the police department in Auburn, northeast of Sacramento. Despite an outpouring of thousands of tips over the years, his name had not been on authorities' radar before last week, District Attorney Anne Marie Schubert said.

"We knew we were looking for a needle in a haystack, but we also knew that needle was there," Schubert said. "We found the needle in the haystack, and it was right here in Sacramento."

"The answer was always going to be in the DNA," she said.

DeAngelo was arrested on suspicion of committing four killings in Sacramento and Ventura counties, officials said.

He was fired from the Auburn department in 1979 after he was arrested for stealing a can of dog repellant and a hammer from a drug store, according to Auburn Journal articles from the time.

FBI agents were gathering evidence at a Sacramento-area home linked to DeAngelo, the agency said.

As the crimes unfolded across the state, authorities called the attacker by different names. He was dubbed the East Area Rapist after his start in Northern California, the Original Night Stalker after a series of Southern California slayings and the Diamond Knot Killer for using an elaborate binding method on two of his victims.

He was most recently called the Golden State Killer.

Jane Carson-Sandler was sexually assaulted in 1976 in her home in Citrus Heights by a man believed to be the East Area Rapist. She said she received an email Wednesday from a retired detective who worked on the case telling her they have identified the rapist and he's in custody.

"I have just been overjoyed, ecstatic. It's an emotional roller-coaster right now," Carson-Sandler, who now lives near Hilton Head, South Carolina, told The Associated Press in a telephone interview. "I feel like I'm in the middle of a dream and I'm going to wake up and it's not going to be true. It's just so nice to have closure and to know he's in jail."

In 2016, the FBI and California officials renewed their search for the East Area Rapist and announced a $50,000 reward for his arrest and conviction. He has been linked to a total of more than 175 crimes between 1976 and 1986.

Authorities decided to publicize the case in advance of the 40th anniversary of his first known assault in Sacramento County.

DeAngelo, who was also a police officer in Exeter, in Southern California, from 1973 to 1976, was taken into custody without incident as officers surprised him at his Sacramento-area home, Sacramento County Sheriff Scott Jones said.

"This was a truly a convergence of emerging technology and dogged determination by detectives," Jones added.

Neighbor Kevin Tapia, 36, said when he was a teenager, DeAngelo falsely accused him of throwing things over their shared fence, prompting a heated exchange between DeAngelo and Tapia's father. He said DeAngelo could often be heard cursing in frustration in his backyard.

"No one thinks they live next door to a serial killer," Tapia said. "But at the same time I'm just like, he was a weird guy. He kept to himself. When you start to think about it you're like, I could see him doing something like that, but I would never suspect it."

Want more KPBS news?Find us on Twitter and Facebook, or subscribe to our newsletters.
    

To view PDF documents, Download Acrobat Reader.

Listen Now


89.5/97.7 FM

© 2018 KPBS Public Broadcasting

© 2018 KPBS Public Broadcasting