A Muslim woman in California has filed a lawsuit against the Ventura County Sheriff's Department for allegedly violating her First Amendment rights. Jennifer Hyatt claims that deputies forcibly removed her religious headscarf, also known as a hijab, while in custody last year.


“I was spoken to like I was trash and deserved everything that was happening to me while in custody,” Jennifer said at a news conference earlier this week. “My hijab was yanked off my head in front of many men despite my continued requests to wear it, I felt naked and humiliated the entire duration of my custody. I am seeking justice because I do still have the right to be a covered Muslim woman — even in jail.”


The Greater Los Angeles Area chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR-LA), along with Erin Darling Law, announced on Monday the filing of the lawsuit in federal court. CAIR-LA’s lawsuit alleges violations under the First Amendment, Fourteenth Amendment, Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA), and the California Constitution.


"We are living in a time where discrimination against Muslims is being legitimized by a sitting U.S. president," CAIR-LA civil rights attorney Marwa Rifahie tells Teen Vogue. "The law protects a Muslim woman’s right to wear her hijab and is intended to provide an avenue for justice whenever someone is denied that right. It is important to advocate and demand that the laws and constitutional protections in this country apply equally to Muslims, especially when Muslims are being dehumanized — like Ms. Hyatt was by the actions of the Ventura County Sheriff’s Department — and demonized in mainstream media."


According to a CAIR-LA press release, while in custody Jennifer was taken to second holding room. She reiterated to deputies that she was a practicing Muslim woman and that based on her faith she could not be seen by other men without her hijab, according to the release. A deputy then allegedly replied, “Not in here, you’re not.”


"Muslim women have increasingly become targets of hate and discrimination, particularly those who are easily identifiable because of their hijab," Marwa says. "No one should have to live in constant fear of retaliation for practicing their religion."


Two years ago, CAIR-LA filed a federal lawsuit on behalf of a Muslim woman whose hijab was allegedly forcibly removed by a male officer of the Long Beach Police Department. After the suit was filed, the LBPD amended its policy to accommodate religious head coverings for people in custody.


In Jennifer's case, Marwa says that she's advocating for both accountability and reform within the Ventura County Sheriff's Office.


"We want the deputies involved, the county of Ventura, and the Ventura County Sheriff’s Department to be held accountable for their complete disregard of Ms. Hyatt’s civil rights," Marwa explains. "Additionally, we want policy reform and implementation when it comes to dealing with arrestees and their religious rights, and not just in Ventura County."


According to Marwa, CAIR-LA has "documented repeated constitutional violations against the Muslim community by law enforcement" prompting the group to introduce the Religious Freedom in Detention Campaign, which uses Public Records Act requests to investigate Southern Californian detention facilities’ policies regarding religious head coverings and practices in detention. "No Muslim woman should have to take a booking photo or endure the duration of her custody deprived of her hijab or her right to cover herself," she says.


The Ventura County Sheriff’s Office declined to comment on this case, citing the pending litigation. The office did tell Teen Vogue that Jennifer’s hijab “was not forcibly removed.”


Get the Teen Vogue Take. Sign up for the Teen Vogue weekly email.


Want more from Teen Vogue? Check this out:  Syrian-American Teen Dalya Zeno Shares What Wearing a Hijab Means to Her


© 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and  Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement  (updated 5/25/18). Teen Vogue  may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. Your California Privacy Rights.  The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 


CNWN Collection