'There's nothing special about him beyond the notoriety of his particular situation,' says jail chief

A Virginia jail holding Paul Manafort has said there are zero “special privileges” for Donald Trump's former campaign manager, as he awaits trial on a number of charges including money laundering and making false statements.

Mr Manafort had his bail revoked by a judge last week, who cited new charges that Mr Manafort had allegedly tried to influence two government witnesses. Mr Manafort denies all the charges against him.

The Northern Neck Regional Jail in rural Virginia was flooded with phone calls, according to superintendent Ted Hull, after Mr Manafort's name initially appeared on the jail’s website next to a unit titled “VIP-1".

“I've probably gotten a dozen calls — people saying, 'I want to know why he's in VIP!’” Mr Hull told NBC News. ”All that is is a name and number. It's a small, fully functional, self-contained cell unit for high-profile inmates.”

“There's no special privileges for him,” Mr Hull said. "There's nothing special about him beyond the notoriety of his particular situation".

Northern Neck, a 500-bed facility, has previously held a number of high-profile inmates. Michael Vick, an ex-NFL player, served time there after a dog-fighting conviction, with Mr Hull saying that Mr Manafort is currently in the same cell.

The jail is also contracted by the federal government to occasionally hold inmates awaiting trials in U.S. District Courts. 

Mr Manafort is separated from the majority of inmates at Northern Neck, who typically reside in units with at least eight to 16 cells. Prior to his stay in jail, the 69-year-old was under house arrest ahead of the trials in both Virginia and Washington DC. 

The Virginia trial is expected to being in July, and the Washington trial in September. Until then, Mr Manafort will only be granted “no contact” visitation rights with his attorneys, separated by a glass wall, according to the jail’s rules for inmates. He can also rent a tablet device for $15 a month. 

or register with your social account

Already have an account? Log in

You can find our Community Guidelines in full here.

Are you sure you want to submit this vote?

Are you sure you want to mark this comment as inappropriate?

Are you sure you want to delete this comment?