Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

The latest Census Bureau population estimates show most Michigan communities gained population; but Fife Lake Township lost 40% in 2017

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

The State of Michigan is working with Fife Lake Township to find economic development opportunities for the recently closed Pugsley Correctional Facility.
(Photo: MDOC)

Detroit appears to be continuing its decades-long population loss, but at least it's not Fife Lake Township, which in 2017 lost 40% of its population, according to the latest U.S. Census Bureau estimates. Detroit and the tiny township near Traverse City, although very different in total population size, had the largest losses statewide. 


“The community doesn’t really understand the impact yet," said Linda Forwerck, the township supervisor. 


Even with the potential hit to the local economy, it's not all bad news for the township: Most of the people who no longer call the small community home were residents of the local prison. 


Fife Lake Township had the largest population drop last year — 40% from 2,557 in 2016 to 1,530 in 2017 — after the Pugsley Correctional Facility closed in September 2016. The minimum security facility housed more than 1,300 prisoners and had 230 employees, according to Michigan Department of Corrections. Census population estimates include people living in institutional settings like prisons and nursing homes and noninstitutional settings such as college dorms and military barracks. 


Forwerck said the population loss definitely affects the community. The last time Fife Lake Township had a population so small was in 2000 — a year before the minimum security prison opened. The largest impact she said will occur after the 2020 census, which will be used to calculate local revenue-sharing from the state. 


Overall, the latest population data show most Michigan communities gained population between 2016 and 2017. 


"There are more areas of the state that have seen small positive increases than in the past," said Eric Guthrie, state demographer. "That is promising." The same held true for the state's largest cities and towns, which include Ann Arbor, Grand Rapids, Lansing, Sterling Heights and Clinton Township. Besides Detroit, Warren also posted losses last year, according to the estimates.


"We need to work harder; the results are just not good enough," Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan said in an interview. Duggan campaigned on stemming the city's decades-long population decline. 


Things are trending in the right direction. The city saw less than one-half of a percentage point decline — 2,376 residents between 2016 and 2017. The population estimate is the smallest annual loss since the peak of Detroit's population at 1.8 million in 1950. The latest population data from the Census show an estimated 673,104 residents living in the city.


"We know that we have gained 3,000 occupied houses, but we're losing population because families of four and five are moving out and families of one and two are moving in," Duggan said. "At this point, our population growth is going to depend upon convincing parents of school-age children that they want to be living in the city of Detroit."


Duggan points to the Detroit Board of Education's approval on Tuesday of a unified bus system for students in the Detroit Public Schools Community District and charter schools in northwest Detroit as a step in the right direction. "It is going to take programs like that where we support both DPS and the charters to finally get us into positive territory," he said. 


Annual census estimates are based on records, including housing, births, deaths and tax filings.


The latest estimates from the Census Bureau are seven years removed from the actual counts that occur every 10 years in the U.S.


"Population estimates as we move further and further away from the base year (2010) become less reliable," said Xuan Liu, research manager at the Southeast Michigan Council of Governments, which performs its own population studies. Liu said research in Detroit shows household and population gains in the corridor from downtown to the New Center area and neighborhoods near Dearborn and Hamtramck.


On the west side of the state, Grand Rapids and Allendale Township. located in the Grand Rapids metro area, had among the largest gains. Other areas that saw large population increases include Lansing and, in southeast Michigan, Macomb, Canton and Lyon townships. 


The fastest growing community in percentage terms was Keego Harbor in Oakland County. The community grew by 12% to 3,398 residents in 2017, according to the census estimates.  


Additional communities that lost population tend to be located on the east side of Michigan’s Lower Peninsula — particularly in counties that hug the Lake Huron coastline. 


Michigan grew at a rate of 0.3% to 9,962,311 residents during the same time period.


Related: Say hello to more Michiganders: Population rises for the sixth straight year


Contact Kristi Tanner: ktanner@freepress.com or 313-222-8877.
