Councilman Jamal Washington was released Thursday from Lake County Jail after being charged with battery, intimidation and other charges earlier this month.


Washington, 44, previously was on a 15-day hold in the jail for charges stemming from an incident with a relative at his Merrillville home earlier Dec. 5.


Judge Diane Boswell put $5,000 cash bond in place at a hearing Tuesday, and Washington, D-3rd, was released around 9 a.m. Thursday, according to Emiliano Perez, sheriff's department spokesman.


Washington currently faces eight charges in Lake Superior Court: three counts of criminal confinement, two counts of intimidation, and one count each of battery, battery resulting in bodily injury and interference with the reporting of a crime, records show.


Washington reportedly held a sledgehammer and grabbed a relative by the throat earlier this month, preventing her from calling anyone or leaving his home in the 5600 block of Connecticut Street for a couple hours on Dec. 5, an affidavit states.


He turned himself in at the jail Dec. 8, where he was held for Porter County officials to examine whether Washington's new charges violated his probation from a previous case.


In 2015, Washington was charged with domestic battery and two counts of strangulation stemming from an incident at his Merrillville home involving two women.


His case was transferred to Porter County. Washington ultimately pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges of battery and invasion of privacy, and he was sentenced to one year of probation.

Judge Jeffrey Thode said Monday that Washington could be released on his own recognizance as his probation violation hearings continue. Washington is set to appear in Porter County court again Feb. 12.


A special prosecutor, John Meyers, was assigned to Washington's new case, and Washington has also requested a special judge. A judge had not been selected as of Thursday afternoon, according to court records.


Washington's next hearing in Lake County is scheduled for Feb. 6.


Last week, the Lake County Council stripped Washington of his committee posts related to criminal justice and corrections.


Although Republic and Democratic party leaders have called on him to resign, Washington denies the allegations.


rejacobs@post-trib.com


Twitter @ruthyjacobs