Broward County Sheriff Israel, who has been much maligned and criticized in the wake of the Parkland massacre, is facing even more condemnation from his own deputies. 

Here’s what happened 

The Broward Sheriff’s Office Deputies Association will hold a “no confidence” vote against Sheriff Israel to see if enough members of the union want to condemn the sheriff. 

“There is a complete failure at the sheriff’s office and he doesn’t recognize it,” said Association president Jeff Bell. 

“The move follows many instances of suspected malfeasance,” explained a statement from the deputies association, “and the lack of leadership that has crushed morale throughout the agency.”

Low morale 

Bell said that the department was suffering from low morale because of conflicting messages and confusion from the leadership. The association represents 1,325 deputies out of 2,560 certified deputies of the county. 

“Amazing leadership” 

In a scathing interview in February over the actions of the Broward County Sheriff’s department during the Parkland massacre, Sheriff Israel touted his own “amazing leadership.”

“Are you really not taking any responsibility for the multiple red flags that were brought to the attention of the Broward Sheriff’s Office about this shooter before the incident, whether it was people near him, close to him calling the police,” asked CNN’s Jake Tapper. 

“Jake, I can only take responsibility for what I knew about. I exercised my due diligence. I have given amazing leadership to this agency,” Israel responded. 

“Amazing leadership?” asked Tapper. Israel responded, “Yes, Jake.”

Here’s a local news report about the no-confidence vote:



Approved posts to MyVoice will be live on the site within a few hours. MyVoice is for posting intelligent, engaging, entertaining and thought-provoking commentary and stories, so following these guidelines will help get your post prioritized and noticed.

Moderators assign strikes for violations of our comment policy. Strikes will disappear automatically in 24 hours, provided you have no further violations. However, if you earn three strikes within 24 hours, your account will be temporary suspended.

Please email moderation@theblaze.com to let us know you would like it removed.

If you notice something is not working as expected, please email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

You can report offending posts by clicking on the little flag icon below every post. This will automatically inform our moderators. If you spot a troublemaker, you can also email us at moderation@theblaze.com.

Speak your mind. Please be respectful of our rules and community. No spam, abuse, obscenities, off-topic comments, racial or ethnic slurs, threats, hate, comments that incite violence or excessive use of flagging permitted.

Please be respectful of our community and spread some love. Any of the following may result in a permanent ban:

For more information, please see our Terms of Use. Now, go have fun and speak your mind!