Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable..

Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. A stray shower or thunderstorm is possible. Low 71F. Winds light and variable.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 4:15 pm

WAKULLA COUNTY, Fla. (WTXL) - A woman has been arrested after a 2-year-old child in her care tested positive for "chronic" use of methamphetamine. 


On January 12, 2018, detectives at the Wakulla County Sheriff’s Office started a child abuse investigation after it was alleged that Kaitlyn Ecker, 20, had involved a two-year old child in methamphetamine and marijuana use inside her home. 


Multiple witnesses were interviewed who stated that the two-year old child smoked marijuana with Ecker and that people “joked” about the child’s ability to “roll joints” for her.


Multiple witnesses say Ecker kept drugs inside the home, and had heard Ecker allowed the two-year old child to smoke meth with a pipe. They also alleged that Ecker used meth herself. 


On January 19, 2018, detectives executed a search warrant at Ecker’s residence, located on Card Lane in Crawfordville. During the search, they found two glass pipes (the type used to smoke meth), a plastic pill bottle converted into a handmade smoking device with burned residue; two grinders (the type consistent with marijuana usage), one of which had marijuana inside; a digital scale; and a small plastic bag containing marijuana residue inside a basket full of children's toys.


Ecker was placed under arrest for possession of marijuana (less than 20 grams) and possession of drug paraphernalia on that date.


With the assistance of Wakulla County Emergency Medical Service personnel, detectives collected a blood sample and hair sample from Ecker and the two-year old child. The blood and hair samples were forwarded to a lab to determine the drug history of Ecker and the two-year old child. 


On March 15, 2018, detectives say the toxicology results concluded that the two-year old tested positive for both meth and amphetamine and the findings were “chronic” rather than “acute.”  


They say "acute" findings would have indicated "a one-time exposure or within a couple of hours before the sample was collected." “Chronic" indicated that the two-year old was exposed "several times or on one or more occasions." 


During a custodial interrogation, Ecker told detectives she shared her bedroom with the two-year old child. She admitted to smoking marijuana as recently as the night before, but away from the child. 


Ecker denied ownership of the glass pipes located in her bedroom, but admitted to smoking methamphetamine approximately four months before.  She also denied ever smoking or ingesting drugs in the presence of the two-year old and denied any knowledge of the child being exposed to drugs.


On Wednesday, detectives obtained an arrest warrant charging Ecker with child abuse, as well as arrest warrants charging her with lewd and lascivious battery and transmission of harmful material to a minor from an unrelated investigation.


The same day, Ecker was arrested by authority of the arrest warrant and was booked into the Wakulla County Jail.


It is unclear if Ecker is the child's mother. 


We're always interested in hearing about news in our community. Let us know what's going on!


Persons with disabilities who need assistance with issues relating to the content of this station's FCC public inspection file should contact Cristie Cratty at ccratty@wtxl.tv or by calling 850-580-9543. Questions or concerns relating to the accessibility of the FCC's online public file system should be directed to the FCC at 888-835-5322 (TTY), or fccinfo@fcc.gov. 