Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A 2-year-old Wakulla child tested positive for methamphetamine and marijuana, a result of her mother letting the toddler smoke both, investigators say.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Kaitlyn Ecker, 20, is accused of letting her 2-year-old smoke meth and marijuana at her Crawfordville home
(Photo: Wakulla County Jail)

A 2-year-old Wakulla child tested positive for methamphetamine and marijuana, the result of her mother letting the toddler smoke both, investigators say.


Now, 20-year-old Kaitlyn Ecker is facing charges of child abuse. She also was charged with lewd and lascivious battery and transmission of harmful material to a minor in connection with a separate case.


The child tested positive for both drugs at high enough levels to indicate to medical examiners it was not a one-time incident.


The investigation into Ecker started in January when the Wakulla County Sheriff’s Office learned the child may have been involved with using both drugs.


“People ‘joked’ about the child’s ability to roll joints for (Ecker,)” WCSO wrote in its report. Others alleged that Ecker let the child smoke meth out of a pipe.


Deputies searched her Crawfordville home on Jan. 19 and found pipes with marijuana and meth residue, grinders, a scale and a baggie of marijuana in a basket of children’s toys.


She was charged at the time with misdemeanor marijuana possession and possession of paraphernalia.


Investigators also took blood and hair samples to determine the drug use history of Ecker and her child. The results were returned mid-March.


“The toxicology results concluded that the 2-year old tested positive for both methamphetamine and amphetamine and the findings were ‘chronic’ rather than ‘acute,’” WCSO wrote.


Chronic readings indicate the child was exposed to the drug several times or on more than one occasion.


Ecker told investigators she smoked marijuana and meth but denied doing so in the presence of her child. She also denied owning the pipes.
