by Luis Valdes |

Feb 20, 2018 |

40 comments

The Wakulla County Sheriff’s Office arrested an 18 year old after receiving an anonymous tip of a threatening video circulating on Snapcatch. For those that don’t know, Wakulla County is just 20 minutes south of Tallahassee, home of Florida’s Capitol.

The video WCSO investigators saw showed person’s hands opening a case containing a rifle, the rifle being removed from the case and loaded with a magazine all with the caption “Don’t go to school.”


According to WSCO Press Release; on Monday at 4:14 p.m., deputies received an anonymous tip. Detectives and uniformed deputies from the Sheriff’s Criminal Investigations Division identified video as originating from Kane Watson, an 18 year old resident of Crawfordville, FL. Arriving approximately 45 minutes from the time of the original complaint; they made contact with Watson and mirandized him.



Waston admitted to posting the video and voluntarily turned over his cell phone and rifle to investigators. Waston was charged with violating the following Florida Statutes:

F.S. 836.10, Written Threats to Kill or do Bodily Injury, a second degree felony.

F.S.790.163, False Report concerning planting a bomb, an explosive, or a weapon of mass destruction, or concerning the use of firearms in a violent manner, a second degree felony.

He was take into custody and booked at the Wakulla County Jail.

As an area resident, I applaud WCSO and their quick action. They actually handled the tip and information correctly. They tasked resources, investigated the possible threat, and took action. Unlike what the Broward County Sheriff’s Office and the FBI did.

Not far from me.

The way it should be done.

Laws broken…check.

Arrest made …. check.

Kudos

Stopped one here too. 

http://missoulian.com/news/state-and-regional/court-records-darby-senior-said-he-d-shoot-students-in/article_5d48b979-4718-552c-863f-207bb6fa7abe.html#tracking-source=home-top-story

And here’s 20 more just since last week…

https://www.cnn.com/2018/02/17/us/other-school-incidents-since-florida-shooting-trnd/index.html

That’s the real issue, this kind of stuff goes on all the time. Now law enforcement are going to act like they are actually doing something.

Public whipping is in order.
If he says “But I was only joking!”, whip him harder and tell him we won’t stop until he laughs aloud at his own joke.
🤠

False report?  Sounds like he hadn’t had time to do anything yet.

A jury will be happy to convict him for making threats, which is exactly what he was doing.

Making threats, yes.  False report though?

Yep: Making threats if he was serious, False report (false threat) if he was kidding. Damned if you do. . .

I thought so, too.

Prosecutors seem to like throwing as many charges as possible at a defendant. Maybe it helps pressure the defendant to take a plea, or increases the odds of getting a guilty verdict on at least one charge.

You are correct, but the proper way to say it is: ” Throw the sh_t ( charges) against the wall and see what sticks”. This comes about because of too many laws on the books that are in place to attack our freedoms.If they can not get us one way they will try another. In no way am I excusing the acts of the individual, only pointing out the fact of innocent till proven guilty is bypassed by these government acts.Again,you are correct. I am just adding more clarification for others to hopefully realize how the government through their passage of many laws can pile them together in hopes one sticks. Stay safe. DAVE

So if he did not post the video, then what?

…then there would be no case, no tip, no action?

“Binder says:
February 20, 2018 at 20:13
So if he did not post the video, then what?”

Then, no one would hear that tree fall in the woods.

Good, but still Fv&lt;k FL. They grow these things wholesale apparantly, so they can blame the Presisent, guns, and the rest of us. In my day, the twisted turds like this who couldn't or wouldn't go into the military, became sheriff.

Joe R        Which of the three were you where you came from?

I was too busy doin your mom, and she still owes us an abortion.

Joe R So sorry you have to resort to your uneducated attacks on others example: All Florida residences, active and retired military from Florida,and law enforcement ( sheriff ) from Florida. You cross the line when you include my mother who has passed. It is individuals such as you who try to take us away from the issue at hand by bringing up your prejudice. If you do not have anything of substance to bring up about the issue then it is best you just say nothing.Stay safe. DAVE

Sounds like you’re from FL, maybe ex-mil, maybe ex or current LEO, either way, too close to home to not be offended by a comment about FL. HOWEVER, this is a FL problem that is Fing up the rest of America, it’s a Blue (D) state problem in a light-red state, and it is currently putting all bona fide U.S. citizen’s rights at risk,
E R G O:
NOT OUR CIRCUS, NOT OUR MONKEYS. It’s more than fair that the rest of us take it as a blind-side sucker-punch FU from left field, and we don’t have to appreciate the effing situation one effing bit.  I stand by those remarks, and that, in my time, troubled kids who didn’t wind up in jail or dead usually wound up in the military or local LE. You threw it back on me so I used a “your mother” line tit-for-tat. I don’t know how NOT “troubled” I was, but I skated thru unscathed by the Grace of GOD. Still, I refer you back to my original comment here.

Joe R Since you went back to your original comment I will remind you I stand behind what I said 100%. Now for your present comment you are still very much uneducated when you have to resort to the language you use to make your points. That being said your lack of education shows through when you state Florida is messing up rest of America and is currently putting all bona fide US citizens rights at risk. Here is your chance  to shine.State all the FACTS you are using to make your statements and please remember there are 49 other states when you do. Hope you do not try to skate through this.Stay safe. DAVE

FL homegrown problem turned school shooter, survivors/FBIs kids turn Soros judas-goat whores, march on FL Senate, and D.C., to bad mouth the President, and push anti-gun communist crap.

All on whatever news source you pull from.

Like I said, about the rest of us, Not our circus, not our monkeys.

Thankfully they didn’t call the FBI.

Wow, you mean there already are laws out there against mass murder/shootings?(sarc).  And if you enforce these laws and act upon tips, it may really work!

Caller: Hello, FBI. I want to report a possible pee pee dossier on President Trump.
FBI: We’ll be right there with 300 investigators and a checkbook!

Caller: Hello, FBI. I want to report a threatened school shooting.
Caller: Hello?
Caller: Is anyone there?

This has been going on for a few days now and it’s getting worse, one charged with making threats was only 11 years old:

http://time.com/5166662/copy-cat-school-shooting-threats-parkland-florida/

Makes me remember all the kids that got in trouble over their poptart guns. So they will be hauled in just for telling another kid they will kill them even over minor fights.

See?  Just like I said, and have been saying…..

America just needs crazies control, not gun control.

All of you high fiving and patting yourself on the back at this success is fine, but don’t forget that outside of the context of a recent shooting and a clear preemption, most of you people would be against this.  “Pre-crime!  Pre-crime!” they’ll shout.

Hesrightyouknow.jpg

Do you mean Snapchat instead of Snapcatch? Pretty sure that is what the author is going for.

I thought it might be a joke, but Mr. Valdes is probably just old and responsible enough to not know what Snapchat is.

I think he’s in his thirties. I recall him trying to run for the NRA Board of Directors and his photo was not one of an old guy. 

Maybe he just doesn’t do social media. 

LOL

Glad see local lawmen successful, now why was the FBI reported first on the scene at Parkland again?

Comparing a sheriffs office which has 30,000 citizens under its jurisdiction to an agency that has to investigate reports from a population of 323 million people is a little disingenuous.

Not if someone comes to you with a name and a possible firearms threat. How many GD agencies do we have in the US that could possibly investigate? FBI, ATF, TSA and the NPS wont want to be left out (sarcasm on that last one)

You forgot NASA. Have their own SWAT team…

I just don’t see a real crime here without  a motive or other statements we haven’t been told about.
  For all we know this was a symbolic and political statement discouraging attendance of government education camps.
  The perception of any threat (based only on this article) is purely subjective. The fact that the phone and firearm were given voluntarily indicates that there was no legal reason to simply seize them as evidence.

AD:  Agreed, not having seen the video, it sounds more like ‘advice’ instead of ‘threat’ to me also.  It would have been clearer if it was captioned “you’ll never be able to use one of these for self-defense, because you have over 400 Democrats and RINOs writing the laws that prevent abuse, to protect you.”

Not having seen the video, it sounds more like ‘advice’ instead of ‘threat’  It would have been clearer if it was captioned “you’ll never be able to use one of these for self-defense, because you have over 400 Democrats and RINOs writing the laws that prevent abuse, to protect you.”

I have no problems with the cops arresting this guy.  Good job. And they didn’t use a SWAT team!
How about that!!

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *


Comment 


Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 







 Notify me of follow-up comments by email.


 Notify me of new posts by email.





(function() {
var referer="";try{if(referer=document.referrer,"undefined"==typeof referer)throw"undefined"}catch(exception){referer=document.location.href,(""==referer||"undefined"==typeof referer)&&(referer=document.URL)}referer=referer.substr(0,700);
var rcel = document.createElement("script");
rcel.id = 'rc_' + Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
rcel.type = 'text/javascript';
rcel.src = "http://trends.revcontent.com/serve.js.php?w=77360&t="+rcel.id+"&c="+(new Date()).getTime()+"&width="+(window.outerWidth || document.documentElement.clientWidth)+"&referer="+referer;
rcel.async = true;
var rcds = document.getElementById("rcjsload_7ce721"); rcds.appendChild(rcel);
})();


©COPYRIGHT 2018, THETRUTHABOUTGUNS.COM ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.