Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

State and Washoe County officials worry the local affordable housing crises and mental health issues are affecting residents' overall health.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    The rising cost of housing in the last few years is making home ownership a tough proposition for Reno home buyers. We look at what’s fueling the Biggest Little City’s housing crisis and potential options for people looking for a new place to call home
    Jason Hidalgo/RGJ

A house is advertised for rent in Wingfield Springs in Sparks on Jan. 10, 2018. Reno-Sparks real estate posted several records in 2017.
(Photo: Andy Barron/RGJ)Buy Photo

Washoe County’s health ranking dropped five spots in the past year, in part because of the lack of affordable housing, according to a recent statewide health report.


Washoe County ranked in the bottom half out of 16 counties in the state for health outcomes, which looks at premature deaths and poor health—both physically and mentally, according to the 2017 Nevada County Health Rankings and Roadmaps report released by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.


Since 2010, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute have released annual reports that rank the health of each county in each state.


Related: Reno's affordable housing crisis is worse than ever as cheap motels vanish.


Related: Investigation finds agency leaders ignored deplorable living conditions for mentally ill


More: Homeless frostbite victim, covered by Medicaid, never received care


Last year, Washoe County ranked No. 4 in health outcomes. This year, it ranked ninth place.


On Wednesday, Washoe County representatives met to discuss the report’s findings. Among that group was state Sen. Julia Ratti, D-Sparks, who said the local affordable housing crisis and rising mental health issues are two factors that may have contributed to the sudden drop in ranking.


“There’s no question that we keep seeing it over and over and over again that we have two top priorities: one is affordable housing and the other is mental health,” Ratti said. “We continue to not do enough as a community to reach solutions on those issues.”


Ratti said affordable housing, mental health and the overall health of residents are all linked together.


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

“There was good progress made in the last legislative session on mental health issues, but there’s still so much to be done,” she said. “And when it comes to affordable housing, we’re going to need all hands on deck. It’s going to have to take the efforts of government and public-private partnerships. We need the private sector to step up.


“It’s going to take a lot of work, but we really need to solve our affordable housing issue.”


Ratti said state and county officials need to be creative about how they finance building new affordable housing. If residents can afford housing, it would ultimately save dollars on the back end, she said.


“In some cases, we know that we save money by keeping people housed,” Ratti said. “Once they become homeless, they can end up in emergency rooms or in jail, and those are much more expensive interventions.”


The report also ranked each county in the state based on health factors, which includes health behaviors, clinical care, social and economic factors and physical environment.



    Self-help tricks to curb the bad feels.
    Buzz60

Nevada ranked third, according to the report. The findings are based on a self-reporting survey from residents.


“Frankly, I think that’s the one that’s most important to our future,” said Kevin Dick, Washoe County district health officer. “We need to be looking at how we are creating conditions that are going to be leading to good health outcomes for our population in the future.”


Still, Dick said he was disappointed Nevada fell from No. 4 to No. 9 in the ranking for health outcomes. He agreed with Ratti and also referenced low affordable housing and mental health as major factors.


“I think some of the driving factors are people who are self-reporting that they have poorer mental health days during a month than they did previously,” Dick said, adding many also reported poorer physical health days in a month.


“And so, when you look at some of the things that have been happening in Washoe County, housing is one of the things that has been brought up…” he said. “We’re seeing an increase in numbers of homeless people. I think those are our daily life stressors that are impacting almost a quarter of our population...”


Dick also emphasized that the report uses data that’s several years old.



    Eating certain foods can improve brain health and cognitive function. Buzz60's Sean Dowling has more.
    Buzz60

“That’s a problem that we have in public health,” Dick said. “A lot of the times you can’t get the data. It takes a long time to get the data all compiled.”


“I think that most of us are aware that our housing problems are even worse now than they were a few years ago,” he said.


Dick said Washoe County health officials are working on connecting with other local groups that are actively looking at the area’s homeless needs. He said behavior health and substance abuse are also top priorities.


“And then we’re looking at physical activity and nutrition as foundational to good health,” Dick said. “Without that, we’d see an increase in chronic disease in the community.”


Dick said another big concern for him is the increase in drunken driving fatalities, which jumped from 30 percent in 2016 to 37 percent this year.


Washoe County has remained consistently in the top or middle ranking over the years, said John Packham, associate dean and director of health policy at the University of Nevada School of Medicine.


Packham said the report looks at factors outside of clinical care, insurance coverage and the overall health system that can impact the wellbeing of the community.


“One in five adults in the latest survey results show difficulty in obtaining affordable housing,” he said.  


 The report also highlights practices that work to improve health.


“This event tries to represent a call to action to begin addressing those problems…” he said.


At a glance:


For more detailed information on the 2018 Nevada County Health Rankings and Roadmaps report, visit the County Health Rankings website. 
