A Nevada woman suspected of driving under influence (DUI) was arrested after she drove down a highway the wrong way, allegedly danced atop her SUV and attempted to escape the scene on a child’s scooter, according to reports Monday.


At about 5:50 p.m. EST on Saturday, Sparks police received a call reporting a woman driving south in the northbound lanes of a local highway. An officer found 27-year-old Sabra Bewley about 20 yards up a hill off the highway, New York Post reported.


Police said Bewley was acting erratically and dancing on top of her SUV before she tried to escape on a kid’s scooter. While they tried to arrest her, police said she did not cooperate and fought with officers.


Police then detained her and took her to a hospital before she was booked into the Washoe County jail.


Bewley was charged with driving under the influence, resisting arrest, having a trafficking amount of the drug called ecstasy and destruction of property. As of Tuesday, she remained in custody at the Washoe County Sheriff’s Office, according to Time magazine.


A similar incident took place in August this year when a man in Ohio named Dale Bentley was arrested for allegedly driving drunk, and then dancing while police officers performed the sobriety test on him.


Bentley's impromptu performance in response to an officer’s request to walk a straight line was caught entirely on the dash camera of a police cruiser in Gahanna, Ohio, in August and the video went viral on social media.


In the video which was said to be 4 minutes 30 seconds, the 39-year-old man could be seen dancing his way through, flailing his arms, swiveling his hips and laughing with the officers while they tried to perform the sobriety test on him. 


The bizarre incident started sometime before 1 a.m. EST on Aug. 4 when the authorities pulled over Bentley's car on Granville Street after he was spotted driving his at a speed of 40 mph in a 25 mph zone, the station  WBNS-TV reported. 


The driver had initially refused to stop his vehicle, according to the police, however, eventually he agreed to pull over in front of the  Gahanna High School stadium in Nevada.


Police asked him to step out of the car and perform field sobriety tests as he appeared to be inebriated and confused. The breathalyzer tested his blood alcohol content and showed it at 0.24, which is three times more than Ohio's legal limit. Bentley was charged with OVI (Operating a Motor Vehicle impaired), failure to comply with a police officer and also speeding, according to a Huffington Post report.