Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Wayne County Prosecutor Kym Worthy wants to make sure a plea agreement, which included a prohibition against Smith running for office is upheld.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs


    The Detroit Free Press hosted a debate between Detroit City Council District 2 candidates Roy McCalister Jr. and Virgil Smith on Friday, Oct. 20, 2017.
    Detroit Free Press staff

Former state Sen. Virgil Smith, D-Detroit, and his eligibility to run for political office will get a hearing next week before the Michigan Supreme Court.
(Photo: Mandi Wright, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

Former state Sen. Virgil Smith, D-Detroit, and his eligibility to run for political office will get a hearing next week before the Michigan Supreme Court.


The beleaguered politician resigned his seat in the state Senate in 2016 as part of a plea agreement on charges stemming from him shooting at his ex-wife's car in 2015.


The charges — domestic violence, malicious destruction of property and felonious assault — grew out of an incident in which Smith allegedly got into an altercation with his ex-wife, who, according to Detroit police reports, discovered another woman in his bed. He told police he fired a .22-caliber rifle into his ex-wife’s car. He called it the stupidest thing he had done in his life.


But one part of the deal — that he couldn't run for elective office for five years — was thrown out by a judge, who said it was unconstitutional. As a result, Smith decided to run for the Detroit City Council in November, causing Wayne County Prosecutor Kym Worthy to appeal the ruling to try and keep him off the ballot.


More: Ex-state lawmaker Virgil Smith wins appeal over run for Detroit City Council seat


More: Ex-state Sen. Virgil Smith released from jail


The state Court of Appeals denied Worthy's motion and Smith went on to lose the City Council race to Roy McAlister Jr. 


But Worthy, who wanted to invalidate the plea agreement if it didn't include a requirement that Smith resign, decided to take the case to the state Supreme Court to decide the issue of whether it's a violation of the separation of powers for a judge to essentially sign off on an agreement that prohibits a person from running for office.


His case will be one of three the high court hears in the afternoon session that begins at 1 p.m. Jan. 11. The oral arguments will be live streamed at http://courts.mi.gov/courts/michigansupremecourt/oral-arguments/live-streaming/pages/live-streaming.aspx.


Contact Kathleen Gray: 313-223-4430, kgray99@freepress.com or on Twitter @michpoligal
