Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A proposal before the Detroit school board Tuesday called for paying the district $200,000 for 1.34 acres of land

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

The partially constructed Wayne County jail on Gratiot Avenue in Detroit in August 2016.
(Photo: Romain Blanquart, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

The Detroit Board of Education didn't have enough votes Tuesday to approve a land deal that would have paid the district $200,000 for a sliver of land that would have been part of the Wayne County jail project.


Officials from the Detroit Public Schools Community District had proposed selling the 1.34 acres of land to Beaubien Associates, an affiliate of Dan Gilbert's Bedrock Management Services. The land is located at 5300-5330 Russell and 1457 Frederick, one block east of I-75 and two blocks south of I-94.


The board voted 3-3, with one member abstaining, during its monthly meeting at Mumford High School.


Also read: 


Vitti: Detroit schools using weak curriculum


Tax millage gives big boost to Wayne Co. schools


Board member LaMar Lemmons was among the "no" votes.


"The community in that area ... objects to a corrections facility being placed there," Lemmons said.


A couple of other board members, however, said they had not heard any objections to the sale of the property, aside from a Detroit resident who objected to the negotiations during a board meeting last fall.


Also voting no: Misha Stallworth and Georgia Lemmons. The yes votes came from Board President Iris Taylor, Board Vice President Angelique Peterson-Mayberry and Deborah Hunter Harvill. Sonya Mays abstained.


Detroit Superintendent Nikolai Vitti said the district sought bids for the property after having it appraised. It was appraised at $130,000. The only bid that came in was from Beaubien Associates.


The $200,000 sale price "is far above market value," Vitti said in recommending the sale.


The district was approached by Wayne County officials in October, according to information provided to the board.


They "expressed interest in the parcels in connection with the property swap deal between the City of Detroit and Wayne County for development of the Wayne County Justice Center."


The district purchased the property in 1994, intending to use it for additional parking for its warehouse at 1425 E. Warren, according to board materials. But it never developed or used the property and doesn't have plans for it.


The materials noted that Beaubien was formed to bid on the property.


"Beaubien Associates LLC intends to use the property in a manner that is complementary to the proposed Wayne County Justice Center."


The county originally planned to build a new jail on Gratiot, but work was halted in June 2013 because cost overruns were pushing the project $91 million over its $300-million budget. Last year, Gilbert's Rock Ventures proposed building a $520-million criminal justice center elsewhere in the city.


Contact Lori Higgins: 313-222-6651, lhiggins@freepress.com or @LoriAHiggins. Staff writer Katrease Stafford contributed to this report.


 


 
