Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low around 65F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%..

Scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Partly cloudy skies after midnight. Low around 65F. Winds NNE at 5 to 10 mph. Chance of rain 40%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 6:55 pm

Sullivan County Sheriff Wayne Anderson easily won the GOP nomination Tuesday to run for his sixth term in the Aug. 2 general election.


Anderson won with 6,678 votes, or 50.4 percent, according to unofficial totals late Tuesday. Challengers Matt Austin finished with 3,866 votes, or 29.2 percent, and Joe Earles brought in 2,705, or 20.4 percent.


Anderson will face independent Jeff Cassidy in August.


“I am very excited,” Anderson said. “[It’s] kind of like my report card and I think they gave me A’s for what we’ve done — not just me, but the whole department. We’re really trying to serve the people of the county [with] a lot of outreach programs and I think they appreciate that.”


Anderson added that he thinks he’ll beat Cassidy by a landslide.


“I think I’ll beat him, probably worse than this,” he said of the vote totals. “I plan on it anyway.”


The sheriff added that he’s going to step up his campaign efforts and work harder to capture votes.


Anderson said he is running for re-election so he can continue work on community programs and be at the forefront of solving the problem of overcrowding at the county jail. During his campaign, he touted his office’s anti-bullying camp for kids, its Explorer Scouts training program, its annual trunk or treat at Halloween, Toys from Cops, its participation in Meals on Wheels and helping churches with security measures.


Before he was elected sheriff, Anderson worked at the Kingsport Police Department for 24 years.


Austin said he respects the voters’ decision and thanked his supporters.


“I gave the voters an alternative — thinking that we need a new vision and a new direction and as it shows right now, the voters didn’t think it was time for that yet,” he said. “We had a very spirited race. We were very respectful to each other and to the citizens of Sullivan County.”


Austin said it’s too early to think about running for sheriff again in 2022.


lspell@bristolnews.com | 276-645-2511 | Twitter: @BHC_Lurah | Facebook.com/lurah.lowery

» Wayne Anderson 6,678


» Matt Austin 3,866


» Joe Earles 2,705

Sign up for a digital subscription to The Bristol Herald Courier now and get your first month for just $2.95. 



                                    
                                        Whenever Lurah Spell posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
