Sunny. High 97F. Winds SE at 10 to 15 mph..

Mainly clear. Low 77F. Winds SE at 10 to 20 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Monitor Alerts
| MyMonitorNews.com
| Subscribe


Weslaco native Benita Valdez became the newest member of Tropical Texas Behavioral Health’s board of trustees after she was appointed and sworn in last week by county officials. 

HONOLULU--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jul 11, 2018--Kamu Grugier-Hill, linebacker from the reigning Super Bowl championship football team the Philadelphia Eagles, has joined together with professional athletes from Hawai‘i who are with the National Football League (NFL), Major League Baseball (MLB) and…

Submit your event to tcupples@themonitor.com by 5 p.m. Monday to be considered for the following Friday. 

Imagine sitting at your desk at work, eyelids heavy, the 2 o’clock hour approaching. Your mind wanders. Another coffee? Energy drink? Lament that there are still at least three hours left in the work day? 

Fixing schools not needed; better decision-makers are 

Jeffrey Wayne Henry

Jeffrey Wayne Henry

The Schlitterbahn co-owner charged with murder in the decapitation death on a 17-story water slide in Kansas is no longer in Cameron County jail.


Cameron County District Attorney's Office Spokeswoman Victoria Cisneros said Kansas authorities picked up Jeffrey Wayne Henry, 62, at 5:47 a.m. today.

Henry, along with a ride designer named John Schooley, are charged in an indictment unsealed Tuesday with reckless second-degree murder for the decapitation death of 10-year-old Caleb Schwab in 2016. The child was riding a raft with two women on a 17-story water slide called Verruckt, the German word for insane, when it went airborne, the Associated Press reported. The men also face 12 counts of aggravated battery and five counts of endangering a child, jail records showed.


Henry appeared in the 107th state District Court last week where Judge Luis Sorrola said if Kansas authorities had not picked the suspect up by today that he would entertain bond.

The Kansas City Star reports that U.S. Marshals arrested Schooley on Monday at the Dallas Fort Worth International Airport after he arrived in the country on a flight from China.


U.S. Marshals took Henry into custody at his Brownsville home last Monday.

