Please log in, sign up for a new account and purchase a subscription to continue reading.

Thank you for reading 11 free articles on our site. You can come back at the end of your 30-day period for another 11 free articles, or you can purchase a subscription and continue to enjoy valuable local news and information. If you need help, please contact our office at 276-669-2181.




 

Add digital to current active 7 day print subscription 

Get home delivery of the newspaper every day. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition.

Get home delivery of the newspaper Monday - Saturday. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition.  

Get home delivery of the newspaper Friday - Sunday. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition. 

Get home delivery of the Sunday newspaper. Plus receive digital access, which includes unlimited use of HeraldCourier.com on web and mobile web as well as our electronic replica edition. 

Receive unlimited web and mobile web access to HeraldCourier.com and get an electronic replica edition every day. 13 week intro rate will convert to $7.95

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Get home delivery of the newspaper every day.

Get home delivery of the newspaper Monday - Saturday. 

Get home delivery of the newspaper Friday - Sunday.

Get home delivery of the Sunday newspaper.

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Sorry, this zipcode is not in our deliverable area for this subscription service.

Re-enter zip code or sign up for digital access.

Get digital access

Please confirm you are in our delivery area

Partly cloudy early. Thunderstorms developing this afternoon. High near 85F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 80%..

Partly to mostly cloudy skies with scattered thunderstorms during the evening. Low around 65F. Winds light and variable. Chance of rain 60%.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 7:15 am

The Sullivan County Jail and Sheriff's Office in Blountville.

Sullivan County Sheriff Wayne Anderson.

Sullivan County Sheriff Wayne Anderson.

The Sullivan County Jail and Sheriff's Office in Blountville.

BLOUNTVILLE, Tenn. — Sullivan County officials are inching closer to a solution to the overcrowded county jail.

Seven architectural and/or engineering firms submitted proposals to develop a three-phase correctional master plan that would solve overcrowding and fix other major issues at the jail.

The main jail was built in 1986 and has been overcrowded for much of that time. It has a capacity for 381 inmates after a 1999 expansion added 150 beds, but it remains overcrowded with capacity being regularly exceeded by more than 200.

A separate building, called the extension, opened in 2005 to help address overcrowding with the capacity to hold 240 inmates. Anderson previously said every bed was immediately filled, keeping the jail from overcrowding for nearly a year. It usually isn’t overcrowded because it only houses non-violent offenders.

In November, the County Commission approved spending $100,000 on the master plan.

According to the request for qualifications document for architect and engineering firms, the phases are:

» Phase one: a document will be produced that summarizes the functions that will take place in the building(s), where the functions will take place, the amount of space needed and an estimated budget to build, equipment needed, and staffing for the next 20-25 years;

» Phase two: the current jail will be evaluated to determine the feasibility of renovation and/or expansion that will meet the needs identified in the phase one document;

» Phase three: schematic design documents and construction drawings will be prepared for the County Commission to approve and construction of the project will be bid.

“I love the idea of having a master plan,” said Sheriff Wayne Anderson. “I think that’s probably the smartest move we’ve ever made, that I can remember. … I believe in planning all this stuff out.”

Now that proposals to develop the master plan have been received, the Sheriff/Jail Ad Hoc Committee will evaluate them and choose firms to interview. After the firms are interviewed by the appropriate county officials, a recommendation will be given to the committee and a contract will be approved by the County Commission.

County officials submitted a plan of action in 2014 to the Tennessee Corrections Institute to avoid decertification of the jail by forming the Sheriff/Jail Ad Hoc Committee, formally known as the County Corrections Partnership Committee. It was tasked with finding a solution to overcrowding. Sheriff’s Office officials send progress reports to the TCI every month and the jail has to be recertified every year.

The jail failed its state inspection on Jan. 27, 2017, according to the request for qualifications document.

Officials say the jail is bursting at the seams for two reasons — a surge in female offenders and the required housing of pretrial inmates.

When the jail was built, it could only house 28 women. After the 1999 expansion, that rose to 143, which is regularly exceeded.

As of Friday afternoon, there were 571 inmates in the main jail. Of those, 250 were female. At the extension, there were 210 inmates. No women are housed at the extension.

A needs assessment was conducted on both facilities by the University of Tennessee County Technical Assistance Service Jail Management Consultant Jim Hart in 2016. The assessment found the jail is inefficient and operates with insufficient food service, laundry and medical areas; mechanical and electrical systems; plumbing; heating and cooling and with frequently malfunctioning doors and locking systems.

The assessment also found:

» Holding cells are being used as permanent housing for inmates with serious mental health issues;

» Office space is limited and scattered;

» The area where inmates are booked and released is small and congested and has no privacy;

» Insufficient housing for offenders serving time on the weekends;

» Space meant for male inmates is being used for women, splitting up the female population and making it harder for them to be supervised;

» Several security risks at the extension, including no perimeter fencing, no reinforced metal separating inmates, and inward opening doors of housing units, which can allow inmates to barricade themselves inside. The only option for evacuation in case of a fire is to open the door and let the inmates go free.

Steve Wilson, with Spoden &amp; Wilson Consulting Engineers, reviewed plans from the 1999 expansion and found that a third story could be built onto the main jail, but he advised against doing that, according to county Mayor Richard Venable, who is a member of the ad hoc committee. Wilson also found that infrastructure was put in at that time to be used for future expansion, but he wasn’t sure all of it could be used because county officials don’t know yet where the new construction will be.

Wilson reported his findings to the ad hoc committee last fall.

“We’re going to try to utilize as much of the existing jail as possible,” said Wally Boyd, chairman of the committee. “It was found to be sound. It would support a third story. … He [Wilson] said if it were me I would not do it because you’re going to take unnecessary risk and enormous expense.”

Anderson said the number of beds will have to be at least doubled to 1,200. His staff has told him that in addition to more beds for inmates, more meeting rooms and classrooms are needed. Currently, life skills classes are taught in one small room. With more rooms, Anderson said, there would be space for outside professionals to come in and teach.

To address safety issues with the linear design of the jail, Anderson said he would like the jail to be laid out in a pod system, where cells only hold two people compared to 16-20 or more in the linear setup. The cells are enclosed by glass so with guards centrally located at a station they can keep an eye on all of the inmates. There are two floors of cells and a commons area in the middle with tables.

“It’s much more controlled,” said Anderson. “Generally, it takes less to guard that cell than it does the other way and it’s more efficient. It’s safer for the officers, number one, and it’s also safer for the inmates.”

The current linear setup limits lines of sight for officers in the jail, even in walk-through checks and requires more staff to supervise the inmates, according to Hart’s assessment.

The current jail, Anderson said, could be converted into meeting rooms.

Goals for the jail that county officials envision are listed in the request for qualifications document:

» Having the right type and number of beds to support an objective inmate classification program through renovation and/or expansion of the current jail;

» Renovation or expansion of the existing jail that addresses: orientation/newly admitted inmate’s screening and classification housing; special needs housing; the jail lobby; booking and inmate interviews; bed space to support weekend offenders; segregation housing to support the needs of male and female inmates; maximum custody housing and staffing; the food service, laundry and medical areas.

The Sheriff/Jail Ad Hoc Committee’s final recommendation for addressing the problem was submitted to county officials in a letter from Boyd on Dec. 8.

The committee recommends immediately expanding the jail to house 1,000 inmates with the option to expand again to hold 250 more and building new kitchen, laundry, and medical facilities and a new booking area to handle the increase in inmate population.

lspell@bristolnews.com | 276-645-2511 | Twitter: @BHC_Lurah | Facebook.com/lurah.lowery

Sullivan County Sheriff Wayne Anderson.

Request for qualifications document for architect and engineering firms to develop a three-phase master plan for the Sullivan County jail. 

Sign up for a digital subscription to The Bristol Herald Courier now and get your first month for just $2.95. 



                                    
                                        Whenever Lurah Spell posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link.
                                    
                                

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Share your photos and videos with us and the community. 
