Michigan News

Medical student, perform a check-up on a baby at Kalamazoo's Family Health Center through the Western Michigan University Family Medical Residency program Tuesday July 8, 2014. (MLive file photo)

BY JULIE MACK

Although its chances of passage seem slim at this point, the U.S. Senate could vote this week on the Graham-Cassidy-Heller-Johnson bill to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. 

The bill would change the funding structure for traditional Medicaid, end the Medicaid expansion and reduce funds available for subsidizing private insurance.

That could impact more than a quarter of the state's population -- those Michigan residents covered by Medicaid or programs created by the ACA.

In all, the bill would reduce the state's projected federal funding for those programs by about 6 percent between 2020 and 2026, according to two independent analyses released this week.

In state-by-state breakdowns of the Graham-Cassidy bill, the Kaiser Family Foundation estimated the bill would cost Michigan about $7.8 billion in lost funding between 2020 and 2026, while Avalere Health estimates the state would lose $8 billion.

Senate health-care plan would cost Michigan billions, studies say

Below is a look at specific provisions of the Graham-Cassidy bill and how it compares to the Affordable Care Act.

By the end of the year, the first year of the ACA's major expansions in insurance coverage, Michigan experienced a sharp decline in uncompensated care, dropping from $903 million in 2013 to $677 million in 2014. (Graphic: Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation)

ACA: Individuals who experience a lapse in coverage longer than three months pay a penalty of $695 or 2.5% of income above $10,000 in 2017. About 6.5 million Americans -- comprising about 4.4 percent of 2015 tax returns -- paid a penalty in 2015, according to the Internal Revenue Service.

Graham-Cassidy: Repeals the ACA’s individual mandate penalty.

That's good news for people who don't want to purchase insurance. It could be bad news for insurance markets and health-care providers. To keep premiums low, insurers need healthy people in the insurance pool. And since even healthy people can experience unexpected, expensive health-care problems, more uninsured people would likely result in hospitals seeing more patients who can't pay their bills.

ACA: Provides tax credits to subsidize premiums for insurance purchased on the individual private market. Tax credits are available for individuals with a household income below 400% of the poverty line. About 300,000 Michiganders purchased insurance through the federal ACA marketplace in 2017, and 81% qualified for subsidies.

Graham-Cassidy: Would eliminate the tax credits starting in 2020. In its place, states would get block grants to help subsidize insurance for individuals who don't get insurance through their work or through Medicare or Medicaid.  

However, Michigan would not receive enough money to cover the subsidies as they stand now. In addition, that funding would expire in 2026 unless Congress re-authorizes the program.

About 50% of Michigan residents get insurance through the ACA marketplace qualify for both tax credits and cost-sharing reductions; 31% qualify just for tax credits, and 19% do not qualify for subsidies.

ACA: Provides cost-sharing reductions for individuals earning up to 250% of the federal poverty line. The CSRs are subsidies that reduce deductibles and co-pays. About half of Michigan residents who get insurance through the ACA marketplace qualified for cost-sharing reductions in 2017.

Graham-Cassidy: Eliminated, although the block grants could be used to reduce deductibles and co-pays. But once again, Michigan will have less money to provide such subsidies.



ACA: Allowed states to expand Medicaid to any individuals age 19 to 64 with an income below 138% of the poverty line. The Healthy Michigan program provides coverage for about 658,000.

Graham-Cassidy: Would eliminate the Medicaid expansion. States could use their block grants to help cover individuals, although there would be less money and that funding would expire in 2027.

Newspaper | Digital Editions | eNewsletters


            Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18).
        


            © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local.
        


            Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
        


            Your California Privacy Rights
        


            
             Ad Choices
        