

The Best Western Plus Gateway Inn and Suites, located in Aurora, Colo., takes extraordinary pride in serving countless guests visiting world-renowned medical facilities nearby including the University of Colorado Hospital, Anschutz Medical Campus, Fitzsimmons Medical Complex, Medical Center of Aurora, and Denver Children's Hospital. Nearly 40% of their guests are visiting medical centers in the community. Commonly, guests are patients themselves, visiting patients, health professionals, or medical students.

"They're already dealing with appointments, extensive paperwork, and stress – we don't want to add to that," says Kyle Murray, general manager of the well-reviewed hotel.

With Sertifi eAuthorize, the property eliminated troublesome paper authorization forms and saw many other benefits such as:

"Sertifi eAuthorize offers a modern, convenient, and secure way to capture payment authorizations from guests," says John Stojka, cofounder at Sertifi.

"The solution heightens PCI compliance and security, ensures hotel staff is operating at peak efficiency, and builds trust and credibility between guests and property."

Visit Best Western Plus Gateway Inn and Suites online or call them directly at 720.748.4800.

ContactJessica HugheyDirector of MarketingSend Email

Sertifi is the leader in Frictionless Business, with innovative solutions for modernizing the last mile of the sales process. Sertifi offers the fastest and most secure way to close business, from eSignatures to online payment capture. Thousands of companies around the world trust Sertifi to close more deals faster, recognize revenue quickly, enhance security and compliance, and go completely paperless.

The Best Western Plus Gateway Inn and Suites, located in Aurora, Colo., takes extraordinary pride in serving countless guests visiting world-renowned medical facilities nearby including the University of Colorado Hospital, Anschutz Medical Campus, Fitzsimmons Medical Complex, Medical Center of Aurora, and Denver Children's Hospital.

Subscribe to our daily newsletter