Welcome! 

Subscribe to Business Wire:
    Email Alerts
    Get Business Wire via: Homepage
    Mobile
    RSS
    Facebook
    Twitter
    LinkedIn
    

News Feed Item




      BioEnterprise, 
      in partnership with the Global 
      Center for Health Innovation (Global Center), Cuyahoga 
      County, and Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) 
      is pleased to announce the winners of the second annual Medical Capital 
      Innovation Competition, “The Next Generation of Healthcare”:
    



      OPEN DIVISION
    



      1st Place/$50,000: VastBiome, 
      Houston, TX – VastBiome utilizes artificial intelligence to identify 
      how the microbiome impacts diseases. Their proprietary microbiome 
      collection methods and the analytical power of its data-drive technology 
      enables personalized cancer medication.
    



      2nd Place/$25,000: nGageIT, 
      Anaheim, CA – nGageIT’s platform detects and verifies the unique 
      fingerprint of medication you take or inject. Using smart health tools 
      and the world’s first ingestible nanoparticle “bar coding” technology, 
      nGageIT measures medication treatment effectiveness, enriches the 
      patient experience, and helps physicians optimize clinical outcomes.
    



      3rd Place/$15,000: EBT 
      Medical, Toronto, Canada – EBT Medical is developing 
      innovative, easy-to-use, non-invasive neurostimulation therapies and 
      disease state support systems for pelvic floor disorders, starting with 
      overactive bladder. With just 30 minutes of stimulation twice per week, 
      EBT Medical’s system delivers long-lasting pharmaceutical- or invasive 
      therapy-equivalent efficacy without the side-effects, invasiveness, or 
      costs that are typically associated with those therapies.
    



      COLLEGIATE DIVISION
    



      1st Place/$6,000: RADIOME, Case Western 
      Reserve University – Approximately 70,000 women annually will 
      receive some combination of chemotherapy and surgery. By predicting 
      which of these patients will benefit from neoadjuvant chemotherapy and 
      be eligible to receive breast-conserving surgery (rather than an entire 
      breast-removing mastectomy), RADIOME reduces ineffective chemotherapy 
      and surgery.
    



      2nd Place/$3,000: InSpirit, Case Western 
      Reserve University – InSpirit is developing a novel wrist wearable 
      hydration sensor to continuously monitor dehydration in real-time and to 
      improve lives of elderly and reduce nursing homes fines.
    



      3rd Place/$1,000: SurgiSight, Johns Hopkins 
      University– When surgical patients are discharged from the hospital, 
      they receive limited instruction on caring for their incision wounds and 
      monitoring for signs of infection. SurgiSight is designing a mobile 
      application that allows discharged surgical patients to communicate with 
      their healthcare providers for better wound reporting and diagnosis of 
      surgical site infections.
    



      The theme of MCIC2 was “The Next Generation of Healthcare” – how big 
      data, artificial intelligence, enhanced reality and other disruptive 
      technologies will engage patients and clinicians, and take healthcare to 
      new levels. The Competition, open to professional and collegiate teams, 
      attracted applicants from 24 countries and 33 states.
    



      In addition to cash prizes, the winning teams will receive meaningful 
      assistance, including mentoring and access to world-class healthcare 
      systems and collaborators. Open and Collegiate division first place 
      winners also receive an opportunity to demonstrate innovation at the 
      HIMSS19 Conference in February 2019.
    



      Competing teams represented a variety of big data healthcare categories 
      including patient engagement and compliance, clinical trial 
      optimization, EHR (electronic health records) optimization, and decision 
      support. For a complete list of participating teams and their product 
      solutions go to https://bit.ly/2J9f7lO.
    



      Supporting sponsors include: Cleveland 
      Clinic Innovations, Case 
      Western Reserve University, Develoco, 
      Jumpstart, 
      The 
      MetroHealth System, and University 
      Hospitals.
    


      About The Medical Capital
    



      The Medical Capital initiative is a collaboration of Cleveland’s 
      internationally renowned clinical, educational, and research 
      institutions, philanthropies, government, and economic development 
      engines. Convened by BioEnterprise, the initiative promotes the vibrant 
      biomedical and healthcare industry in the 18-county Northeast Ohio 
      region. The Medical Capital includes more than 700 biohealth companies, 
      30 clinical, research and educational institutions, $735 million 
      annually in research funding, and more than $200 million annually in 
      private startup funding. For more information: TheMedicalCapital.com.
    



      About BioEnterprise
    



      BioEnterprise is a business formation, recruitment, and acceleration 
      effort designed to grow the Northeast Ohio healthcare industry. Located 
      in Cleveland, at the Global Center for Health Innovation and in 
      University Circle, BioEnterprise provides management counsel and support 
      services to health IT, medical device, and biopharmaceutical companies. 
      In addition, BioEnterprise convenes and leads strategy for 
      industry-building initiatives such as The Medical Capital, HIT in the 
      CLE, and the Global Center for Health Innovation. BioEnterprise founders 
      are Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland Clinic, and University 
      Hospitals. Additional technology partners include the NASA Glenn 
      Research Center, Cleveland State University and BioOhio. Since 2002, 
      BioEnterprise and its partners have created, recruited and accelerated 
      more than 350 health IT, medical device, and biopharmaceutical 
      companies, and have helped these companies raise more than $2 billion in 
      new funding. To learn more: BioEnterprise.com.
    



      About Cuyahoga County
    



      Cuyahoga 
      County is home to world-renowned healthcare facilities, including 
      Cleveland Clinic, University Hospitals and the MetroHealth System. It is 
      also home to 1.2 million people and is comprised of 59 unique and 
      distinctive communities, with Cleveland as its nucleus. The county is 
      the economic center of Northeast Ohio. With more than 120,000 healthcare 
      professionals, the healthcare field is the largest employer in Cuyahoga 
      County. Additionally, Greater Cleveland has a booming biotechnology and 
      biomedical industry, with more than 700 companies employing 230,000 
      people.
    



      About HIMSS
    



      HIMSS 
      is a global voice, advisor and thought leader of health transformation 
      through health information and technology with a unique breadth and 
      depth of expertise and capabilities to improve the quality, safety, and 
      efficiency of health, healthcare and care outcomes. HIMSS designs and 
      leverages key data assets, predictive models and tools to advise global 
      leaders, stakeholders and influencers of best practices in health 
      information and technology, so they have the right information at the 
      point of decision.
    



      HIMSS drives innovative, forward thinking around best uses of 
      information and technology in support of better connected care, improved 
      population health and low cost of care. HIMSS is a not-for-profit, 
      headquartered in Chicago, Illinois, with additional offices in North 
      America, Europe, United Kingdom and Asia.
    



      About The Global Center for Health Innovation
    



      The Global Center for Health Innovation is a convening platform for 
      multi-partner public, private and philanthropic collaborations on 
      healthcare matters of global interest. Capitalizing on Cleveland’s 
      healthcare assets and resources, it acts as the gateway between Ohio’s 
      healthcare and biomedical communities and the rest of the world. 
      Connected to the Huntington Convention Center of Cleveland, the Global 
      Center was built to attract additional investment and convene biomedical 
      and healthcare activities that lead to ongoing innovation. To learn 
      more: TheGlobalCenter.com.
    



    





View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180424006693/en/


                  Published April 24, 2018                                    
                  Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.
                  
                  Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.
                

Copyright © 2009 Business Wire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Business Wire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Business Wire. Business Wire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.

Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©2018 DXWorldEXPO, LLC.All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC.
Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO is prohibited.