By

Max Margan For Daily Mail Australia






  Published:
  01:39 EDT, 17 October 2017

 | 
  Updated:
  04:17 EDT, 17 October 2017







          14

View  comments

A disgraced primary school teacher  forced her students to write letters and draw pictures for a convicted paedophile behind bars.


The female teacher was sacked from the Catholic school in central New South Wales  after she phoned Wellington jail, near Dubbo, asking for permission to deliver the letters to the prisoner.  


The teacher and the paedophile are thought to have known each other through a local church where they were fellow parishioners before he was jailed, according to 2GB's Ray Hadley. 


In a shocking twist, the teacher took the matter to Fair Work claiming she had been unreasonably dismissed, before reaching a settlement with the Catholic Education Office. 


A disgraced primary school teacher forced her students to write letters and draw pictures for a convicted paedophile behind bars (stock image)

The woman took the matter to the state's Catholic Education Commission, claiming she was unfairly dismissed, according to 2GB's Ray Hadley (pictured)

Some members of the church, including the teacher, continue to support the paedophile despite being convicted over his sick crimes, Hadley understands. 


The NSW Catholic Education Commission confirmed the teacher has been dismissed from the Catholic school sector, though it is unclear if she is now working with children in another capacity. 


'CECNSW is limited in what we can say about this matter as it involves many sensitive issues, the most important being the welfare of students in the care of one of our small, regional schools,' the commission told Daily Mail Australia in a written statement.


'Our paramount concern is always the safety and well-being of our students. As such, the teacher involved in this matter was immediately stood down and an independent investigation was launched. 


The female teacher was immediately sacked from the Catholic school in central New South Wales after she phoned Wellington jail, near Dubbo, asking that the letters be delivered (stock)




The convicted paedophile is believed to be jailed at Wellington Correctional Centre (pictured)

'The school immediately notified all necessary authorities including the NSW Ombudsman.


'Industrially, the matter has been settled to the satisfaction of both parties and the teacher is no longer working in the Catholic school sector.'   


The Office of the Children's Guardian couldn't confirm if the teacher's working with children check would be cancelled. 


'Due to privacy laws, the Office of the Children's Guardian does not publicly discuss individual's Working with Children check,' a spokesman told 2GB.


'Generally speaking, people issued with a Working with Children check clearance are subject to continuous monitoring for a new relevant criminal offence for the five-year life of the clearance.'  




Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group