

By Joel Connelly, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

Bill Clinton engaged and charmed, to the end of his presidency. His motorcade headed the wrong way up 4th Avenue for a spontaneous 2000 drop-in at a Human Rights Campaign dinner. A shout came out of the crowd: "Nice ass." Clinton beamed. He then connected in a speech on ending LGBT discrimination, this from the guy who had signed the Defense of Marriage Act.


Bill Clinton engaged and charmed, to the end of his presidency. His motorcade headed the wrong way up 4th Avenue for a spontaneous 2000 drop-in at a Human Rights Campaign dinner. A shout came out of the crowd:


Its technology economy has propelled the Evergreen State to
A-minus status as a place for fundraising -- central in the political world
created by the U.S. Supreme Court's 2010 Citizens United decision. Hence, both
the Clintons and daughter Chelsea have raised money at private fundraisers. A
succession of surrogates -- from campaign manager Robby Mook to Vice
Presidential nominee Sen. Tim Kaine -- swing through for non-public events.





Its technology economy has propelled the Evergreen State to A-minus status as a place for fundraising -- central in the political world created by the U.S. Supreme Court's 2010 Citizens United decision.


King County Democrats staged an auction in the last few days, with two lucky winners getting tickets to hear former Vice President Joe Biden hawk his latest book at the sold-out American Promise Tour at Benaroya Hall.

Biden is a leading potential candidate for his party's 2020 presidential nomination. He burnishes a story of family values (being "a Biden") and hardscrabble Scranton, Pennsylvania, roots.

As with almost all Democratic Party leaders, however, Biden didn't meet with ordinary Democrats or ordinary voters during his stop on Seattle. Neither will Hillary Clinton when she hawks her book, "What Happened," at the Paramount next week.

Pay-to-play politics has taken over the country.


EMAIL NEWSLETTERS: Get breaking news, Seahawks coverage, Joel Connelly and award-winning photography in your inbox

When this writer was a kid, Democrats bought ad time just before the noon news on Bellingham's KVOS Radio (as it was then). The message: "Vote Democratic, the party for you, not just the few."

The reverse seems true when top Democrats come calling. Hillary and Sen. Tim Kaine came to Seattle only for fundraisers in last year's general election campaign. Ditto with President Obama, whose last public rally in Washington was at Husky Stadium in 2010.

MORE FROM JOEL CONNELLY: Washington state's most contentious politicians

The venues are strictly in Seattle, and rich suburban precincts of Medina and Hunts Point (Biden did do a 2014 appearance at a technical college in Renton). Only Bernie Sanders has ventured out into the rest of the state, including Democratic strongholds (e.g. Southwest Washington) moving from blue to red.

It wasn't always so.

For years, a picture history of Washington could be found in the basement Alice Paul Room (named for famous feminist) of the Richland, Wash., home of civic leader Patricia Cochrane. It showed photos of famous Americans visiting Eastern Washington.

John F. Kennedy was on the wall, both in a 1960 campaign visit to Lewiston-Clarkston, and in his 1963 speech dedicating the Hanford N-reactor. Two-time presidential nominee Adlai Stevenson came to the dry Tri-Cities wearing a raincoat. A boyish Ted Kennedy decorated the wall, from days as Western coordinator of JFK's 1960 campaign.

VIDEO: Sen. John McCain blasts Hillary Clinton book tour

Pointless and misguided. Arizona Senator John McCain used those among a few other choice words to describe Hillary Clinton’s post-election loss book tour of “What Happened.” Veuer's Chandra Lanier has the story.

Pat and Gordon Cochrane were Democrats, but front-and-center was ex-President Gerald Ford.  Pat was able to secure services of the former Republican president at a Richland Chamber of Commerce luncheon for $15,000, including the private jet charter.

The world of the Alice Paul Room is behind us. Just attending some Clinton and Obama events cost more than $15,000. Both Bill and Hillary Clinton have gone over our heads to the Great White North and collected six-figure speaking fees from the Greater Vancouver Board of Trade.

Local Dems were pleased to cop a Biden endorsement for Manka Dhingra's successful State Senate campaign in the 45th District.  The American Promise Tour had, in Melinda Gates, an interviewer without peer.  Democrats who bought their way in were able to post pictures on Facebook.

Still, the disconnect is unsettling. It is bipartisan. As recently as 2000, George W. Bush was campaigning at a Seattle Boys &amp; Girls Club, reading from "The Very Hungry Caterpillar" in Spanish to grade school kids in Yakima, and promising to "put food on the American family" at a Spokane rally.

By 2004, as president, Bush was raising $1 million on a lawn in Medina.

O.K., blame it all on Citizens United, the infamous 2010 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that blew away 103 years of restraints and limits in campaign spending.  Raising money is no longer part of the game. It IS the game. It is also a game played in private.

Something is lacking, however, when a candidate's/official's view of the country is airport to inside of limousine to mansion or posh setting, the choreographed appearance, back to limousine and back to the airport.

Almost 50 years after his death, one Bobby Kennedy biography is just out, another in the oven.  They celebrate a politician who went into harm's way (a black neighborhood of Indianapolis the night of Martin Luther King's assassination), and loved to passionately argue.  An unstated message:  Something is missing today.

"I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear," wrote Walt Whitman. Not if you're running for high office.

Columnist Joel Connelly has written about politics for the P-I since 1973.


Email Joel at joelconnelly@seattlepi.com and follow him on Facebook.