

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

The 27-year-old woman accused of killing her wife in Redmond and 
trying to cover up her tracks is now charged with attacking a former 
roommate with a hammer.

The 27-year-old woman accused of killing her wife in Redmond and trying to cover up her tracks is now charged with attacking a former roommate with a hammer.

Auburn – Population: 78,400 people – Violent crime arrests
per 1,000 residents: 4.2




Auburn – Population: 78,400 people – Violent crime arrests per 1,000 residents: 4.2

The 27-year-old woman accused of killing her wife in Redmond and trying to cover up her tracks is now charged with attacking a former roommate with a hammer.

Aterraka Scotland was already jailed for second-degree murder when prosecutors filed a new second-degree assault charge on Monday.

Police say she fatally strangled Tiffany Scotland and employed the help of a friend to stab her body and make it look like she was robbed, court documents say.

RELATED: Autopsy: Slain Redmond woman died by strangulation

But two years ago, she also allegedly hit a former roommate in Seattle while he was moving out of their North Beacon Hill apartment in South Seattle.

The victim was carrying his belongings on April 25, 2016 from his room in the 2300 block of 14th Avenue South, where he had shared a house with Aterraka Scotland and her wife Tiffany Scotland. He later told police that Aterraka Scotland repeatedly vied for his attention, inviting him to her bedroom for a drink, asking him to help her move something, following him into his room and staring at him from her own room, according to the Seattle Police Department.

At one point, Scotland was holding a pet rabbit and the victim commented on how pretty it was, but rebuffed yet another invitation to come to her room, reports say. He claimed he ignored every one of her attempts to engage him in conversation.

Finally, he was moving items in his bedroom when Scotland entered, wearing gloves and carrying a hammer, according to the police report. He thought she wanted his help hammering something, but as he bent to pick something up, he allegedly heard his dog growl and saw Scotland swing the hammer down on his head, saying, "You f--king Mexican."

RELATED: Police: Arrested wife says 'wrestling' caused slain wife's death

The roommate ran downstairs to a mobile home parked nearby, where he or the mobile home owner called 911.

Medics took the man to Harborview Medical Center, where surgeons stabled the hammer wound on his head shut.

The former roommate reportedly continues to undergo counseling for the trauma resulting from the assault, Detective John Lewitt wrote in his May 8 report.

Scotland allegedly killed her wife in April after learning she had an affair. After employing friends to stab her and move her body within their Redmond bedroom, prosecutors say she took Tiffany Scotland's phone to assume her identity and show that she was still alive.

She also allegedly admitted that she planned to dispose of her wife's body at a later time, Deputy Prosecutor Samuel Lee wrote in a court memo.

Scotland's bail was raised from $1 million to $3 million after the murder charge was filed after authorities learned she solicited relatives to bail her out of jail so she could "start fresh" in a different state.

SeattlePI reporter Lynsi Burton can be reached at 206-448-8381 or lynsiburton@seattlepi.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LynsiBurton_PI. Find more from Lynsi here on her author page.