Sunny. High near 90F. Winds light and variable..

A clear sky. Low 61F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph.

 Updated: July 11, 2018 @ 10:53 am

Seattle Seahawks' Thomas Rawls stretches before an NFL football game against the Arizona Cardinals, Saturday, Dec. 24, 2016, in Seattle. (AP Photo/Ted S. Warren)

Seattle Seahawks' Thomas Rawls stretches before an NFL football game against the Arizona Cardinals, Saturday, Dec. 24, 2016, in Seattle. (AP Photo/Ted S. Warren)

RENTON — As evidenced last Sunday at Green Bay, the Seahawks are more than happy to let the hot hand take over at tailback, which may make the question of who starts somewhat moot.

Eddie Lacy got the start against the Packers but played just seven snaps with five carries for three yards with Chris Carson coming in after Lacy and after having some early success then getting six carries and 39 yards on 26 snaps.

Sunday, the Seahawks hope to have one more tailback — Thomas Rawls — to throw into the equation.

Seattle coach Pete Carroll reiterated during his Wednesday press conference that the Seahawks expect that Rawls will return for Sunday’s home opener against the 49ers after he sat out last week with a high ankle sprain suffered in the exhibition opener Aug. 13.

Rawls practiced fully last week but the team decided to hold him out one more week hoping he would get to 100 percent before returning.

“I think he will (play Sunday),’’ Carroll said. “He’s got to make it through every day of practice. We haven’t practiced yet. We’ll do it one day at a time but he looks to be prepared to go and that’s what we are counting on until we can’t.’’

Carroll also again said not to read much into Lacy’s game saying “we’ve got to make sure and give him space and get him going. He really had a couple of runs but a couple of runs that didn’t get going because of what we did up front. So I think he’s doing fine.’’

All of which means fantasy players may still want to tread warily with Seahawks running backs. The temptation is to think that the Seahawks will ease Rawls in if he makes it back. Conversely, the easing in may well have been done in holding him out last week and the Seahawks may let Rawls go as long as he can if he shows he can handle it and might well give him the start since he was the starter before being injured.

Carson also has shown deserving of more playing time and will have to continue to get carries.

And then there’s the role for C.J. Prosise as a third-down, two-minute back one he did fairly well Sunday particularly in the final series of the first half.

How all of that comes together remains something that even the team may not know yet.

But if Rawls makes it through practice this week then the Seahawks on Sunday may finally have their full complement of running backs, and some interesting decisions to make along the way.

What the Seahawks mostly hope happens, though, is that the return of Rawls also helps revive the running game.

Asked what the team could expect from the return of Rawls, offensive line coach Tom Cable gave an interesting answer: “Violence. I mean really, when you think about his career, what he has done, he is going to come after it. He is going to go after it every time he touches it.”

Here are a few other notes from Carroll’s press conference:

• One player whose health is not an issue is defensive end Cliff Avril. Avril left Sunday’s game briefly with a shoulder injury but Avril said he is fine.

• Carroll said again he would not repeat what the NFL told him about the Jeremy Lane penalty on Sunday other than to say again he agreed with those who said it was a bad call. Lane said he didn’t ask the officials what happened and said it doesn’t matter now because the game is in the past. “I don’t know,’’ Lane said of if the officials thought he threw a punch. “I didn’t ask. I can’t get that game back.’’ Lane said it was frustrating having it happen, especially as early in the game as it did. “You can’t even go back outside so it makes you feel like you committed a murder or something.’’ Lane said he watched the rest of the game on television in the locker room.