

By Lynsi Burton, SeattlePI

Caption


Close

Jonnie Lay, 48, is charged with first-degree rape after a rape kit returned a DNA match for him in a 2007 assault. Police say he kidnapped a woman from downtown Seattle and raped her multiple times as he held her captive for several hours.


Jonnie Lay, 48, is charged with first-degree rape after a rape kit returned a DNA match for him in a 2007 assault. Police say he kidnapped a woman from downtown Seattle and raped her multiple times as he held


Auburn – Population: 78,400 people – Violent crime arrests
per 1,000 residents: 4.2




Auburn – Population: 78,400 people – Violent crime arrests per 1,000 residents: 4.2

When a woman identified as "TR" in police reports was raped in 2007, the rape kit was stashed in what became known as a rape kit "backlog."

In 2015, then-Seattle Police Department Chief Kathleen O'Toole ordered them all tested -- by then more than 1,200 kits hadn't been processed by the Washington State Patrol Crime Lab.

But on Monday, prosecutors filed a rape charge against a man in TR's case, having received a DNA match in March.

RELATED: Seattle PD to test all rape kits in storage

They charged 48-year-old Jonnie Lay, believed to be an Illinois resident, with first-degree rape, saying he snatched TR off a downtown Seattle street and raped her in a car and in some woods.

TR, who was 44 at the time, was walking in the area of Second Avenue and Pike Street March 14 when an older white Cadillac pulled up carrying two men and the passenger, identified as Lay, pulled her into the back seat, according to Seattle police reports.

The driver of the Cadillac dropped Lay and TR off in a wooded area near a homeless camp, where Lay allegedly raped her. He threatened her with a screwdriver and told her she could "give it up willingly" or he would hurt her with the tool, court records indicate.

He also reportedly told her, "Women were nothing but bitches and hoes and that if she was going to be out walking around she should expect this type of treatment."

After the assault, Lay called the Cadillac driver to pick them up. He allegedly raped her again after they boarded the car.

At one point, Lay's ID fell to the floor board, and TR read his name. He threatened to kill her if she reported the rapes to police and claimed he knew where she lived, according to police.

Lay also told TR that he wanted her to work for him as a prostitute, but she replied that he "would have to kill her first," Senior Deputy Prosecutor Emily Petersen wrote in court documents.

RELATED: Fourth foreman charged in Northwest Partitions rape case

The driver finally dropped TR off "after several hours" at the Olympic Sculpture Park. She reported her assaults to police and got tested with a rape kit at Harborview Medical Center.

Seattle police say the crime lab contacted them March 6 with their match to TR's rape kit, indicating the DNA recovered was traced to Lay.

Police contacted TR again and she told her story again, consistent with her 2007 report.

Lay, a registered sex offender, reported last year that he was moving to Illinois.

Rape kits are used to perform a forensic examination of sexual assault victims in an attempt to collect evidence connected to an attacker such as blood, saliva or semen. The exam is conducted by medical staff and preserves the evidence for testing by the State Patrol crime lab.

The lab looks for DNA belonging to an assailant and enters results into an FBI index containing DNA profiles.

Before O'Toole's 2015 order to test all kits, Seattle police decided to send a kit to the state crime lab based on certain criteria. Police might decline to send a kit to the lab because the victim refused to cooperate with investigators, detectives determined no assault occurred or a reported victim recanted his or her allegations.

But the evidence was stored for future reference.

TR's kit was not tested until September of last year and yielded a DNA profile for a man. A match to a specific person did not return for another several months, prosecutors wrote.

The statute of limitations for charging a rape case in Washington is 10 years, but a spokeswoman with the King County Prosecuting Attorney's spokeswoman said that because Lay was not identified as a suspect until this year, the 11-year-old case is still eligible for charging.

SeattlePI reporter Lynsi Burton can be reached at 206-448-8381 or lynsiburton@seattlepi.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LynsiBurton_PI. Find more from Lynsi here on her author page.