Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

A Matawan man already paroled from a prison term  in a New York Giants season ticket sales scam can retract his guilty plea, appellate judges ruled.

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?



    Crime and arrests were down in 2015, the most recent year with available data.
    Alex N. Gecan | Wochit

John N. Gorman
Monmouth County Prosecutor?s Office
(Photo: MONMOUTH COUNTY PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE)

A Matawan man who authorities said scammed more than $100,000 from 16 victims by falsely claiming he could sell them New York Giants season tickets will be allowed to take back his guilty plea, appellate judges ruled Thursday.


John Gorman, 51, was sentenced to the prison term on Feb. 17, 2017, and released on parole on March 22.


He pleaded guilty to theft by deception in Superior Court in Ocean County in 2016 and later tried to retract his plea, but Superior Court Judge Patricia B. Roe wouldn’t let him.


In an opinion issued Thursday, Judges Clarkson S. Fisher, Douglas M. Fasciale and Scott J. Moynihan overturned Roe’s decision. They vacated Gorman’s guilty plea and returned his case to the trial court for prosecution.


The judges said Gorman, in entering the plea, did not provide an adequate basis to establish his guilt in the crime of theft by deception.


“Contrary to the state’s argument that defendant ‘purposely (misled) the victims to believe that he had the Giants tickets,’ defendant stated that he did not have the tickets when he took the victims’ money, and ‘did not know (he) wasn’t getting the tickets until (he) had taken all the money,'" the appellate judges wrote in their opinion.


“He further claimed he intended to return the victims’ money," the opinion stated. “Thus, defendant did not admit he obtained the victims’ money by deception; he did not know at the time he took the money that he would not be able to obtain the tickets. Further, defendant’s admissions did not establish another element of the crime – that the victims relied on the deception when they tendered the money."


More: Dog fighting: Asbury Park man who threw dog in trash sentenced


More: Brookdale student's boyfriend wants to break up for their murder trial


More: Fugitive feline nabbed by sherriff's officers on warrant patrol


A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Roe, in rejecting Gorman’s bid to retract his guilty plea, said he obtained money from 16 victims with a clear understanding he was going to use it to purchase season tickets, and then he refused to return their money after he realized he couldn’t get the tickets. Roe said he instead used the victims’ money for his own purposes.


Roe on sentenced Gorman to five years in state prison and ordered him to pay $116,550 in restitution to the victims.


Authorities alleged Gorman took advantage of the fact that he shared the same name as the director of ticketing of the New York Giants to mislead the victims into believing he was employed by the football club and that his proposed deal was legitimate.


They said he scammed his victims, many of whom he contacted through Craigslist, by showing them documents indicating that he had 28 personal seat licenses, a precursor to purchasing season tickets for the 2010 season, when he only had two of the licenses. Authorities allege the scam went on from Nov. 9, 2008 through July 31, 2010.


Giants Stadium LLC offered the private seat licenses to existing season ticket holders for a fee to coincide with the opening MetLife Stadium in 2010.


Learn about Monmouth County crime statistics by watching the above video. 


Kathleen Hopkins: 732-643-4202; Khopkins@app.com
