Welcome! 

News Feed Item



$6 million for Kids Code Jeunesse to teach students and train teachers in coding and digital skills required for the middle-class jobs of tomorrow 


MONTRÉAL, Jan. 24, 2018 /CNW/ - The federal government is investing in young Canadians to provide them with the digital skills needed for the middle-class jobs of tomorrow. Thanks to a $6-million investment in coding and digital skills training through Kids Code Jeunesse, more young Canadians will be equipped with the in-demand digital literacy and problem-solving skills required by today's employers. 


The funding was announced by the Honourable Mélanie Joly, Minister of Canadian Heritage, and David Lametti, Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development, during a visit to the offices of Kids Code Jeunesse, a Canadian not-for-profit organization dedicated to building digital skills communities and empowering children, teachers and parents to thrive in a technology-driven society. 


The investment is being allocated through CanCode, a $50-million federal program that will give nearly 1 million students from kindergarten to Grade 12 the opportunity to learn coding and other digital skills. CanCode will also provide over 63,000 Canadian teachers with the know-how to incorporate new digital skills and technologies into their classrooms. 


CanCode is one of the many digital skills programs offered by the Government of Canada that seek to bridge the digital divide and help Canadians access digital technology and develop the skills they need to use them. It aligns with the Government's Innovation and Skills Plan, a multi-year strategy to create well-paying jobs and ensure Canadians have the skills to succeed. 


Quotes


"Becoming the most innovative country begins with investing in Canadian talent. Our government is committed to equipping Canadian youth with the digital skills they need for the jobs of the future. By teaching kids to code today, we're positioning Canada for future success across all industries and sectors because these kids will facilitate digital adoption, making all Canadian industries more profitable and globally competitive." – The Honourable Navdeep Bains, Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development


"CanCode is our government's down payment on Canada's future. This program will help ensure more young Canadians, of all backgrounds, have the right skills for the jobs of the future. We are helping prepare young Canadians with the skills and experience they need for a bright future."– The Honourable Mélanie Joly, Minister of Canadian Heritage

"This investment is great news for students in the Montréal area. It gives our youth the opportunity to learn the digital skills they need for future employment and further study in high-demand STEM fields."– David Lametti, Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development 


"As we imagine our future goals and challenges, we have every reason to believe that Canada can be a world leader in nurturing our most precious resources—our curious, bright and creative children."– Kate Arthur, Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Kids Code Jeunesse


Quick facts


Associated links


Follow Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada on Twitter: @ISED_CA


 


SOURCE Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada


Published January 24, 2018 
Copyright © 2018 SYS-CON Media, Inc. — All Rights Reserved.

Syndicated stories and blog feeds, all rights reserved by the author.


Copyright © 2007 PR Newswire. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of PRNewswire content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of PRNewswire. PRNewswire shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.






Terms of Use &amp; Our Privacy Statement - About Newsfeeds / Videofeeds. Copyright ©1994-2018 DXWorldEXPO LLC. All Rights Reserved. All marks are trademarks of DXWorldEXPO LLC. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of DXWorldEXPO LLC is prohibited.





