In conversation with the talent of tomorrow. 

Coat 16 ARLINGTON, shoes ARTIST’S OWN

It’s not often that a musician comes along and gets namechecked by alumni from both The Specials’ and Jools Holland’s band, but rising star Georgia &amp; The Vintage Youth can already boast their backing, and the respective collabs.  

It all started for Georgia Crandon when she came second as a solo artist in music comp TeenStar 2015. Since joining forces with her band, The Vintage Youth (as the moniker suggests), together they create a soulful sound, helped by Crandon’s unique Winehouse-esque vocals, and are receiving unique hype as a young British band offering something different. 

With a residency at Shoreditch’s Lighthouse and new EP “El Reco” dropping today, we couldn’t not grab a quick moment with the alt star. 

All clothing ARTIST’S OWN

Talk us through your early music memories.

I was always a musical kid. I was into theatre when I was younger, always singing around the house. I first picked up a guitar when I was seven, my dad taught me a little. I always said I wanted to be a singer, but never thought I would actually go into it. And then when I was 11 I started playing piano. My friend taught me a few songs and then I kind of taught myself the rest. Again, I didn’t think I wanted to make a career. It’s only a couple of years ago that I decided to give this a go.

So you grew up in a musical household?

My parents always played music around the house. It was always Motown, soul, Elvis… All that old kind of stuff.

So, what kind of music were you into?

When I started secondary school I tried to listen to what everyone was listening to. But it was never my thing. Then I started to listen to old stuff again, I realised that’s what I liked most.

You have quite a distinct singing voice. How did you realise that you could sing?

It’s just a natural thing. I’ve never thought “oh, that’s the style I want to do” or “now I can sing”.
You were runner up in TeenStar2015. How would has changed since then?

I think my confidence has changed the most. When I did that, I didn’t think I stood a chance. I just did it for experience and for a bit of a laugh, really. And I ended up getting through all the rounds and getting second. Coming second out of 9000 made me think I got something worth checking out. That was two years ago; I had never gigged before then so it made me want to start gigging. I’ve never done anything like that really. Especially by myself because I was on my own. Then I formed a band and now I’m more confident on stage. 

Speaking about your band. Where did the name “The Vintage Youth” come from?

Well that’s because I wanted them to have their own identity. I write songs and everything but the band has their own identity. Vintage Youth is a few different meanings. We like old music. But I also work with older people like Dave Swift. We’ve got this common interest which is the music so you don’t feel the age gap.

Tell us about your creative process. Where do you draw your influences from?

Everyday life. Just going out and seeing shit. Situations you get yourself into. Usually, the easiest song to write is when it’s a situation you can’t really talk about or explain: you write it all out. There are situations where you’re coming out of a relationship or you’re feeling a bit down and you don’t want to bore anybody else about it… So you just write songs.

(LEFT) Dress DODO BAR
(RIGHT) Dress ROBERTA EINER

And where does the inspiration for the specific tracks come from?

So, “Ireland” was about a guy from Ireland who moved away. “Sing To You” is about not getting in too seriously with somebody. It’s like when someone says to you “I like being with you but I’m not ready for a relationship” I’m like, “mate I’m not asking you to marry me, calm down”. “Tell Me To Go Home” is when I used to be sent home from school, so that speaks for itself. 

Can you talk us through your collaborators?

This particular EP, the guy who produced it is called Neil Goodie. He was an engineer. I liked him a lot. He asked “Could I give a go at producing?” and I said sure. He hasn’t changed it too much. He has gone with my style and enhanced it. Obviously my band… There was a lot of musicians in one room!

What are they like to work with?

Dave Swift is very calm. He relaxes you, he’s got an aura about him. If you feel a bit stressed he completely relaxes you. I could listen to him talk for days. And then Neville Staple – he was a nutter in his younger days. He is quite mellow and calm. But when he got into the booth to record he becomes a naughty youngster again. So that was nice to watch. They’re both just really cool guys.

How are you feeling about this EP coming out?

I’m just excited. Hopefully people like it! A lot of hard work went into it. I like being able to go out and sing those songs to people. 

You have quite a few performances coming up right? Is there no level of stage fright?

I used to, back when I started. I remember the first few gigs I did I would get really bad nerves. I’d feel sick and everything. But now I’ve become so comfortable with it. There is always a bit of apprehension. Back in the day, I used to get nervous a week in advance. Now, it’s where I feel most at home.

Cool. So any final thoughts?

Yes! I’ve got a new residency, me and the band. We perform at the Lighthouse in Shoreditch, big blue building that’s just re-opened. We’re there every single Thursday. 

“El Reco” is out now; get yours here.

Top and skirt JUST CAVALLI, coat 16 ARLINGTON