Following the Prime Minister’s clarion call on 2nd October 2014 for each individual to devote at least 100 hours to Swachhata through the year, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) in association with Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS) has launched the Swachh Bharat Summer Internship – a novel and first of it’s kind initiative. The internship period commences from tomorrow, May 1, 2018 and ends on July 31, 2018. The programme aims to engage millions of youngsters across the country, to encourage them to contribute to the Swachh Bharat Mission in the spirit of a true janandolan. The Prime Minister in his address, Mann Ki Baat, yesterday called upon the youth to avail the benefits of the Internship and take forward the cleanliness movement.

Students can sign up for the Swachh Bharat Summer Internship by logging on to the portal www.sbsi.mygov.in which has already gone live. Besides students from college and Universities, youth from NYKS can also register for the internship.  Nodal officers at college level will coordinate the implementation of the internship.

Under the internship, all interns who complete at least 100 hours of sanitation related work in villages would be given a Swachh Bharat certificate. Those who complete the internship with additional, specified outputs would also gain 2 curriculum credits specially allowed by UGC. Additionally, top performers would receive awards at the College and University / District (NYKS), State and National Level. 

MHRD has already issued relevant instructions to college and University levels. States have been asked to facilitate the students as they fan out to villages to take up various Swachhata activities including Shramdan and awareness campaigns during the internship. The period for taking up the internship has been kept as a minimum of 100 hours any time from 1st May 2018 to 31st July 2018. The last date for registration is 15th May.

                                        &lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;

AR/SNC/SD