


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe to USA TODAY


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

System still wrongly punishes girls, faces challenge of juveniles who abscond

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

Washington D.C.'s New Beginnings juvenile detention center, is located in Laurel, Md.
(Photo: Jarrad Henderson, USA TODAY)

The ninth in a series of multimedia projects that examine causes for recidivism in the American justice system.


WASHINGTON, D.C. — Marques left home at age 13. 


He was transported from the only city he knew, Washington, D.C., to Savannah, Ga., in handcuffs, he says. 


His crime? 


He got into fights a lot at school, he says. For that (at least in part), he was sent to a residential treatment facility (RTF) called Coastal Harbor more than 500 miles from his home. 


Until recently, transporting kids to another state for treatment was much more common for boys and girls caught in the youth detention system in Washington.


RE-ENTRY PROJECT: Is America failing its prisoners?


POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media


According to a former interim D.C. Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services (DYRS) director, the detention system actually saved money by sending juveniles to RTFs in other states because Medicaid covered the costs.  


In the approximately three years since his return from Georgia, Marques, now 17, says that he has been placed in DYRS custody several more times, and that he doesn't feel like he's getting reformed.


Hear Marques, Tatianna, other DYRS youth and its director in their own words: 


After a recent support-group meeting with other juveniles inside a brick building in Northeast D.C., Marques (because he's under 18, DYRS requested that we not publish his last name) rattled off a list of offenses he has been arrested for: shoplifting, stealing, assault, assault on a police officer and attempted assault with a deadly weapon.


Since D.C. shuttered its old Oak Hill youth detention facility in 2009, and developed a more progressive approach to juvenile justice — one that focuses on keeping kids close to their communities and discards the punitive approach to punishment — it has been lauded as a model for reform.


The system has come a long way. Oak Hill was considered one of the worst juvenile detention facilities in the country. There were reports of sexual assault and physical abuse. One former inmate says she saw a girl beaten, stripped and handcuffed in her cell. 


But DYRS has worked hard to build a new facility, change its philosophy, and reduce its reliance on RTFs, according to Director Clinton Lacey. Yet the system, like so many others across the country, still struggles.


There is a high arrest rate for absconding (when committed juveniles leave unsecured facilities). Reaching kids like Marques — a frequent re-offender — is still a challenge for the juvenile justice system. He is among those youth who keep the recidivism rate for juveniles in D.C. hovering at under 25%.


And girls who are in trouble, whom Lacey refers to as "the most vulnerable," are still mistreated by the justice system. Though it happens less frequently, the director says, young females still get locked in detention simply for trying to escape dangerous situations. 


The road to New Beginnings, D.C.'s current juvenile detention center, is dotted with broken reminders of the city's past. Old buildings with busted out windows and brick facades in varying states of decay cut a path to the facility.


The center stands out in this deeply wooded area of Laurel, Md. The building's pristine windows and glass doors open to a world of color. The walls are covered in murals. The facility is filled with bright furniture and has a spacious auditorium.   


Just up the road was Oak Hill. The inside of the old facility was never much. The cells mirrored the gray interiors of adult prisons.  


But the differences between New Beginnings and Oak Hill go well beyond the buildings. 


Inside New Beginnings, on a crisp day in December, juveniles take the stage for a speech competition. It's an activity that, before 2005 reforms, kids in D.C. detention likely wouldn't have experienced. 


Juveniles got little to no education at Oak Hill. According to a documentary by the DC Lawyers for Youth, students often left the facility worse than when they arrived. 


A class-action lawsuit that was filed on behalf of juveniles in 1986 forced the system to change.  


By the time DYRS Director Lacey arrived in 2015, the city had committed to improving the way it dealt with juveniles. A consent decree forced strict oversight of the new facility; the Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services had been created as a Cabinet-level agency; and the Maya Angelou Academy became the academic arm of the detention center. At least three students have been accepted to four-year colleges after leaving detention.


Much of what D.C. has done reflects what Missouri did to successfully change its system years earlier.


That state reduced the number of kids held in detention facilities, choosing instead to allow more juveniles to remain in their communities as they served time. It also created facilities for youth that were smaller (holding between 10 and 30 kids) and placed them throughout the state. Facilities looked less like jails and more like dorms. 


Lacey described his philosophy of juvenile justice as one centered around love. 


If detention, he says, "is not connected to real investment ... with the communities ... and families that the young people are returning to, then it's a failure. ... We can't do it alone." He calls those areas million-dollar blocks — neighborhoods where millions of dollars are spent sending people to jail instead of investing in the community.


New Beginnings has 60 beds, and those aren't full. There are 27 boys housed at the facility and three girls.


About 65% of the juveniles committed to DYRS serve out their detention in the community — group homes, foster care or their own homes. 


That's a far cry from the hundreds of kids who were regularly locked up at Oak Hill. 


But there are still kids on lockdown most agree shouldn't be there. Girls who run away from home, for example, are especially at risk. 


During our interview, Lacey admitted that girls have been detained at New Beginnings for status offenses such as running away, truancy and breaking curfew. But he wouldn't divulge whether any of the girls currently jailed in New Beginnings were there for such infractions. 


When we toured the facility, we found one girl who said she was.


She said that her brother attacked her and she ran away. She was picked up after that and locked up, she says. 


D.C. isn't alone in the practice. 


In 2015, more than 2,300 juveniles were locked up for status offenses nationwide, and about 20% of those kids had simply run away from home. 


Lacey agrees that locking up runaways is wrong, but he says it's sometimes the best of the system's bad options. Giving girls more choices, he says, is among his priorities.


ACE, or Alternatives to the Court Experience, a diversion program run by the D.C. Department of Human Services, does that for some girls, but not all. 


Inside New Beginnings, just after the speech competition, Tatianna, 16, who has been an inmate for about 11 months, talks about her plan to get out. 


She didn't specify what she was locked up for, but mentioned that before she got to New Beginnings she had smoked pot and snuck out after curfew. 


She also stated that the program, which rewards juveniles for good behavior, has given her direction and helped her focus more on academics. She, like all the juveniles, spends most of her day in school. She wants to go to college in Atlanta and is interested in art. 


As much as D.C.'s system isn't working for Marques, it appears to be working well for Tatianna. She is also a repeat offender, but she's hopeful this will be her last time in detention. She says she has adjusted her attitude and speaks of wanting to make her mother proud. 


Tatianna is from Southeast, D.C., an area that is full of those million dollar blocks Lacey mentioned. The most crime-filled wards in the city are the ones that the majority of kids who end up in DYRS are from. 


Sending kids back to the community to serve out their time in group homes or foster care sometimes comes at a cost — kids leaving the unsecured facilities.  


Tatianna (last name withheld),16, left, shares a hug with Brenda Padavil,
communications director, at the New Beginnings juvenile detention facility. (Photo: Jarrad Henderson, USA TODAY)

Some of the juveniles who end up in DYRS custody have been homeless and are used to determining for themselves where to stay at night. They may want to hang out with their friends instead of returning to an assigned group home. In other cases, kids may be in danger in the group home or in their foster care placement. 


Group homes are managed not by DYRS but by contractors. And kids who aren't happy there often leave. And they're arrested for it. 


In 2013, the city's inspector general released a report that analyzed, in part, the effectiveness of placing DYRS juveniles in the community. It found that DYRS failed to "monitor youths adequately" and to "provide clear standards to ... contracted facilities about reporting abscondences."  


The report included 17 recommendations, such as better analysis of data and better use of GPS devices. But arrests for the crime have actually gone up since then. 


In the first six months of this year, absconding was the second-highest offense for which juveniles were arrested, according to Metropolitan Police Department records, tied with robbery and pushing toward 200. 


During the same time period in 2013, the year the report was issued, 145 arrests were made for the crime, a rate that was 15% lower.


Marc Schindler, who served as interim director of DYRS in 2010, says absconding was even worse under the old system. 


There were group homes "that had bad reputations," he says. "Kids were staying in group homes that were not good environments." 


But on a weeknight in a brick building in Northeast D.C., Marques and other juveniles who are serving out their detention in the community are, at least for the moment, showing no signs of discontent. 


After the group discussion, they play a game called mingle-mingle. It's like musical chairs, but instead of sitting, they walk in a circle and then form groups based on a number that one of them randomly calls out.  


For a moment, it's easy to forget that these are kids who have been arrested; some have committed violent crimes. They laugh at each other and get excited about the play break. 


Marques, smiling and running with his friends, is one of them. 


A poem Tatianna recited for us a few days earlier came to mind. Near the beginning, she forcefully belted out this line: "If we put our minds to it, we can overcome to do well." 


But the system must keep changing. 


Eileen Rivers is the Web content editor for USA TODAY's Editorial Page and editor of Policing the USA's Re-entry Project. Follow her @msdc14. 


Visit Policing the USA or the Re-entry Project for more podcasts, videos and interviews with male, female and juvenile inmates across America in coming installments of this series. 
