Our website uses cookies to improve its performance and enhance your user experience. Through cookies, certain personal data is collected and may be stored temporarily. You can change your cookie settings through your browser. More info: Privacy Policy

MOSCOW (Sputnik) - The second group of refugees, comprising people mainly from Afghanistan and Pakistan, has left Australia’s detention camps in Papua New Guinea’s (PNG) Manus Island for the United States under a resettlement deal between Washington and Canberra, SBS broadcaster reported Tuesday, citing refugees and advocates.

A group of 40 people left the island on one flight but will be split up in Manila, since some refugees will fly to New York and the others to Los Angeles, Ian Rintoul, an activist and refugee advocate, told the SBS broadcaster. According to other media reports, another 18 refugees will leave the island later in the day.

The refugees are expected to be resettled in various US states, including North Carolina, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Georgia, according to the SBS broadcaster.

All migrants arriving to Australia without a visa are subject to mandatory detention. The country used to use offshore processing, sending refugees to Nauru, a small island country in Micronesia, or Manus Island. In April 2016, the PNG Supreme Court ruled the detention of migrants applying for asylum in Australia illegal, saying that the detention in the Manus Island camp violated the constitutional right to personal liberty.

READ MORE: 'Peaceful' Manus Island Center Cleared of Refugees in New Guinea

In November 2016, the administration of then US President Barack Obama initiated a resettlement program, as part of which the United States would accept up to 1,250 refugees residing in Australia, most of whom were from Iran, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka. In exchange, Australia agreed to accept refugees from the "northern triangle" states of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.

Incumbent US President Donald Trump later slammed his predecessor's deal, calling it "dumb." In September, 54 migrants were resettled under the deal.

The fact of registration and authorization of users on Sputnik websites via users’ account or accounts on social networks indicates acceptance of these rules.

Users are obliged abide by national and international laws. Users are obliged to speak respectfully to the other participants in the discussion, readers and individuals referenced in the posts.

The websites’ administration has the right to delete comments made in languages ​​other than the language of the majority of the websites’ content.

In all language versions of the sputniknews.com websites any comments posted can be edited.

A user comment will be deleted if it:

The administration has the right to block a user’s access to the page or delete a user’s account without notice if the user is in violation of these rules or if behavior indicating said violation is detected.

Users can initiate the recovery of their account / unlock access by contacting the moderators at moderator@sputniknews.com

The letter must contain:

If the moderators deem it possible to restore the account / unlock access, it will be done.

In the case of repeated violations of the rules above resulting in a second block of a user’s account, access cannot be restored.

To contact the team of moderators, write to moderator@sputniknews.com

Get push notifications from Sputnik International