
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

02/07/2018 07:20 AM EST

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj) 

I hope I never hear a Kars4Kids commercial again. And now that Gov. Murphy has chosen to ditch NJ 101.5 for the monthly “Ask the Governor” program, there’s a good chance I won’t.


Story Continued Below

Instead, Murphy has decided to alternate monthly between News 12 and public radio stations. News 12 is cable and not available on all systems, like Fios. And NJTV, which put together a big partnership with NJ.com and NJ Spotlight, is miffed that the governor didn’t select it. (It’s free and available in every part of the state, after all.)

But News 12 recently lifted its web paywall, and the program will be streamed online every month for those who don’t get it. 

Murphy’s dismissal of NJ 101.5 is not surprising. Although it’s got some good and straight-ahead reporters, its hosts are on the right. Kim Guadagno probably should have filed millions in in-kind contributions with ELEC for the amount of promotion morning drive time host Bill Spadea gave her. The station doesn’t even come close to covering the whole state. And while former host Eric Scott was not overtly partisan, he rarely asked Christie a pointed follow-up.

Read more about the move here. Also, be sure to check out this link.

WHERE’S MURPHY? In Atlantic City to speak to two gatherings: The FMBA Conference at 11 am and the NJ Agricultural Society lunch at 12:30 pm

STATE DELAY — State offices open on a two-hour delay today because of the weather

WHERE’S CHRISTIE? Apparently in the Bahamas. Or was two days ago, when he was spotted watching the Kelly and Ryan show 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Operating Engineers’ Erin Rice

QUOTE OF THE DAY: "The last two years of dysfunction between the two houses wasn't necessary. And obviously it takes two to tango, so I have some blame my hands as well." — Senate President Stephen Sweeney

WHAT TRENTON MADE

SO NO ONE TOLD YOU POLITICS WAS GONNA BE THIS WAY — “After Menendez, Christie scandals, ban large gifts from 'friends',” by The Star-Ledger’s Tom Moran: “The Justice Department's decision to drop charges against U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez puts New Jersey voters in a bind this November. To oppose Donald Trump, they will have to accept the senator's fondness for luxury gifts and his close friendship with the felon who supplied them. What a mess. Here's a suggestion: How about we change the rules so that members of Congress can't accept personal gifts worth more than, say, $200? And while we're at it, how about doing the same with New Jersey governors? Remember that weekend Chris Christie and his clan ran up a weekend hotel bill of $30,000, paid for by the King of Jordan? Christie got away with that one by saying the king was his personal friend. He then forgot the king's name -- and that's not a joke. Under a $200 rule, a senator or governor would be free to accept a nice bottle of wine as a birthday gift from a friend. Perhaps the rules could be a bit more generous for children and spouses.” Read the report

CHRISTIE PARDON — “Christie released killer, and Point Pleasant Beach victim's family left in the dark,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Kathleen Hopkins: “Frank McGowan’s son got the troubling news while at his father’s 65th birthday party on Jan. 14. It came in the form of a text message from a cousin who found out about it on social media … Now, as his belated birthday party was winding down, Frank McGowan had to learn from his son that Lisa Pyatt, the woman convicted of murdering Kevin Patrick McGowan, was out of prison. Former Gov. Chris Christie, in one of his last acts before he left office, commuted her sentence to time served, almost six years before Pyatt’s earliest possible parole date. About 9 p.m. on Jan. 12, news media received emails from Christie’s office containing the clemency orders the outgoing governor had signed on that date, four days before he left office. Pyatt, whose clemency order was in that batch, was released from the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women in Clinton the next day. About 9 p.m. on Jan. 13, Christie called Sen. Gerald Cardinale, a Bergen County Republican who advocated for Pyatt’s release, to tell him she was out of prison ... But no one bothered to notify the McGowan family beforehand.” Read the report

2018 — “Meet the Women Reshaping New Jersey Politics,” by The Wall Street Journal’s Kate King: “Colleen Mahr is running for a position that few women hold but is among the most powerful in New Jersey politics—county leader of a political-party organization … Seven of the 42 county party organizations in New Jersey are led by women, including four Democrats and three Republicans. If she wins, Ms. Mahr would bring that count to eight. Ms. Mahr served for five years as first vice chairwoman of the Union County Democratic Committee and became acting chairwoman in January after the chairman resigned. Ms. Mahr is running against two other candidates, both men, for the permanent chair position in a party convention later this month when the organization, comprised of more than 800 elected committee members, will vote to select a leader. At a time when women nationwide are signing up in record numbers to run for office, winning leadership roles within political parties is critical to boosting and sustaining female representation in government, Ms. Mahr and other women politicians said.” Read the report

—"NJ Transit's head of rail operations to retire in March” Read the report

GUNS — “Gun groups take on Murphy over N.J. handgun rules,” by NJ Advance Media’s S.P. Sullivan: “As Gov. Phil Murphy moves to tighten New Jersey's gun laws, state gun rights advocates -- backed by the National Rifle Association -- are mounting a legal challenge in federal court. A lawsuit filed Monday by the Association of New Jersey Rifle and Pistol Clubs seeks to throw out the Garden State's handgun permitting rules, which require gun owners prove a ‘justifiable need’ to obtain a license to carry. Those rules have been in place for decades, and while former Gov. Chris Christie moved to loosen the standard, one of Murphy's first efforts as governor was to claw back those changes. Now, emboldened by a favorable court ruling in Washington, D.C., gun rights advocates are asking the courts to deem New Jersey's rules unconstitutional.” Read the report

AMTRAK’S FAULT — NTSB cites sleep apnea in NJ Transit, LIRR crashes, by POLITICO's Lauren Gardner: The National Transportation Safety Board unanimously approved a report Tuesday finding the Federal Railroad Administration's failure to require safety-sensitive railroad workers to be medically screened for disorders like obstructive sleep apnea contributed to two New York-area commuter rail crashes and “jeopardizes public safety.” Both accidents occurred because the engineers were too fatigued to stop their trains at a crucial moment, in part due to undiagnosed cases of sleep apnea, the NTSB said. Its probable cause findings released on Tuesday for two incidents involving NJ Transit and the Long Island Rail Road were nearly identical. The absence of a device or safety system that could have stopped the trains before each collision at the terminals also contributed to the crashes, the NTSB said. The NJ Transit crash, which occurred in September 2016 in Hoboken, killed one woman and injured more than 100 people. It spurred an extensive investigation by state lawmakers and led to calls to overhaul the agency. Read the report

KUMBAYA — After years of infighting, Democratic lawmakers have 'Kumbaya' moment, by POLITICO’s Ryan Hutchins and Matt Friedman: The Democrats who control the two houses of the New Jersey Legislature spent the last two years fighting over anything and everything. A stray word by either Senate President Stephen Sweeney or Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto could have sent the other running the opposite direction, torpedoing major policy proposals as the two worked to show their own political might. Now, with Prieto ousted by Assemblyman Craig Coughlin of Middlesex County and a new governor taking office, the Democrats are trying to prove to themselves they can all get along, even though there's said to be growing tension with the governor's office. For the first time in years, the majority members from both houses gathered Tuesday for a united caucus meeting. The lawmakers spent hours holed up in the Hyatt Regency New Brunswick, sketching out the broad outlines of the big issues they’ll face — and trying to avoid any conflict. No agreements were hammered out on specific policy proposals, according to multiple people in the room, even as the subject of a millionaires tax and other major agenda items came up. Read the report

—"Tension in Trenton: Do Murphy and Sweeney have issues to resolve?" Read the report

HIGHER ED — Murphy renews pitch for free tuition at community colleges, by POLITICO's Linh Tat: Gov. Phil Murphy resumed his pitch for free college tuition on Tuesday, returning to an issue he last spoke about in depth on the campaign trail last fall. But Murphy tried to tamp down expectations when asked if he would start to put money toward a free tuition program in his fiscal 2019 budget proposal. “We’re going to see,” he said. “I don’t think you’ll get this tomorrow. … We have strong aspirations … for both extending [K-14 and] … pre-K. … We’re not here today by accident. This is something we care a lot about.” Making college more affordable and accessible remains a goal of his administration, said Murphy, who estimates it would cost the state $200 million per year to offer free tuition at community colleges. Read the report

—“Murphy joins this group of N.J. governors who came from other states | Albright” Read the column

—“InsiderNJ’s African-American Political Power List in honor of Black History Month” See the list

—“Keyes-Maloney drops LD15 Assembly bid” Read the report

—"Calls for state probe into radium in drinking water” Read the report

THE TRUMP ERA

SANCTUARY — “3 Indonesian immigrants leave church sanctuary after judge blocks deportation,” by NJ Advance Media’s Sophie Nieto-Munoz: “For the first time since Oct. 9, Arthur Jemmy set foot outside the Reformed Church of Highland Park. Jemmy had been seeking sanctuary in the church with Harry Pangemanan and Yohanes Tasik, three undocumented Indonesian Christian immigrants who were able to go home this weekend after a federal judge halted temporarily their deportation. U.S. District Judge Esther Salas issued the temporary restraining order Friday after reviewing a class action lawsuit filed by the ACLU of NJ. It stops Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials from deporting Indonesian Christian immigrants who were seeking asylum, and Salas could grant them a second chance to apply.” Read the report

CALL ME CRAZY, BUT IT SEEMS TO ME MURPHY IS NOT A FAN OF TRUMP — New Jersey joins fight opposing Trump's transgender military ban, by POLITICO’s Katie Jennings: New Jersey Attorney General Gurbir Grewal on Tuesday signed on to an amicus brief in a federal lawsuit challenging President Donald Trump's proposed ban on transgender people serving in the military. The amicus brief filed in Karnoski v. Trump follows a string of recent actions by Grewal and the administration of Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy to challenge the policies of the Trump administration and former Republican Gov. Chris Christie. These actions include joining a multi-state lawsuit to protect undocumented immigrants in the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program and overturning Christie-era regulations loosening concealed-carry standards for handguns, among others. Read the report 

—"White House: Trump infrastructure proposal set for Feb. 12 release” Read the report 

LOCAL

MICHAEL ALONSO WAS SWORN IN FOR THE FIRST TIME A MONTH AGO — “At Bayonne BOE meeting, tension over new trustee's resolutions,” by The Jersey Journal’s Corey W. McDonald: “New Board of Education trustee Michael Alonso is wasting no time in trying to push his agenda in his new position. And just in case he can't, he's ‘exploring the possibility’ of running for mayor in May. During a Wednesday night BBOE open public workshop -- just before the regularly scheduled meeting -- trustees were presented with six resolutions, all of which were introduced by Alonso that night … His other proposals included plans to to hire Jack Butchko, his former campaign manager, as a grant specialist to secure additional funding for the district ‘at a nominal sum’ of $31,000; a resolution to ‘implement a senior citizens tax relief program for all senior citizens in Bayonne;’ and a resolution to solicit a bid for an independent auditor to take another look into the board's finances.” Read the report

PATERSON, OF ALL PLACES? — “U.S. Attorney: Paterson official took kickbacks for $136k in bogus payments,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “An unnamed local official took kickbacks for making $136,500 in illegal payments from the Paterson Municipal Utilities Authority to a vendor who did not perform any work for the money, federal authorities announced Tuesday … The amounts of the checks ranged from $15,000 to $45,000, federal officials said. All of those payments were made more than six weeks after the Paterson City Council had voted to dissolve the controversy-plagued utilities authority in Oct. 2014, a measure that was supposed to shift the $1 million in assets that the agency had at the time into the city’s coffers. The vendor, Carnell Baskerville of Linden, pleaded guilty in federal court to committing conspiracy with a utilities authority commissioner, the U.S. Attorney said.” Read the report

NYUCK, NYUCK, NYUCK — “Censure fallout: John Curley formally loses Monmouth GOP backing for freeholder,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Suzanne Cervenka: “Monmouth County Freeholder John Curley officially lost his backing from the county Republican party, which selected a new candidate to run for his seat in November. During a party convention this weekend, Monmouth County Republican Committee selected Middletown Township Committeeman Gerry Scharfenberger to replace Serena DiMaso, who became a District 13 Assemblywoman in January. Scharfenberger, who was sworn in as freeholder Saturday, will receive the county Republican party's backing in November with Hazlet Deputy Mayor Sue Kiley who will be running for Curley's seat.” Read the report

PINK FLOYD SHOW FOR BIRDS — “Trenton to combat crow poop with pyrotechnics, lasers, effigies and distress calls,” by The Trentonian’s David Foster: “The capital city will be pulling out all the stops this year to fight crow feces covering the streets. In coordination with the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service’s Wildlife Services personnel, Trenton police will be conducting crow dispersal activities at state- and city-owned properties, Lt. Stephen Varn announced Tuesday in a press release. The methods will include pyrotechnics, lasers, spotlights, amplified recordings of crow distress calls and crow effigies. The efforts started on Monday and are expected to last two weeks from 4 p.m. until 9 p.m. for up to five consecutive nights and can continue periodically through the end of March, police said.” Read the report

HOBOKEN RUNOFF — “Fight over return of Hoboken runoffs heads back to council,” by The Jersey Journal’s Terrence T. McDonald: “A political fight over whether runoff elections should return to Mile Square City heads to the City Council tomorrow, when the body is expected to attempt to override a veto issued by Mayor Ravi Bhalla last month. The vote will test how much power Bhalla, who won November's six-way mayoral race with 33 percent of the vote, has over a nine-member council that includes two of his mayoral rivals, five members who endorsed Bhalla opponents in the fall and just two Bhalla allies. Councilman Michael DeFusco is leading the charge to reinstate runoffs, eliminated by voter referendum in 2012. DeFusco finished in second place on Nov. 7 and would have faced Bhalla one-on-one if Hoboken still had runoff elections. Bhalla has framed the issue as a fight over the ‘integrity of our elections’ — the subject line of an email he sent to supporters Monday morning — and says runoffs would boost the power of campaigns that pay for votes. DeFusco says voters should decide again whether local candidates must get over 50 percent of the vote to win.” Read the report

—“Paterson mayor tells personnel chief no more working from home” Read the report

—“Why an N.J. district says it can't find a full-time superintendent” Read the report

—“Atlantic City Democrats approve committee to investigate $10K check” Read the report

—“School district closed by flu outbreak re-opens after sanitizing buses” Read the report

—“Why an N.J. district says it can't find a full-time superintendent” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

OK, SO WHAT ABOUT TRUMP? — “Is lack of civility and discourse ruining our republic?” by Kevin O’Toole for InsiderNJ: “I’ve had my share of irate emails, hate phone calls and confrontations from upset constituents – this is to be expected. I have also had my share of media attacks, some fair and some not. I have also been subject to some limited, uninformed, rumor-based, media-mongering and that is unfortunate. As a proponent of open debate, I do not see how these communications did anything but express personal animus which did not contribute at all to a discussion of issues I was running to address. And that type of media mongering should be curtailed, if not eliminated. I firmly believe that some of the more reckless and slanted political media coverage of today (left and right) has helped water and nurture the underlying angst and resentment that people have towards office-seekers and holders.” Read the op-ed

MANDATORY FUN — “N.J. schools should have mandatory recess, politicians insist in years-long fight,” by NJ Advance Media’s Adam Clark: “Chris Christie once called the idea of mandatory school recess ‘stupid’ and ‘crazy government run amok.’ But Christie isn't governor anymore, and the mandatory recess bill he vetoed during his presidential campaign is back yet again. The state Senate this month approved a proposal to make a daily 20-minute recess a requirement for all students in grades K-5, the latest push in an effort Sen. Shirley Turner, D-Mercer, began nearly 10 years ago.” Read the report

— “NJ Teachers Union Promotes Black Lives Matter in Schools,” by NJ101.5’s Adam Hochron: “The state's largest teachers union is promoting a controversial political movement in schools during Black History Month. The New Jersey Education Association announced that it will recognize Black Lives Matter at School Week. The NJEA said the week is meant to support the movement's call to end zero-tolerance discipline measures that disproportionately affect minority children, implement restorative justice in schools, hire and support more black teachers, and mandate black history/ethnic studies in K-12.” Read the report

HOUSH SAUCE — “Rowan president spices up hot sauce - for scholarships,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Alexandra Dematos: “The president of one of New Jersey’s largest universities doesn’t need a recipe to craft some of the hottest sauces around, the profits of which go toward an emergency scholarship fund for students. Instead, Ali Houshmand of Rowan University took an idea from the garden to his kitchen in order to kick-start his signature line of hot sauces, which has raised almost $20,000 for Rowan’s Student Scholarship Fund. ‘I never believed in written recipes … Beginning with a greenhouse on campus that he would visit daily to water and tend to his peppers, Houshmand went on to collaborate with the Rutgers Food Innovation Center in Bridgeton, which helped him create the three flavors of Houshmand’s Hazardous Hot Sauce sold today. The tuition fund created from the profits of his labors is in place to help students in need of financial aid for whatever reason – if a parent loses a job or if a student could not qualify for a needed loan – to prevent a gap or even an end to a student’s education.” Read the report 

BLUE WAVE COMING — “No, there's no tsunami warning at the Jersey Shore,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Alex Gecan: “If you received an alert from AccuWeather indicating a tsunami warning on the Jersey Shore, you can relax - it was just a test. The company's website and social media accounts indicate that there is no tsunami warning in effect. ‘The National Weather Service Tsunami Warning this morning was a TEST,’ according to AccuWeather's Facebook page and Twitter feed. ‘No Tsunami warning is in effect for the coast of the U.S.’” Read the report 

—“Dark web, cut-out Bible: How feds say child-porn network thrived in N.J. prison” Read the report

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC