
                                                            Politico

Lauren Dezenski's must-read rundown of what's up on Beacon Hill and beyond.

Get the Massachusetts Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

01/26/2018 07:08 AM EST

By Lauren Dezenski (ldezenski@politico.com; @LaurenDezenski) with Brent D. Griffiths (bgriffiths@politico.com; @BrentGriffiths) 

TGIF, MASSACHUSETTS. Sunny and clear with a high around freezing in Boston.


Story Continued Below

DORCENA FORRY DEPARTURE SPARKS SPECIAL ELECTION — State Sen. Linda Dorcena Forry’s surprise announcement yesterday that she’s leaving Beacon Hill for the private sector has ignited a burst of interest in a rare opening to represent Dorchester and South Boston — as well as host the storied St. Patrick’s Day Breakfast.

The seat itself will be filled in a special election — under Senate rules, the date for an election to fill a vacant seat must be announced within 20 days after the vacancy occurs. Because it’ll be a special, look for the field to consist of more established figures, presumably those who already hold office. Why? They’ll likely have more access to the money and resources needed to craft a serious bid on such short notice, plus they wouldn’t have to give up their current offices to run in the special election. 

State Rep. Russell Holmes, state Rep. Dan Cullinane (who was campaign field director for Dorcena Forry’s contentious Senate bid against state Rep. Nick Collins in 2013), and Boston City Councilor Annissa Essaibi George have all confirmed to me they are taking a look at the seat. As Essaibi George put it to me last night, “I’d be foolish not to give this a look.”

Collins (who lost to Dorcena Forry in 2013), Dorcena Forry’s former chief of staff Sean Pierce, state Rep. Evandro Carvalho, and Boston City Councilor Ayanna Pressley are also in the mix of potential contenders. 

The district itself is one of the most politically active in the state — and is home to three of the four at-large Boston city councilors, as well as two district city councilors and four state representatives (as well as Boston Mayor Marty Walsh himself). 

Dorcena Forry’s departure is effective at the end of business hours today. Forry, who leaves as the highest-ranking black elected official in the commonwealth, will join the leadership team at the powerful Suffolk Construction as Vice President of Northeast Region, Diversity, Inclusion and Community Relations.

A crucial question: Who will have hosting duties for this year's South Boston St. Patrick’s Day breakfast? Preparations for this year’s event have already been underway for months. Insiders say precedent will come from 2013, when the district was in the throes of a pitched special election and host responsibility fell on Southie’s then-City Councilor Bill Linehan. This time around, organizers are hoping to tap Congressman Stephen Lynch, a son of South Boston and veteran of the St. Patrick’s Day breakfast circuit.

Have a tip, story, suggestion, birthday, anniversary, new job, or any other nugget for the Playbook? Get in touch: ldezenski@politico.com.

TODAY — Gov. Charlie Baker travels to Washington, D.C. for informal meetings at the Pentagon on the military’s activities and presence in Massachusetts — Acting Gov. Karyn Polito attends the Shrewsbury Youth and Family Services Annual Breakfast with state Rep. Hannah Kane before heading to Boston for the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce’s 2018 Pinnacle Awards Luncheon — The Group Insurance Commission holds hearings in North Dartmouth and Hyannis.

FOR YOUR WEEKEND TOWN HALL AWARENESS — Sen. Elizabeth Warren holds her 18th town hall — and first of 2018 — in Malden on Sunday. Doors open at Malden High School at noon, and the event begins at 1 p.m. — Sen. Ed Markey will hold a town hall in Amherst on Sunday night. He’ll take questions from the audience and discuss congressional action on immigration, tax reform, health care, and climate change in 5:30 p.m. event at Amherst-Pelham Regional Middle School. 

DATELINE BEACON HILL — 

— “GIC To Reconsider Health Plan Consolidation,” by Matt Murphy, State House News Service: “The Group Insurance Commission, relenting to days of withering criticism over its decision to limit health plan offerings to nearly 450,000 state employees and retirees, plans to reconsider that vote when it meets next week. After the initial vote, unions, lawmakers and other public officials said they felt blindsided by the decision, and are skeptical of the GIC's assurances that members will not lose access to their doctors.” 

 — “Massachusetts senators approve 'NASTY Women Act,' repealing 'archaic' abortion laws,” by Gintautas Dumcius, MassLive.com: “Senators on Thursday unanimously passed the "NASTY" bill, which stands for Negating Archaic Statutes Targeting Young Women. The bill, which still has to pass the House and receive the governor's signature before becoming law, repeals a ban on unmarried women's use of contraception, the criminalization of the distribution of contraception, an abortion prohibition from the 1800s, and a requirement that abortions after the 12th week of pregnancy must be performed in a hospital.”

 — “Mass. Senate Ethics Committee reaffirms commitment to confidentiality in Sen. Stan Rosenberg probe,” by Shira Schoenberg, MassLive.com: “The Senate Ethics Committee has restructured its investigation into former Senate President Stan Rosenberg, D-Amherst, to protect the confidentiality of witnesses, after questions were raised about the confidentiality of subpoenas.”

— “Same-day registration gets push with backing from Galvin,” by Katie Lannan, State House News Service: Beginning next year, Massachusetts voters would be able to register to vote on the same day they cast their ballots, under a new proposal from Secretary of State William Galvin. Galvin announced Thursday that he is proposing legislation that would allow Massachusetts residents who are otherwise eligible to vote to go to their local polling place on Election Day, complete a registration form, and vote immediately afterward. Current law requires voters to be registered at least 20 days before an election in which they plan to vote.”

— “Massive oil burn during cold snap a 'disaster,' says state energy and environment secretary,” by Colin A. Young, State House News Service: “During the frigid 15 days between Christmas and Jan. 9, power generators in Massachusetts burned about two million barrels of oil — more than twice the amount of oil they burned during all of 2016, Energy and Environment Secretary Matthew Beaton said Wednesday. High demand for natural gas to heat power plants, homes and businesses during the cold created gas pipeline constraints that led to high natural gas prices and the corresponding increase in power production at less expensive oil- and coal-fired power plants, grid operator ISO New England said.”

TRUMPACHUSETTS — 

THERE’S ALWAYS A MASSACHUSETTS CONNECTION — “Joe Kennedy to deliver Democratic response to State of the Union address,” by Victoria McGrane and Annie Linskey, Boston Globe: “The choice thrusts the 37-year-old, three-term congressman from Brookline into the national spotlight more squarely than he has ever been before. ‘Congressman Kennedy is a relentless fighter for working Americans,’ Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi said in a press release announcing the move.

 — “Lawrence Mayor: Trump administration is ‘focusing on imaginary bad guys’,” by Chris Cassidy, Boston Herald: ‘It just seems like more bullying,’ Mayor Daniel Rivera told the Herald last night, when asked why he thought Lawrence was one of only two New England cities singled out in letters sent yesterday. The Department of Justice issued letters to 23 jurisdictions nationwide — including Lawrence and Burlington, Vt. — demanding they turn over documents that might reveal whether they are actively instructing local law enforcement not to cooperate with federal agencies on illegal immigration issues.”

 — “Enough Trump Bashing, Democrats,” by Frank Bruni, Deval Patrick and Joe Trippi, New York Times: “‘I hate government shutdowns,’ [Former Gov. Deval Patrick said.] ‘… We need to focus less on what’s wrong with Trump and the Republicans and more on what’s right with us, and especially on how we as Democrats can lead us all to higher ground without fear and division.’ ‘… I think the one truth that candidate Trump spoke during the campaign is that conventional or establishment politics really isn’t working well enough for most people.’”

— “U.S. attorney says opioids top target, but pot still on radar,” by Andy Metzger, State House News Service: “Opioid crimes are his top drug enforcement priority, but U.S. Attorney Andrew Lelling told reporters Wednesday that his enforcement of federal marijuana laws could ensnare anyone from an hourly wage employee at a marijuana dispensary to a bank that opens an account for a pot shop. During a meeting with reporters at the federal courthouse, Lelling, a recent appointee of President Donald Trump, repeated that he will not rule out bringing criminal cases against participants in the forthcoming state-legal retail marijuana industry.

 — “Atlantic White Shark Conservancy sees donations spike after report claimed Trump dislikes sharks,” by Steve Annear, Boston Globe: “In [an interview from 2011 that was published by In Touch Weekly] , [adult film star Stormy Daniels] mentioned a series of bizarre comments he reportedly made about his disdain for sharks while they were together in a hotel room. Since then, the conservancy has seen a sharp and sudden spike in money coming in from first-time donors who want to help fund the conservation’s research — mainly to spite the president.”

THE TSONGAS ARENA — 

— “1A Auto to Give Company Wide Bonus,” PR News Wire: “Massachusetts based online auto parts retailer 1A Auto announced across the board cash bonuses for all full-time employees. CEO Rick Green [and Republican contender for the Massachusetts Third congressional district] says that the decision was based on recent changes to tax policy. In a company meeting Wednesday, Green told employees, ‘Ultimately the tax savings will be passed to our customers in the form of lower prices, but we want to also share some of the savings with you, our hard-working employees.’”

WOOD WAR — Herald: “ON THIN ICE,” “PARKING STICKER $HOCK!” — Globe: “Media forced VA to act, agency says,” “Dorcena Forry is leaving the Senate,” “Trump gave order to fire Mueller in 2017,” “Eagles fans flying high,” “State rethinks a change in health plan,” “Hasty Pudding says it will cast women.” 

THE LOCAL ANGLE — 

 — “'It's like a tsunami hit our school system,' councilman says of influx of hurricane evacuees attending West Springfield schools,” by Conor Berry, MassLive.com: “A subcommittee of the West Springfield Town Council is considering asking the state for help with an emergency situation: educating children who are living in West Side's many hotels and motels. Since Hurricane Maria devastated the island of Puerto Rico in September, hundreds of families have uprooted and moved to Greater Springfield, home to a well-established Latino community. Many of these families are living in hotels funded through the Transitional Shelter Assistance program run by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.”

 — “Sexual misconduct claim against Judge Thomas Estes 'damaged public trust,' governor's councilors say,” by Jim Russell, special to the Republican: “A federal lawsuit filed against Massachusetts Trial Court Judge Thomas Estes accuses him of forcing a woman who used to work at a private service agency that advocated on behalf of clients to perform a sex act inside a courthouse. Estes had been the presiding judge at Eastern Hampshire District Court in Belchertown, but was removed from any bench duty last year.”

 — “Mass. Taps Eversource's Northern Pass For Hydropower Project,” by Bob Salsberg, Associated Press: “The $1.6 billion Northern Pass project, which officials called the largest procurement of renewable energy in the state's history, was selected from among dozens of bids submitted last year under a 2016 law that called for a significant boost in the supply of renewable energy in Massachusetts. Eversource said it planned to build a 192-mile transmission line that would carry almost 1,200 megawatts of Quebec hydropower from the Canadian border at Pittsburg, New Hampshire, to a substation in Deerfield, New Hampshire, where it would then flow into Massachusetts through the regional energy grid.”

 — “Kennedy in Taunton to check out Manet expansion, discuss funding cliff,” by Jordan Deschenes, Taunton Daily Gazette: [Congressman Joseph Kennedy] also used the time to foster a discussion about Congress’s failure to reauthorize federal funding for community health centers in September. ‘Given some of the challenges posed down in Washington, it’s pretty inspiring to be able to come and visit sites like these,’ Kennedy began, praising the ‘professionals’ bringing ‘top-notch’ care to underserved communities.

 — “Philadelphia accepts Rocky statue Super Bowl bet from Brockton mayor,” by Marc Larocque, Brockton Enterprise: “It’s game on for a Super Bowl bet of heavyweight proportions, between the mayor of ‘The City of Champions’ in Massachusetts, and his counterpart in ‘The City of Brotherly Love.’ If the Patriots win the Super Bowl over the Philadelphia Eagles, according to the wager, the Pennsylvania city would have to adorn its world famous ‘Rocky’ statue with New England gear. But if Philadelphia wins the big game, then the Rocky Marciano statue standing outside of Brockton High School would have to be dressed up in Eagles attire, based on the rules of the bet.”

MEDIA MATTERS — “Who won and who lost the local news war when NBC broke up with WHDH,” by Shirley Leung, Boston Globe: “A little more than a year after the bitter divorce, the new NBC10 Boston’s newscasts are struggling to gain an audience, while Ansin’s Channel 7 is often first or second in key time slots. For NBC10 Boston, the time to shine will be in February, when the network will air the Super Bowl (Feb. 4), followed by the Winter Olympics (starting on Feb. 6).”

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — to Westfield Rep. John Velis and New Bedford Rep. Antonio Cabral.

HAPPY BIRTHWEEKEND — to Director of communications for the International Union of Painters and Allied trades John Doherty and Boston’s Department of Neighborhood Development deputy director Kerry O’Brien, WGBH producer Antonio Caban and Program and policy director for Protect Our Defenders Christina Knowles, who both celebrate on Sunday.

DID THE HOME TEAM WIN? — Yes! The Bruins  beat the Senators 3-2. 

FRESH OUT OF THE GATE — THE LATEST HORSE RACE PODCAST EPISODE: We’ve got veteran State House News Service reporter Matt Murphy in the bunker this week breaking down Governor Charlie Baker’s State of the Commonwealth address. Plus Maureen McInerney, public affairs associate at MassINC fills in for host Steve Koczela to talk fundraising in the governor’s race, the election for Suffolk County Register of Deeds (it’s wonky, we know) and the upcoming forum featuring the Democrats — all thirteen — running for the MA-3. Subscribe and listen on iTunes and Sound Cloud 

Want to make an impact? POLITICO Massachusetts has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Bay State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness among this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: jshapiro@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from Massachusetts, check out: http://politi.co/1qNSlWx

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC