
                                                            Politico

Matt Friedman's must-read briefing on the Garden State's important news of the day

Get the New Jersey Playbook Newsletter


By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

07/05/2018 07:20 AM EDT

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj):

Good Thursday morning!


Story Continued Below

Before we broke for the holiday, on Tuesday afternoon, Gov. Phil Murphy signed two bills that Chris Christie had repeatedly refused to.

One provides tax credits for film and digital media. Murphy is all for this. Christie was against it. Which is a bit of a role reversal when you consider that Christie loved giving out tax credits to other industries, and Murphy says he wants to pare down those other programs. Christie had let the film tax credit program expire and refused to renew it.

The other was a bill to make it easier for transgender New Jerseyans to put the sex they identify with on birth certificates, as well as a bill to reflect that on death certificates and a bill to create a task force on transgender issues. Christie vetoed the first bill twice. More on those below.

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — Missed yesterday: BPU Chief Counsel Noreen Giblin, Union County Manager Ed Oatman

WHERE’S MURPHY? No public schedule

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “Never before has a state taken the lead to address the growing crisis in local news.” — Mike Rispoli, state director for Free Press Action Fund, on the “Civic Info” bill and its $5 million appropriation.

SHIRT OF THE DAY — The Pepto-pink number Gov. Murphy wore to the beach yesterday.

WHAT TRENTON MADE

PENSIONS — Murphy signs bill giving police, fire unions control over pension fund, by POLITICO’s Ryan Hutchins: Gov. Phil Murphy on Tuesday signed a bipartisan but controversial measure handing over control of New Jersey's $26 billion Police and Firemen's Retirement System to a board dominated by labor union appointees. The Democratic governor, who has fashioned himself an ally of labor, had conditionally vetoed the legislation last month, saying it needed to be "implemented in an appropriate manner that protects both the stability of the fund and New Jersey taxpayers." Murphy ordered up changes that were meant to further insulate taxpayers if things go wrong and, more immediately, to ensure the broader pension doesn’t lose money by divesting the assets too quickly. Lawmakers approved the amendments and sent the bill back to the governor’s desk last week. Murphy said in a statement Tuesday that the bill was a “good first step” in shoring up the public employee retirement system, adding the state “must move forward with stable, reliable pension payments." “It is critical that those who have paid into the pension system are comfortable that they will be able to retire with dignity,” Murphy said. “Labor is the backbone of many New Jersey families.” Read the report 

THE QUIET SPEAKER — “You may not know him, but this guy may be the reason we're not stuck in a N.J. shutdown right now,” by NJ Advance Media’s Brent Johnson: “Coughlin, the rookie speaker of the state Assembly, and Stephen Sweeney, the veteran state Senate president, struck an 11th hour deal with new Gov. Phil Murphy on Saturday night over which taxes to raise to support the new state budget. It ended weeks of of bickering among the trio of Democrats -- New Jersey's three highest-ranking elected officials -- that brought the state to the brink of its second shutdown in two years. Much of the focus since then has been on whether Murphy or Sweeney came out on top in a power struggle for who'll dominate the Statehouse the next few years. But for all his bad blood with Sweeney, Murphy also needed Coughlin to enact a budget. And the soft-spoken -- and low-profile -- Middlesex County attorney has been described as the underrated figure in the fight. Assemblywoman Valeri Vainieri Huttle, D-Bergen, called Coughlin the ‘mediator’ in the room. Assemblyman John McKeon, D-Essex, dubbed him ‘the honest broker and voice of reason.’” Read the report

I HAVEN’T COME BACK FROM THE ABYSS SINCE MY PARENTS DROVE ME HOME FROM SEEING IT IN THE THEATER IN 1989 — "N.J. back from `abyss,' Murphy says. credit raters need more," by Bloomberg's Elise Young: “Governor Phil Murphy’s record $3.2 billion pension payment was an easy sell to New Jersey lawmakers who had fought him on other budget initiatives. Still, he said, it was bittersweet to sign a spending plan that won’t impress Wall Street enough for an upgrade. Credit-rating analysts want to see other elements of what the state was lacking under his predecessor, Republican Chris Christie, including recurring revenue, fulfilled obligations and a sizable surplus. Until then, Murphy said Monday in an interview, New Jersey’s once top grade will remain second-worst among U.S. states, behind Illinois. … The 2019 budget brings New Jersey ‘one step back from the abyss,’ said Murphy, a retired Goldman Sachs Group Inc. senior director and former ambassador to Germany, who took office in January. ‘This is a major step, but it’s one step,’ the Democrat said...” Read the report

—Mulshine: “Phil Murphy's 11th-hour budget: He can't tax enough for what he wants to spend” Read the column

—“Careening towards the brink: Insider NJ’s budget showdown play-by-play” Read the report

BIRTH CERTIFICATES — Murphy signs transgender birth certificate bill twice vetoed by Christie, by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: Transgender New Jerseyans will find it easier to change the sex listed on their birth certificates under a new law — part of a package of three bills Gov. Phil Murphy signed Tuesday aimed at boosting transgender rights. The birth certificate bill is named the Babs Siperstein Law, named after the transgender New Jersey activist and former Democratic National Committee member. "Allowing vital records to match gender identity is an important step forward that will allow transgender individuals to control the disclosure of their transgender status," Murphy said in a statement. Read the report 

SNOOKI SUBSIDY — New Jersey once again offering film tax credits, by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: Gov. Phil Murphy on Tuesday signed a law that will make film and digital production companies eligible for millions of dollars in tax credits. The new law replaces a tax credit program that former Gov. Chris Christie allowed to expire. "By signing this legislation, we are allowing these companies to take advantage of New Jersey's unique culture, location, and geography," Murphy said in a statement. "I look forward to seeing the many projects that will come out of our great state thanks to the Garden State Film and Digital Media Jobs Act." The law provides $75 million per year over five years for film productions — up from $10 million under the old program. Digital productions would get up to $10 million a year in credits. Read the report 

DEATH AFTER TAXES — “Certainties in N.J.: Death and taxes. Now death's getting an overhaul,” by NJ Advance Media’s Stephen Stirling and S.P. Sullivan: “New Jersey's broken system for investigating sudden and suspicious deaths -- spotlighted by an NJ Advance Media investigation published last year -- will get more resources and tougher oversight under a new law signed by Gov. Phil Murphy on Tuesday. The legislation, the Revised State Medical Examiner Act, takes effect Sept. 1 and caps more than 40 years of dysfunction and failed attempts by lawmakers and governors to reform one of the most critical functions of state government: determining how and why someone died. NJ Advance Media's investigation, published in December, revealed that decades of neglect had turned the state medical examiner system into a national disgrace, revealing examples of mishandled bodies, bungled criminal cases and families left grieving without answers.” Read the report

THE 565 — “Is time up for tiny towns in New Jersey? Some say mergers would save money and lower taxes, but skeptics disagree,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Max Cohen: “The tiny borough of Oaklyn in Camden County spans just over half a square mile and is home to around 4,000 residents. On a recent hot morning, the borough’s administrative office was staffed by two people and the all-volunteer fire department, with its four trucks, was locked up. It’s a quintessential example of the hundreds of small New Jersey towns that are in the scopes of folks who advocate combining tiny towns by forcing them to join with their neighbors. Under one idea that surfaced from an economic task force headed by state Senate President Steve Sweeney, towns with populations under 5,000, like Oaklyn, would be required to consolidate. Mayor Robert Forbes is no fan of that idea.” Read the report

PLEASE MAKE CHECK OUT TO ‘MATT FRIEDMAN, NJ PLAYBOOK AUTHOR’ — “New Jersey poised to invest $5 million into local journalism,” by CNN’s Brian Stetler: “What if every state in the union provided some seed money for local journalism -- as a way to rebuild some of what's been lost through years of budget cuts and layoffs? That's what New Jersey is on the verge of doing. Public media advocates are calling it a historic legislative victory. Last month, both houses of the New Jersey legislature passed the ‘Civic Info Bill.’ The bill sets up a nonprofit group that will be supported by five of the state's universities. A board of directors will approve grants to strengthen local news coverage. New Jersey governor Phil Murphy signed a state budget on Sunday night that allocates $5 million for the Civic Information Consortium … The campaign was predicated on the belief that many communities are being under-covered, partly because many local newsrooms are struggling to stay afloat. There is ample evidence to back this up. Staffing and resources at print newspapers have been shrinking for years and digital start-ups have only partially filled the void. In New Jersey, this is compounded by the fact that the state is located between two big cities, New York and Philadelphia, that are in other states. The practical effect: Less coverage of hyperlocal issues.” Read the report

ENERGY — Could New Jersey leave PJM? BPU is considering it, by POLITICO’s Danielle Muoio: Joseph Fiordaliso, president of the Board of Public Utilities, is considering pulling the state out of PJM — the sprawling, regional energy market that New Jersey helped form almost a century ago. As first reported by RTO Insider, Fiordaliso said he is frustrated with the regional transmission operator, arguing that PJM has often failed to support the state or come to its defense during key policy decisions. When asked whether those concerns could drive him to leave, Fiordaliso said he was ‘exploring it.’ Read the report 

—“N.J.'s unemployment rate falls to 10-year low. Here's what that means for you” Read the report

—Hospitals get good news, bad news in NJ’s last-minute budget resolution Read the report

—“Newark’s district-charter enrollment system is here to stay, new superintendent said in meeting” Read the report 

THE TRUMP ERA

DUH OF THE DAY — “Menendez says comic who impersonated him never should have gotten through to Trump,” by NJ Advance Media’s Jonathan D. Salant: “U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez, speaking on CNN, called it 'concerning' that a comedian could impersonate him and get a call through to President Donald Trump. Comedian John Melendez, best known as ‘Stuttering John’ on the Howard Stern show, said he falsely identified himself as Menendez and was able to talk by telephone to president aboard Air Force One. ‘It's concerning to me that the President of the United States - the most powerful man in the world - could have a shock jock comedian get through and speak to him on Air Force One,’ said Menendez, D-N.J. ‘While it may have been a joke to him, the subject matter is very serious: the dividing of children from their parents, a Supreme Court nominee who will make a generational difference on the court against the interests of affordable health care and reproductive rights," he said.” Read the report

CAN THEY REALLY COUNT ON GINGRICH TO BE COMMITTED? — “Newt Gingrich to headline GOPAC fundraiser in Ocean County,” by Ocean County Politics’ Gavin Rozzi: “Former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich (R) will be in Toms River on July 11th for a fundraiser benefiting the election fund of a national GOP SuperPAC. Event organizers will hold a rally &amp; reception featuring Gingrich at the Days Inn Hotel in Toms River on Wednesday, July 11th 2018. Tickets for the rally portion of the fundraising event are $25, but those opting for meet and greet will have to pony up $5,000. Also listed on the invitations were former Lieutenant Governor Kim Guadagno, who unsuccessfully challenged Governor Phil Murphy in the 2017 campaign, along with Ocean County GOP Chairman George Gilmore.” Read the report

IMMIGRATION — "Most immigrants facing deportation don't have lawyers. N.J. is changing that," by Philly Inquirer's Jonathan Lai: “All immigration lawyers know the axiom: Handling deportation cases in immigration court is akin to trying death penalty cases in traffic court. Immigration courts are overburdened, the stakes are high for asylum-seekers — and immigrants have no guarantee of counsel. Because deportation proceedings are civil matters, not criminal, those who can’t afford lawyers aren’t assigned public defenders. They have to persuade someone — a law school clinic, a public interest law group, an advocacy organization — to take up their cases. Otherwise, they’ve got nothing. New Jersey is moving to change that. The state budget agreed to last weekend includes $2.1 million to help pay for attorneys for immigrants fighting deportation. Advocates say that will help, though they estimate the full costs of covering every immigrant would run to about $15 million.” Read the report

FAINTING SPELL — U.S. Rep. Bill Pascrell nearly collapsed from heat exhaustion Tuesday while attending an event at with Sen. Menendez and others at Englewood fire headquarters. He tweeted Wednesday that he was discharged after a brief hospital stay and is doing fine. 

—“N.J. has a backlog of 30K citizenship applications. Here's why” Read the report

—“Trump may return to Bedminster for long weekend” Read the report

—“Woman climbs Statue of Liberty base to protest ICE, forcing July 4 evacuation of monument” Read the report

—“New U.S. citizens welcomed at Battleship New Jersey” Read the report

LOCAL

REED DIDN’T READ — “Gov. Phil Murphy vetoes Trenton MOU removal,” by The Trentonian’s Isaac Avilucea: “The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the state and Trenton remains in force. In a shocking turn of events that left capital city leaders scrambling, Gov. Phil Murphy line-item vetoed the removal of Trenton from the MOU that required Department of Community affairs approval for new city hires as part of him signing into law a $37.4 billion budget deal that averted a state shutdown. Leaders in the 15th District were made aware of the sudden reversal of fortunes for Trenton Tuesday morning. An 11 a.m. news conference where Mayor Reed Gusciora and political leaders planned to explain the importance of the striking of the MOU was abruptly canceled.” Read the report

—“Trenton Mayor Gusciora on MOU mix-up: ‘I jumped the gun’,” by The Trentonian’s Isaac Avilucea: “While trying to convince Trenton voters he was the best candidate to lead the capital city forward, Reed Gusciora pointed to the connections he made with top state leaders during his 22 years as a state assemblyman. He bragged at the runoff debate against Paul Perez about dining at then-Gov.-elect Phil Murphy’s home. It turned out the Christmastime meal before the governor was sworn into office was less a meeting of the minds to discuss issues impacting Trenton than it was a casual holiday bash for invited state legislators to hobnob with the former Goldman Sachs guru. In his first week in office as Trenton mayor, Gusciora was forced to eat crow following an embarrassing mix-up that may become known as the Memorandum of Misunderstanding.” Read the report

ARTICLE NEGLECTS TO MENTION PATERSON’S TRUE HERO, FETTY WAP — “A city founded by Alexander Hamilton sets the stage for Its next act,” by The New York Times’ Rick Rojas: “On a lively stretch of Main Street, one bakery is Syrian and another is Colombian and Italian. A Yemeni restaurant opened near a Lebanese spot. And across the street, there is a barbershop called Palestine, where men getting haircuts filled nearly every seat. André Sayegh, the newly elected mayor, grew up in this neighborhood in Paterson’s south end. He has seen its evolution. Arrivals from around the world have flocked here, many coming from the Middle East, and have opened the businesses — the restaurants, meat markets, shops and salons — that draw customers from well beyond the city’s borders. Mr. Sayegh sees the neighborhood not just as a bright spot in a distressed city, but as a template for growth for other parts of Paterson where progress has been much more difficult to achieve. ‘We have all the right ingredients,’ Mr. Sayegh, who spent a decade on the City Council, said as he walked along Main Street.” Read the report

KATYN STOP WON’T STOP — “Group submits petition to overturn council action on Polish statue,” by The Jersey Journal’s Terrence T. McDonald: “The question of whether Jersey City's Katyn monument is moved may soon be in the hands of voters. A group opposed to moving the statue from its Exchange Place home delivered a petition to City Clerk Robert Byrne on Tuesday seeking to overturn a June 13 ordinance that authorized moving the monument one block south. The petition has over 10,000 signatures, the group said. Crowded inside the clerk's City Hall office and singing "God Bless America," a bit of the Polish national anthem and "The Star-Spangled Banner," the group handed in three boxes filled with over 2,000 pages, each containing up to eight signatures. If the clerk certifies that at least 6,700 valid Jersey City voters signed the petition, voters could decide via referendum whether to overturn the council's June 13 action.” Read the report

I’M NOT SAYING IT’S ME. BUT GET WAWA TO OPEN IN MAHWAH AND MAYBE IT WILL ALL STOP — “Mahwah council president alleges foes are targeting him and his family,” by The Record’s Marsha Stoltz: “Slashed tires? Flooded basement? A claim he's harbored a teen runaway? These incidents and allegations highlighted an hour-long press conference on Tuesday by Township Council President Rob Hermansen. Hermansen stopped short of accusing Mayor William Laforet ‘or someone close to him’ for the basement flooding, vandalized tires, and a police inspection of his home for a runaway friend of his daughters. Hermansen vowed, however, to track down the culprit. ‘I was definitely targeted,’ said Hermansen. ‘I have an idea who, but if I say publicly, someone will say it's because of our disagreement.’” Read the report

LIVING ON THE (RIVER) EDGE — “Seven rescued after River Edge strip mall facade collapses,” by The Record’s Rodrigo Torrejon: “As Courtney Lichtenberger opened up National Artifacts, the vintage comics and collectibles store on Kinderkamack Road, on Tuesday morning she heard what sounded like pebbles falling. She didn’t think much of it. That is, until she walked to the front of the store as the ceiling seemed to collapse. ‘I heard what sounded like a rock hitting my window,’ Lichtenberger, 24, said. ‘So as I was walking toward the window, the entire thing came down. I screamed.’ Shortly before 10 a.m., the front façade of as many as seven stores in Kress Plaza collapsed, initially trapping seven people in some of the stores, River Edge Fire Chief George O’Connell said. No injuries were reported and all seven people had been extricated by 11 a.m., O’Connell said.” Read the report

MAYOR CAUSED MARIJUANA TO BE FLUSHED DOWN TOILET? IMPEACH! — “West Wildwood mayor told cops to lay off political allies, lawsuit states,” by The Press of Atlantic City’s John DeRosier: “A former Class II officer in the borough claims in a lawsuit he was fired from his job for writing tickets to political allies of Mayor Christopher Fox and he was directed to target residents who may not vote for the mayor in future elections. Jeremy Mawhinney, of Egg Harbor City, was hired by the West Wildwood Police Department as a Class II officer in June 2016 and fired in October 2017 after he was told several times by his sergeant, James Dodd, and Chief Jackie Ferentz not to write tickets to Fox’s allies, regardless of whether they were breaking the law, according to the lawsuit … On June 26, 2016, Mawhinney alleges, he responded to a residence on Magnolia Avenue for a noise complaint and alleged use of marijuana … Both officers arrested the man and found marijuana, which was taken to the Police Department as evidence, according to the lawsuit. Once at the police station, the officers there received a phone call from Ferentz saying the mayor was demanding the marijuana be disposed of and the defendant be released on a noise complaint he would have dismissed in court.” Read the report

—“Possible GOP defections in Morris County” Read the report

—“Bodycam video shows A.C. cop fatal shooting of man allegedly armed with knife” Read the report

—“Burned crash victim sues cops who kicked him” Read the report

—“Englewood Cliffs mayor won't go stigma-free, so cops do it for him” Read the report

—“Renter Hell: Lakewood tenants ordered out, then given reprieve” Read the report

—“Fireworks cancelled in Beachwood, Milltown after no-show vendor” Read the report

EVERYTHING ELSE

AKA PHIL MURPHY’S VISION FOR THE STATE — “New Jersey's iconic Fairy Tale Forest to re-awaken in fall,” by The Record’s David M. Zimmer: “It’s not fantasy. Fairy Tale Forest may soon re-awaken from its long sleep. Closed 13 years ago, the theme park that brought famed bedtime stories to life in the town’s Oak Ridge section is nearing a renaissance, said owner Christine Vander Ploeg. A family-friendly restaurant, aptly-named Fables, is due to launch by the end of summer. Sections of the park first opened in 1957 should become accessible in the weeks after, she said. “It’s exciting, bringing back something that’s so generational,” Vander Ploeg said.” Read the report

RELIGION — “Mother: Caring for girl amid brain-death debate ‘worth it’,” by The AP: “The mother of a girl at the center of a medical and religious debate over brain death said she does not regret moving from California to New Jersey so her daughter could receive care after being declared dead … Jahi had been declared dead in December 2013 at age 13 after suffering irreversible brain damage during surgery in California to remove her tonsils. A coroner signed a death certificate. Winkfield refused to accept the conclusion and took Jahi to New Jersey, which accommodates religions that don’t recognize brain death. Winkfield said Tuesday that her daughter grew and went through puberty — evidence she was not dead.” Read the report

NJ LITERALLY SWELLED WITH PRIDE — “N.J. mom-daughter entry a first for Nathan's hot dog contest,” by The Daily Record’s William Westhoven: “Montville School District Superintendent Rene Rovtar filled a portion of her bucket list last Fourth of July by literally digging her teeth into the annual Nathan's Famous Hot Dog Eating Contest. She qualified to compete again this year, but one member of her 2017 cheering section — daughter Kristina Rovtar — has taken on another ‘roll’ by claiming her own seat at the table for what is known as ‘the Super Bowl of competitive eating’ Wednesday on the Boardwalk in Coney Island, N.Y.” Read the report

— “Fireworks sales boom in New Jersey as revenue, injuries skyrocket nationwide” Read the report

—“PHOTOS: Bat dog celebration day at Trenton's Arm &amp; Hammer Park” See the good dogs

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg 

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX



                                            By Evelyn Farkas


                                            By James Higdon


                                            By Tom Nichols


                                            By Molly K. McKew

 © 2018 POLITICO LLC