Elgin Mayor Dave Kaptain said he is saddened by the police shooting of Elgin resident Decynthia Clements but urged residents to be patient for answers while the investigation is conducted.


In a statement released Wednesday, Kaptain called the shooting an "unfortunate incident" and lauded the police for trying to provide as much information as possible given the restrictions imposed by the Illinois State Police as they investigate what happened.


"Our police department continues to be open and transparent, and additional information will be shared with the public as soon as possible," Kaptain said in the statement.


"The community needs to heal and it's important we continue to support the friends and family of Ms. Clements, our police department and one another. We need to have constructive conversations."


Clements, 34, of Aldine Avenue, was shot about 2 a.m. Monday by Elgin police Lt. Christian Jensen in an incident on Interstate 90, near Route 25, according to information released by Elgin Police Chief Jeff Swoboda.




Decynthia Clements was shot and killed by Elgin police officers along Interstate I-90 on March 12, 2018.

Officers had been trying to persuade Clements, who was armed with a knife, to exit her SUV for more than an hour when she apparently set fire to her vehicle, Swoboda said. Police were either pulling or had pulled Clements from her car because of the fire when the shooting occurred, he said.


An autopsy conducted by the Cook County Medical Examiner's Office Tuesday showed Clements died because of multiple gunshot wounds. Her death was classified a homicide.


"There are still many questions unanswered, and I wish to remind all to please be patient," Kaptain said.

Kaptain also encouraged residents to participate in an upcoming "Courageous Community Conversation," which has been conducted annually by the Elgin Human Relations Commission since 2015. No date has been set for the program.


The event was started following police shootings that occurred in Ferguson, Mo., and New York City. Members of Elgin's African-American religious community suggested Kaptain start holding community conversations.


During one of the first to be held, the Elgin Clergy Coalition, National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives and the city held a joint gathering on the importance of communicating, listening and respect and the dynamics of a traffic stop.


Other conversations have focused on immigration issues, police body cameras and on the controversy in 2016 surrounding David Powers' mural, "American Nocturne." The publicly displayed art piece used a portion of a photo from 1930 of people at a lynching in Marion, Ind. as its subject matter.


Kaptain said the conversations give people a chance to listen and learn from each other. One dealing with the shooting incident will be particularly important because people involved or connected to the incident will have to live with the matter for the rest of their lives, he said.


"It's important to let things take their course. We will deal with the facts, but it takes time until all that comes out. Right now there are more questions than answers. There is a wait for the answers," Kaptain said.


The Rev. Nathaniel Edmond, pastor of Second Baptist Church, agreed with Kaptain. Edmond said Elgin police, the Elgin Clergy Coalition and others have worked to build a bond of trust through efforts that have included past community conversations.


"My heart and prayers go out to the victim and her family and to the officer involved," he said. "It's important for the community to wait for the full investigation before reacting. If what happened couldn't have been avoided, if it was properly handled, we move on. If it was improperly handled, then authorities must deal with correcting the action."


mdanahey@tribpub.com