

Miguel Perez Jr. is one of many legal permanent residents who have served in the U.S. military, then been confronted with the possibility of deportation to their native countries after committing a crime.

After he spent days in solitary confinement, immigration officials moved a U.S. Army veteran and green card holder to the general population at an ICE detention center in Kankakee to help “monitor and care” for his religious fast.


Miguel Perez Jr., 39, a Chicago resident who faces deportation, was transferred from an Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention center in Kenosha County, Wis., to Kankakee County Jail on Tuesday. Perez served two tours of duty in Afghanistan but was later convicted of drug charges.


In an interview with the Tribune on Wednesday, Perez said he is being housed with the general population at the jail and that he has worked out a liquid diet plan with the jail staff.


Kankakee has more housing accommodations to “monitor and care for his religious fast,” according to an ICE spokeswoman, Nicole Alberico. She said that despite “erroneous rumors,” and in contrast to the assertion of advocates for Perez, he has not been placed on suicide watch.


Family members and advocates criticized immigration officials for placing him in solitary confinement on Friday and denying him access to his personal doctor as his hunger strike enters its fourth week. Dr. David Ansell of Rush University Medical Center, who has treated Perez since September, called the move a “criminal form of torture,” given his past injuries.


Perez is facing deportation to his native Mexico, where he hasn’t lived since age 8. His supporters, including U.S. Sen. Tammy Duckworth, D-Ill., are working to keep him in the country. Perez said his family is traveling to Washington on Thursday to meet with U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, to discuss his case.


Chicago Tribune’s Todd Panagopoulos contributed.


nmoreno@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @nereidamorenos


RELATED


Green card-holding veteran facing deportation moved to detention facility as family lashes out »


Green card veteran facing deportation placed on suicide watch, advocates say »


Veteran facing deportation moved into solitary confinement amid ongoing hunger strike »
