By

Jennifer Smith For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  09:22 EDT, 3 July 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  17:18 EDT, 3 July 2018







          89

View  comments

A Guatemalan mother who was separated from her children at the border six weeks ago has seen them for the first time after being bailed out of jail in Arizona and transported across the country by volunteers but she is still not allowed to take them home. 


Yeni Gonzalez and her three children, Deyuin, six, Jamelin, nine, Lester, 11, were stopped at the border in Arizona on May 19 as they tried to enter the US illegally. 


They decided to flee Guatemala to escape the violence of local gangs who were trying to recruit her 11-year-old son. 


Today they saw each other for the first time in 45 days at The Cayuga Center in New York City where the children spend their days between sleeping at night at a foster  home with five other kids. 


Yeni, who is being put up in New York in a free apartment arranged by a group of volunteer mothers, will not be allowed to take the children home with her for months and must say goodbye to them at 5pm every day before they are taken back to their foster home. 


By law, she must meet the requirements of any prospective foster parent before the children can be released to her. The requirements include having a job in the US and a home in your name - neither of which Yeni does.


The only hope they have of being able to sleep under the same roof in the next several months is if the children can be released to their great aunt in North Carolina who has applied to sponsor them. 


Yeni Gonzalez, 29, got to see her three children for the first time in six weeks on Tuesday. They were reunited at The Cayuga Center in New York City where the children spend their days before going to a foster home at night. Yeni was bailed out of a detention center in Arizona on June 28 and was then driven across the US by a group of volunteers who also gave her bail money. She cannot take her children home with her to the apartment she has arranged because she is not a US resident and has no job 

The family has been told however that they must wait 60 days until her fingerprint check has been completed before they know if her application has been approved.   


Speaking outside the center on Tuesday, Yeni said she was thankful for all of the support she had received. She told a group of reporters that both she and the children cried when they finally hugged for the first time in six weeks. 


'I am very happy and thankful to God. When we got separated I told them, "I promise I will fight for you and I will find you." 


'Today I told them, "I promised I would look for you, and here I am.' 


She was picked back up by her lawyer at 5pm and taken to the apartment offered to her by a group of New York City mothers who felt compelled to act when they heard her lawyer talking about their case on the radio. 


Tomorrow, she will go back to the center to be with her kids and they will repeat the process until they find a resolution. 


Her lawyer said he was dreading having to watch her say goodbye to the children again who, he feared, thought they would be able to go home with their mother on Tuesday. 


'That's the part I am dreading. I am hoping at the center someone will be smart enough to say, "We can't do this every night." 


'The children are going to say that they want to go home with their mother, of course.'   


The family chose to leave Guatemala on May 19 because of the escalating violence in their hometown. 


Yeni was raising them as a single mother in Guatemala after their father disappeared. 


At first, they were kept together in their first detention center, but soon they were separated, her lawyer, Jose Xavier Orochena, explained. 


After he got involved, he went on a local New York radio station to talk about the case. 


'I did an interview for a local, small public radio station here in New York. Julie, a mom who is contact with several other mothers, was either disturbed or angered and she contacted me and said, "Look, we want to help. I have all these moms. How can we help?"' Orochena told DailyMail.com. 


Yeni cried as she spoke outside the center where her children were inside. She will not be allowed to spend a night with them for several months while her immigration case is still pending. She has applied for asylum 

Unlike in criminal court, which often forbids suspects or defendants from leaving the state where they are arrested while on bail, immigration court makes no such rule. 


It is however almost always impossible for them to go anywhere because ICE requires them to surrender their passports, if they have one, and most do not have enough money. 


The group of mothers arranged for Yeni to be driven across the country by different drivers which allowed her to bypass the issue of not having a passport. 


She arrived in New York on Tuesday and went straight to see the children. 


However it will be several months at least before she is able to spend a night with them. 


Despite being their biological mother, she must meet the same requirements as any prospective foster parent before the kids can be released to her.  It involves having an income, which she does not, and a home in her name, which she does not. 


Among those there to support the young single mother on Tuesday was Democratic Congressman Adriano Espaillat (pictured consoling her) 

'It's crazy. What's more important?


'A three-bedroom apartment and an income? Or that these children can be reunited with their biological mother?' Orochena fumed on Tuesday afternoon.


A glimmer of hope has been offered by her aunt in North Carolina who has applied to be a sponsor for the children. 


Despite filing her application weeks ago, they have been told they have to wait 60 days for her fingerprints to be cleared before they can take the process any further. 


The delay infuriated Orochena.  


'60 days! I am a criminal attorney. I know how long it takes for fingerprints to be run through a check. It is instant,' he said. 


Meanwhile, Yeni is applying for her case in immigration court to be moved from Arizona to North Carolina. 


She is also applying for asylum and, if it is granted, will be closer to applying to sponsor her own children to live with her. 


Yeni cried as she held up a lollipop given to her by one of her children inside the center 

Yeni said she is one of thousands of women with similar stories. They discussed it in custody in Arizona, she said. 


'We all shared so many sad stories. I want them to know that there are many people willing to help them. 


'It is not easy. I wish you all the luck,' she said. 


More than 2,000 children have been taken from their families at the border in recent weeks and scattered in different states under President Donald Trump's zero-tolerance policy, which criminally prosecutes adults caught crossing the border illegally.


But amid an international outcry, Trump last week issued an executive order to stop the separation of immigrant families at the border.


Gonzalez arrived in New York on Monday and was greeted by supporters near Central Park and in Long Island City, places where she made stops.


Gonzalez had arrived at the center accompanied by supporters, including Democratic U.S. Rep. Adriano Espaillat.


'We want to make sure that more of these stories become a reality,' Espaillat said.


U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions has said the Republican president's immigration policy is a step forward for police and public safety in general.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group