


Settings


Cancel


Set

Hi 

Already a subscriber?


Subscribe today for full access on your desktop, tablet, and mobile device.


Already a print edition subscriber, but don't have a login?


Manage your account settings.


Find subscriber exclusive deals, events, manage your account and more.


View the E-Newspaper

Manage your Newsletters

View your Insider deals and more

Member ID Card

Chat Support

Chat Support

Support

Support

Log Out

Get the news

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

MCSO responds to the allegation made about a three-day hunger strike to protest the quality and frequency of the food they are served

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs




Subscribed, but don't have a login?


Maricopa County Sheriff's Office Inmate meals.
(Photo: Lurissa Carbajal/The Republic)

Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone on Wednesday addressed concerns being raised by some inmates and activists who claim the county still is serving inadequate meals at its jails under his new leadership.


He even offered the media a taste.


As of Wednesday, 23 of the roughly 8,000 inmates being held at Maricopa County jails have opted out of their meals as part of a hunger strike, he said.


"This is 0.006 percent of our inmate population." Penzone said.


Penzone said public safety and increasing the department’s manpower were higher priorities for him than whether or not detainees are happy with the taste of the food they receive.


“Meeting the needs of this county as it relates to public safety and detention is 1-A for me,” Penzone said. "Then, there’s a long list of many other things that are important and then down here at the very bottom are whether or not the detainees are happy with the taste of the food they receive.”


On Tuesday, a group of local activists held a protest outside the Durango Courthouse in Phoenix, which is next to the Estrella Jail facility, as a show of solidarity with inmates, some of whom indicated they would stage a three-day food strike.


 "The thing is, why can't you show them what you are feeding them?" said organizer Salvador Reza on Tuesday, adding that under law, the inmates are required at least 2,400 calories a day.


Maricopa County Sheriff's Office inmate meals. (Photo: Lurissa Carbajal/The Republic)

Penzone responded Wednesday by saying the two meals served at the jails each day meet the court-ordered mandate for nutritional value and provide a total calorie count of 2,600, which meets and exceeds the daily recommended amount.


The lack of staff makes it impossible to accommodate the many different dietary needs, he said.


He said more than 8,000 loaves of bread are baked daily as part of the 16,000 meals delivered, Penzone said.


The two meals are served at 8 a.m. and 6 p.m., he said.


During his press conference Wednesday, the Sheriff's Office provided trays to media members with each of the meals, inviting them to examine the food and even try it. Several did, with some suggesting salt would help.


In addition to bread, inmates receive milk, seasonal fruit and vegetables, and a soy-based meal that provides daily protein, Penzone said.


Penzone said meals have to meet nutritional requirements while not violating religious practices, which means no salt or any type of spices in the food, making it taste extremely bland. 


MORE: Some Maricopa County inmates going on hunger strike to protest poor food, activist says


Former Sheriff Joe Arpaio often drew criticism for his efforts to cut back on meal costs by reducing the number of meals and eliminating meat. 


Penzone said the agency has a full-time nutritionist and that the meals have been court approved.


The average cost per day for two meals is $1.42 per inmate, the Sheriff's Office said. The annual cost spent on inmate food is a little more than $5.5 million a year, officials said.


However, inmates do have the option to purchase other foods weekly through the jail's canteen if money is placed on their jail account, Penzone said. The Sheriff's Office provided a long list of items that can be purchased, much of it similar to items available in a convenience store.


Penzone's advice to the inmates who are not satisfied with the jail food is, "Don't commit crimes."


The jail is not a hotel looking for high-quality rankings of how the food tastes, Penzone said. 


“Am I concerned that what we do is humane? Absolutely,” Penzone said. "But if you’re asking if my concern is satisfying the taste buds of our inmates? It’s not.”
