By

Geoff Earle, Deputy U.s. Political Editor For Dailymail.com






  Published:
  10:26 EDT, 19 June 2018

 | 
  Updated:
  11:45 EDT, 19 June 2018







         243

View  comments

Aides are providing President Donald Trump with visual counter-programming to the heart-wrenching images of immigrant children stripped away from their parents at the border – showing him pictures active, smiling kids.


The inside-the-White House visuals customized for the president are a counter-point to the child migrant crisis that has exploded across network and cable TV news.


No such images have been seen in public – where a series of published photos show bleak detention facilities, sterile housing, children being marched into tents, and distraught parents and their children. 


One notable wire news image shows a two-year-old Honduran crying out as her mother is searched and detained on the border in McAllen, Texas under the Trump administration's new 'zero tolerance' policy, which has led to more than 2,000 immigrant children being separated from their parents in the last six weeks alone.


But Trump's brief includes pictures of children 'smiling, playing video games and exercising outside,' an official told the Washington Post. 


Aides are showing President Donald Trump images of immigrant children smiling and playing following separation from their parents, as internal counter-programing to disturbing images like the one above of a two-year-old Honduran asylum seeker cries as her mother is searched and detained near the U.S.-Mexico border on June 12, 2018 in McAllen, Texas

The report said Trump is suspicious of the media coverage of the incident that he has been monitoring. Trump is a well-known consumer of cable TV news.  


A senior official said Trump believes the media is cherry-picking the most emotional images to dramatize the story and make the administration look bad.


Yet several members of his own party have urged Trump to make a change.


Former communications director and longtime loyalist Anthony Scaramucci told CNN: 'I'm here to say that it's very bad policy and that the president is a humane guy. He's doing an amazing job on so many different fronts and he doesn't need this type of visual or this type of imagery, OK, aside from which it's inhumane and it's cruel, which I absolutely don't like.'


Scaramucci added: 'I think he needs to step back, stop listening to his aides and his advisers.' 


Trump has been getting similar advice to ignore critics from the outside, where Fox News host Laura Ingraham has come under fire after calling immigration detention centers for children 'essentially summer camps'. 


Ingraham was discussingDonald Trump's policy to separate immigrant children from their parents when she made the controversial comment on Monday. 


Children being detained are given emergency blankets

Two young girls watch a World Cup soccer match on a television from their holding area where hundreds of mostly Central American immigrant children are being processed and held at the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Nogales Placement Center on Wednesday, June 18, 2014, in Nogales, Ariz. CPB provided media tours of two locations in Brownsville, Texas, and Nogales, that have been central to processing the more than 47,000 unaccompanied children who have entered the country illegally since Oct. 1

Two female detainees sleep in a holding cell, as the children are separated by age group and gender, as hundreds of mostly Central American immigrant children are being processed and held at the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Nogales Placement Center on Wednesday, June 18, 2014, in Nogales, Ariz.

The inside of a dormitory at the Tornillo facility, a shelter for children of detained migrants, is seen in this photo provided by the US Department of Health and Human Services, in Tornillo, Texas

Immigrant children, many of whom have been separated from their parents under a new zero tolerance policy by the Trump administration, are shown walking in single file between tents in their compound next to the Mexican border in Tornillo

Laura Ingraham has come under fire after calling immigration detention centers for children 'essentially summer camps'

'As more illegal immigrants are rushing the border, more kids are being separated from their parents,' she said on The Ingraham Angle. 


'And temporarily housed at what are, essentially, summer camps.' 


Ingraham's words horrified many after pictures were released showing immigrant children lined up in a series of cages created by metal fencing at these detention centers.


One particular photo showed 20 children lying on dark green mats inside a cage, only covered by thin emergency space blankets. 


Another shows children in a single-file line sitting next to one another.


White House spokesman Hogan Gidley told Fox News Monday what was happening was 'heart wrenching, you see what's going on out there.'


But he said of the president: 'He doesn’t like this but he also understands it's the law of the land.'


 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday &amp; Metro Media Group